Down, Beckenham, Kent.  Tuesday September 9 1873  My dear Dr Sanderson  I will send up early tomorrow two plants with 5 goodish leaves, which you will know by their being tied to sticks.  Please remember that the slightest touch,     even by a hair, of the 3 filaments on each lobe, makes the leaf close, & it will not open for 24 hours. You had better put 1⁄4 of inch of water into the     saucers of the pots. The plants have been kept too cool in order toretard them.  You had better put them on rather warm (i.e., temp. of warm green house) for a day, & in good light.    I am extremely glad you have undertaken this subject.  If you get a positive result, I should think you ought to publish it separately, & I could quote it;     or I should be most glad to introduce any note by you into my account.  I have no idea whether it is troublesome to try with the thermo-electric pile, any change of temperature when the leaf closes. I could detect none witha common thermometer.  But if there is any change in temperature, I should expect it would occur some 8 to 12 or 24 hrs after the leaf has been given a big     smashed fly, & when it is copiously secreting its acid digestive fluid.  I forgot to say that as far as I can make out, the inferior surface of the leaf is always in a state of tension, & that the contraction is confined to the     upper surface; so that when this contraction ceases or suddenly fails (as by immersions in boiling water) the leaf opens again, or more widely than is     natural to it.-  Whenever you have quite finished I will send for the plantsin their basket.  My son Frank is staying at 6 Queen Anne St, & comes home on Sat. afternoon, but you will not have finished by that time  Yours very sincerely  Ch Darwin    P. S. I have repeated my experiment on digestion in Drosera with complete success. By giving leaves a very little weak hydro-chloric acid, I can make them     digest albumen i.e., white of eggs quicker than they can do naturally – I most heartily thank you for all your kindness.  I have been pretty bad lately &     must work very little.