PAPERS 
RELATING TO
THE TREATY OF WASHINGTON. 
VOLUME IV .- GENEVA ARBITRATION. 
CONTAINING THE REPORT OF THE AGENT OF THE UNITED STATES; 
PROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES;  DECISION AND AWARD OF THE
TRIBUNAL; OPINIONS OF THE ARBITRATORS;  REPLY OF THE 
SECRETARY OF STATE, ACKNOWLEDGING THE RECEIPT OF 
THE REPORT OF THE AGENT OF THE UNITED STATES, 
AND COMMENTING UPON THE  OPINION OF THE
ARBITRATOR APPOINTED BY HER BRITANNIC
MAJESTY ; REPORT OF THE COUNSEL 
OF THE UNITED STATES; OPINIONS OF STATESMEN, MAGAZINES, AND JOURNALS OF GREAT 
BRITAIN  AND THE CONTINENT ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE TREATY.
 WASHINGTON: 
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.
1872.
ITABLE OF CONTENTS.
Report of J. C. Bancroft Davis, agent of the United States	
Award and protocols transmitted	
Action of Joint High Commission on the indirect claims	
Protocol of May 4, 1871, and statement of claims	
In harmony with all previous action	
No exception taken hy British commissioners .	
Definition of "Alabama claims " in the protocol binding on the agent	
Preparation of case	
Private claims classed as indirect	
Employment of Mr. Beaman	
His fidelity	
Arrangement of the evidence	
Preparation of case; principles adopted	
The tribunal a judicial body ..	
Case to be stated frankly	
Unfriendly course of Great Britain and British ministers a want of due
diligence	
What acts of subordinates a government not responsible for	
Maintenance of insurgent bureaus on British soil a want of dne diligence—
British denial of liability	
Submission of this part of the case to publicists I	
President Woolsey	
Mr. William Beach Lawrence	
Mr. E. R. Hoar	
General dishing	
The Cabinet	
Last chapter not submitted for advice	
No claim made for a particular sum for indirect damages; tribunal asked
to estimate	
Delivery of the case at Geneva	
Language of the case mild	
Comments of the British press -	
Action of the British government	
Contemplated request for withdrawal of the American case	
Opinion of the continental press favorable to the United States	
Exchange of the counter case	
Industry and zeal of the secretaries	
Friendly view s of the British agent	
The argument by the counsel regarded as masterly	
United States argument filed	
British move for long adjournment	
Consequent negotiations	
Adjudication on the indirect claims	
Friendly feelings on both sides	
British argument filed; motions for further argument	
Opinions on the Florida	
Supplemental arguments ordered and made	
Decisions of the tribunal	
Damages	
Award	
Determination to award a sum in gross	
Counsel advise at every stage	
Independence and ability of neutral arbitrators...,	
Due diligence; what was claimed by United States	
Position of Great Britain	
Views of Count Sclopis	
Decision of the tribunal .-	
Unfriendliness of England ; views of Count Sclopis	
Views of Viscount d'ltajuba	
Views of Mr. Adams	
His impartiality	
Page.
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
10
10VI
TABLE   OF   CONTENTS.
I. Report of J. C. Bancroft Davis—Continued.
Effect of a commission ; position of the United States	
British position	
American rejoinder	
Views of Viscount d'ltajuba	
Decision of the tribunal	
Supplies of coal; position of the United States	
Decision  of the tribunal	
Views of Mr. Adams	
Views of Count Sclopis	
Views of Mr. Staempfli	
Views of Viscount d'ltajuba	
Municipal laws of England cannot be set up in justification	
The tribunal pass upon the Sumter, NashvHle, &c, notwithstanding British objections •- \	
Sir A. Cockburn's dissenting opiuiou... •	
He is the representative of Great Britain	
His charges against the American counsel	
They need no vindication	
No opportunity offered to consider or object to the charges	
He charges the case with abuse and hostility	
The reasons for those charges	
The justice of the line of argument in the American case admitted	
Lord Russell justifies it	
Lord Westbury justifies it	
The results of the tribunal a vindication of the policy of arbitration	
II. Protocols of the conferences of the arbitrators	
1. Organization, and delivery of cases	
2. Adjournment to June 15	
3. Delivery of American argument; British motion for adjournment	
4. Adjournment	
5. Arbitrators declare indirect claims not a subject for computation of dam
ages 	
6. The United States acquiesce in the decision	
7. Decision made official.   British argument filed.    Sir R. Palmer moves
for re-argument; motion denied	
8. Sir A. Cockburn moves for re-argument; motion denied	
9. Order of proceedings	
10. Same subject.   Mr. Staempflr's paper; Sir A. Cockburn's renewed motion
for argument	
11. The Florida	
12. The Florida	
13. Sir A. Cockburn's motion for argument denied : the Alabama	
14. Argument ordered as to due diligence, effect of commissions and sup
plies of coal: the Alabama	
15. British arguments submitted: Sumter, Nashville, and Chickamauga	
16. Tallahassee and Retribution	
17. Oral argument of Mr. Evarts	
18. Arguments of Mr. Evarts and General Cushing	
19. Retribution : argument of Mr. Waite	
20. Sallie, Jeff. Davis, Music, Boston, and V. H. Joy	
21. Effect of commission ; new evidence submitted by Great Britain	
22. The Georgia	
23. The Shenandoah ; new tables presented by the agents	
24. The Shenandoah; argument ordered on the effect of the entry of the
Florida into Mobile ,	
25. Lord Tenterden's statement about tables presented by Mr. Davis; argu
ments as to Florida; decisions as to Sumter, Nashville, Retribution,
Georgia, Tallahassee, Chickamauga, and Shenandoah	
26. Lord Tenterden presents new tables; decisions as to Florida, Tuscaloosa,
Clarence, Tacony, and Archer; Mr. Davis replies to Lord Tenterden's
remarks on the American tables	
27. Claims for expenses for pursuit of cruisers, for prospective profit's, and
for gross freights rejected	
28. Argument ordered respecting interest '....• .'
29. Mr. Staempfli's statement, and Sir A. Cockburn's memorandum" regard
ing a sum in gross	
30. Regarding draught of decision	
31. Form of decision adopted ; ViscountdTtajnba respecting supplies of coal"
32. Signature of award and dissolution of tribunal	
Page.
10
10
10
10
10
11
11
11
11
11
12
12
12
12
12
12
13
13
13
13
13
14
14
14
15
15
16
17
19
19
20
21
25
26
27
28
29
29
30
30
31
31
32
32
33
33
34
34
36
37
43
43
44
47
47
48
smTABLE OF CONTENTS.
VII
* Page.
III. Decision and award  49
Recitals   49
Award   50
Due diligence    50
[[Effect of a commission  50
^Exterritoriality of vessels of war  50
Effect of want of notice    50
Supplies of coal    50
Responsibility for acts of Alabama    51
Responsibility for acts of Florida  51
Responsibility for the acts of the Shenandoah after leaving Melbourne .. 52
Responsibility for the acts of the  Tuscaloosa,  Clarence, Tacony, and
Archer  52
No responsibility for the Retribution, Georgia, Sumter, Nashville, Tallahassee, or Chickamauga  52
The Sallie, Jeff. Davis, Music, Boston, and V. H. Joy not taken into consideration   53
Claims for cost of pursuit not aUowed    53
Same as to prospective earnings -. 53
Only net freights allowed   53
Fifteen and a half millions awarded for compensation  53
IV. Opinions of the arbitrators  55
Opinions of Count Sclopis  55
Due diligence  57
British unfriendliness  62
Vessels which have received commissions  69
Supplies of coal  74
The Alabama  75
The Shenandoah  81
The Florida.  90
Opinions of Viscount d'ltajuba  96
Effect of a commission  96
The Florida  98
The Alabama  99
The Georgia,  Sumter, Nashville, Retribution, Tallahassee, and Chickamauga   101
The Sallie, Jeff. Davis, Music, Boston, V. H. Joy  101
Shenandoah  101
Opinions of Mr. Stsempfli  103
Opinions on the questions of law as to which the tribunal of arbitration
requested elucidation  103
Rules of the treaty take precedence  103
Questions to be decided  106
Definition of facts  106
Vessels whose acts are to be adjudicated upon  107
The Florida  108
The Alabama  119
The Shenandoah ,  125
The Sumter  .134
The Retribution  138
Opinions of Mr. Adams  141
Due diligence  141
The effect of commissions  146
Supplies of provisions and coals  148
The Florida  150
The Alabama :  171
The Tuscaloosa  181
The Georgia  187
The Shenandoah '.  196
The Sumter  208
The Nashville  212
The Chickamauga  214
The Tallahassee  215
The Retribution  217
Opinions of Sir Alexander Cockburn „  230
Causes of complaint brought forward by the United States  230
Rules of the treaty of Washington  230
Difficulty arising from the treaty  231
Elements of neutrality  '234VIII
TABLE   OF  CONTENTS.
IV. Opinions of the arbitrators—Continued.
Obligations of the neutral state	
Obligations of the subjects of a neutral state	
Liability of the state for acts of its subjects	
Rights of neutral subjects in respect of trade	
Difference between a state and its.subjects in regard to trade	
Effect of war on neutral trade	
Blockade and contraband of war	
Different view	
M.Hautefeuille   ......----  ........ ....
No obligation on neutral governments to prevent trade in contraband oi
war, or with blockaded ports	
M. Ortolan '	
Ships of war and coals	
Passive commerce of the neutral	
Lampredi - |	
Azuni -	
Mass6	
M. Ortolan	
Heffter	
Professor Bluntschli	
Sir R. Phillimore	
M. Hautefeuille 1	
Practice in former wars	
American authorities ;-	
Purchase of contraband of war by the Government of the United States.
Result of discussiou	
Sale of ships	
Professor Bluntschli	
Opinion of Dana	
Opinion of M. Ortolan	
Opinion of Professor Bluntschli	
Opinion of M. Rolin Jacquemyns	
Opinion of the judges of England	
Case of the Sahtissima Trinidad	
Judgment of Mr. Justice Story	
Case of the Gran Para	
American review	
Opinion of Mr. Adams	
Question as to prohibition of sale of articles contraband of war	
Ship of war sent out for immediate service	
Armament and crew sent out in different ships	
Duty of neutral government	
American argument as to effect of foreign-enlistment act	
British and American acts	
As to effect of act of 1870	
Right conferred on belligerent by municipal law	
Effect of proclamation	
Equipment of vessels under rules of treaty	
Construction of rules of treaty	
Due diligence, what ?	
Opinions of jurists	
Same principle applied to government	
Heads of diligence	
Law	
Page.
234
234
234
235
235
236
237
239
239
239
239
239
241
241
242
242
243
243
243
244
244
245
245
247
247
247
247
248
249
250
250
251
251
251
252
252
253
253
254
254
Means at disposal of government.
Action of government	
Errors of judgment	
Delay I	
Seizure of vessels	
Judicial miscarriage	
Liability for acts of subordinates	
Municipal law of Great Britain	
Foreign-enlistment act	
Preventive law	
Comparison with American acts " ',
Preventive powers of British and American acts
British act of 1870	
Negotiations for amendment of the foreign-enlis't
war	
ment act during the civil
259
260
260
260
262
264
265
265
265
266
267
267
267
268
268
270
270
271
271
271
276TABLE   OF   CONTENTS.
IX
Page.
IV. Opinions of the arbitrators—Continued.
Comparison with foreign laws  277
Law of Austria  278
Law of Prussia  278
Law of Switzerland  278
Law of France  278
Law of Belgium  2c0
Law of the Netherlands  2H0
Law of Spain  280
Law of Portugal and Brazil  281
Law of Italy  282
Law of Denmark  283
Law of Sweden    .-. 283
Law of Russia  283
Law as to privateers -.  283
Comparison between Great Britain and United States as to observance of
neutrality  288
Legislation of 1794  289
Complaints of Spain  289
Complaints of Portugal  295
American act of 1838  298
Expedition of Lopez against Cuba  299
Walker's expedition against Mexico and Central America   30 L •
Fenian raids  303
Expedition in aid of the Cuban insurrection  305
Complaints of unfriendliness  309
Alleged evidence of unfriendly feeling  311
Complaints of unfriendly conduct  313
Acknowledgment of belligerency  313
Vattel....-  315
Hautefeuille  315
Professor Bluntschli  315
Mr. Dana  316
The SautissimaTrinidad  317
Whether acknowledgment premature. .'  319
Recognition of belligerency .■ .  324
Course pursued by foreign powers  324
Question as to confederate vessels  326
Discussion with government of the Netherlands  326
Correspondence with Brazil  331
Correspondence with Spain  336
Correspondence with French government  336
Correspondence with British government  336
Regulations of June 1, 1861  339
Regulations of 31st January, 1862  339
As to Nassau  340
Alleged partiality as to coaling  344
Supplies of arms obtained from Great Britain  344
Ships obtained from Great Britain  346
Steps taken by the British government  347
The Bermuda      347
The Georgiana  348
Vessels at Glasgow  349
The Phantorn and Southerner  349
The Alexandra  350
The South Carolina  351
The Gibraltar or Sumter  351
Iron-clads at Birkenhead      351
The Canton or Pampero  352
Iron-clad ram at Glasgow  353
The Rappahannock  353
The Amphion   354
The Hawk  - 354
The Ajax, the Hercules, the Virginia, the Louisa Ann Fanny  354
Anglo-Chinese fleet  355
General results  355
Proceedings of other governments   356
Brazil  356
Portugal  356
II—BTABLE   OF   CONTENTS.
JV. Opinions of the arbitrators—Continued.
France	
The Stonewall	
Complaints of blockade-running	
Sympathy in the colonies 	
Application to particular vessels	
The Florida -	
At Liverpool	
At Nassau ■
Alleged recruitment of crew	
Florida after leaving Green Cay -	
Question as to effect of going into and remaining at Mobile	
After Mobile	
Case of the United States vs. DeQuincy	
Question whether the Florida should have been seized on again cominj
into a British port ~	
Effect of commissions on ships of war	
Ships of war exterritorial	
Heffter ■
Sir R. Phillimore ■
Ortolan	
Case of the Exchange •
Commission of mere belligerent	
Effect of alleged violation of neutral territory	
Hautefeuille	
Ortolan	
Duty of seizing for breach of municipal law	
Duty, of excluding from neutral ports	
Case of the Cassius	
Stay of belligerent ships in neutral ports : supplies of coal there	
Power of neutral sovereign —
Law as asserted byt he United States	
Whether coaling makes a port a base of naval operations	
Right of asvlum ,
Supply of coal.
At Nassau..
At Nassau	
At Barbadoes	
At Nassau	
At Bermuda	
At Brest,	
At Martinique	
Again at Bermuda	
The Alabama	
At Liverpool	
After leaving Liverpool ..
Arming off Terceira	
At Martinique	
At Jamaica	
At the Cape of Good Hope
In the eastern seas	
At Cherbourg	
Tuscaloosa	
Georgia	
Shenandoah	
At Melbourne	
Supply of coal	
Melbourne a base of naval operations
After leaving Melbourne	
Sumter ^	
At Trinidad -,..'.'..'..'.'.
At Gibraltar	
At Liverpool 	
Nashville *""""'
At Bermuda	
At Southampton	
Again at Bermuda	
Chickamauga	
Tallahassee	
Retribution	
Page.
356
358
359
365
366
367
367
386
405
405
405
406
406
408
409
409
410
410
410
411
412
412
412
413
414
416
417
418
418
419
422
424
425
425
427
430
433
435
437
439
439
446
447
460
462
463
466
468
471-
472
473
477
484
489
497
498
505
506
506
513
518
519
519
522
527
527
530
531TABLE   OF   CONTENTS.
XI
Page.
TV. Opinions of the arbitrators—Continued.
Cases in which Great Britain has been held responsible  536
As to the award of a sum in gross  536
Amount of claims  537
Claims for cost of pursuit and capture  537
Question of damages  337
Claims for prospective catch  537
Claims for gross freights  539
Double claims  539
New claims A  540
Property destroyed  540
Values of whaling-vessels  541
Values of merchant-vessels  541
Claims for cargoes  541
Claims for personal effects  542
Claim for interest  542
Conclusion  544
V. Reply of the Secretary of State, acknowledging the receipt of the report of
the agent of the United States, and commenting upon the opinion of the
arbitrator appointed by Her Britannic Majesty  545
Acknowledging the receipt of the report  545
The President's approval  545
The action of the arbitrators on the indirect claims  545
Entry of judgment on the indirect claims  546
Effect of the judgment - — 546
The award of the tribunal  546
The dignity and learning of the arbitrators appointed by Italy, Switzerland,
and Brazil  546
Mr. Adams receives the thanks of Her Britannic Majesty and of the President  -  546
The dissenting opinion of Sir Alexander Cockburn  546
This opinion not read or made known to his colleagues  546
If the contents had been known it should have been objected to  546
Sir A. Cockburn professes to speak as the representative of Great Britain.. 547
Resume of the positions he maintains as the representative of Great Britain. 547
Effect of the controversy in defining neutral rights and obligations..  548
The importance of noting the views of the representative of the British
government -  549
VI. Report of the counsel of the United States  550
VII. Appendix: Opinions of statesmen, magazines, and journals of Great Britain
and the continent on the construction of the treaty of Washington  551
IL—REPORT OF J. C. BANCROFT DAVIS, AGENT OF THE UNITED
STATES.
EEP OET.
Mr. Davis to Mr. Fish.
Paris, September 21, 1872.   (Eeceived October 10, 1872.)
Sir: I transmit herewith, in a separate inclosure, the original award
of the tribunal of arbitration, and, in another separate in- Award and. proto.
closure, the original protocols of the conferences. co!3 transmitted-
Having now conducted to a successful termination the interests intrusted to me by the President, 1 respectfully ask permission to make a
statement respecting them.
At the conference of the joint high commissioners at Washington, in
which the subject of the Alabama claims was first consid-
di_» a - •• 'i-i- • i Action    of    joint
, the American commissioners, m their opening state- high commission on
ment, defined the demands of the United States against Great
Britain, growing out of the acts of the Alabama, and the other cruisers,
which were to be the subject of the negotiations, in the following language, viz:
Extensive direct losses in the capture and destruction of1 a large number of vessels,
with their cargoes, and in the heavy national expenditure in the pursuit M
of the cruisers; and indirect injury in the transfer of a large part of the isri, and statement
American commercial marine to the British flag, in the enhanced pay- of claim3-
ment of insurance, in the prolongation of the war, and iu the addition of a large sum
to the cost of the war and the suppression of the rebellion.
At the same time they indicated the manner in which some of these
claims could be substantiated, viz: the claims for the loss and destruction of private property in the ordinary manner; the cost of the pursuit
of the cruisers "by certificates of Government accounting officers," and
what they styled " indirect losses" by estimates. All the subsequent
negotiations proceeded from this starting point.
It has been shown, beyond possible question, in the argument of General Cushing, Mr. Evarts, and Mr. Waite, presented to the In harraony with
tribunal on the 15th of June last, that this definition of our »»p^™^«tion-
claims was in strict accordance with all previous negotiations between
the two governments, with the action of the Senate of the United States,
and with the official expressions of the President to Congress.
The British members of the joint high commission took no exception
to the definition when it was made by their American col-   no exception taken
-t mi i   •       *j_ by British,  commis-
leagues.   They acquiesced in it. sioners.
When I had the honor to receive the directions of the President to
prepare the Case of the United States for submission to tlie Definition 0f "Aia-
tribunal, J regarded myself as bound by the definition of the p^ocoifmnding'oa
words "Alabama Claims" which the American commission- tueage!it-
ers had given in the opening conference, which they had adhered to
throughout the negotiations, and which had been placed in the protocol
IbARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Preparation of c
Private claims classified as indirect.
Employment of M
'Beaman.
HiS fidelity.
by the joint act of all the commissioners. I looked in vain in the treaty
for any waiver or remission of those claims. On the contrary, I found!
an express provision that the United States were to have the judgment
of the tribunal on all their claims growing out of the acts of the
cruisers.
The question was a practical one: for the claims for " enhanced rates-
of insurance" were among those which had been classified-
as "indirect" in the statement, which had received the approval of all the members of the joint high commission..
Many claims of this character were presented at the Department of
State, and a circular was issued, under the immediate direction of the-
Secretary of State, informing claimants that all claims growing out of
the acts of the cruisers would be presented to the tribunal, leaving that
body to determine on their merits.
It was impossible for me to prepare the Case and, at the same time, to
direct in person the details of the arrangement of the evidence respecting the national and individual claims. Mr.
Charles C. Beaman, jr., of New York, was employed to do the latter,,
under general directions from me, and did his work with
admirable fidelity. Thus the evidence already collected,,
together with important new materials from the archives of the several
Departments, and the proof of the losses suffered by individual claimants, were arranged and stated in the manner marked out by the American members of the- joint high commission, viz:
1. The evidence offered by individual claimants for the loss and de-
Arrangementofthe struction of property and for enhanced rates of insurance
evidence. was analyzed and tabulated, and a full abstract of each case
was prepared by the clerks.
2. The national claims for the pursuit of the cruisers were stated and
tabulated at the Navy Department, and were inserted by us exactly as--
received from that Department.
3. No proof was offered of the national losses by the transfer of the-
commercial marine, or by the prolongation of the war, but they were
left to be estimated by the tribunal of arbitration, should Great Britain-
be found responsible for them.
The Case, which was reserved for my own work, was constructed on>
the following theories of fact and of law—theories which
have received the sanction of the eminent counsel of the-
United States; which have been adhered to in all the arguments, and which have, to no small extent, been adopted by the arbitrators :
(a) That the tribunal of arbitration was a judicial body, substituted
The tribunal a ju- by the parties to take the place of force, and empowered
•hciaitody. to try and determine issues which otherwise could be settled
(if at all) only by war.
(&.) That the injuries of the United States should be stated, therefore,.
case to be stated with the fullness necessary to a determination in a court of
ftaakiy. jaW) an(j ^^ tke same frankness with which they would be
stated in case of an appeal to force. I did not think that the United
States could obtain full justice at the hands of the arbitrators if any appreciable part of their wrongs were left untold.
(c.) That the government of Great Britain, by its indiscreet haste in
counselling the Queen's proclamation recognizing the in-
ahTa'nd surgents as belligerents, by its preconcerted ioint action
with France respecting the declarations of the congress of
Paris, by its refusal to take steps for the amendment of its-
T reparation of
case — p rinciples
adopted.
Unfriendly cov
of Great Brit
British mhi
"Want of    due   diligence^*m*'
REPORT OF THE AGENT OF THE UNITED STATES.     3
neutrality laws, by its refraining for so long a time from seizing the
rams at Liverpool, by its conduct in the affair of the Trent, and by its
approval of the course of its colonial officers at various times; and that
the individual members of the government, by their open and frequent
expressions of sympathy with the insurgents, and of desires for their
success, had exhibited an unfriendly feeling, which might affect their
own course, and could not but affect the action of their subordinates;
and that all this was a want of the " due diligence " in the observance
of neutral duties which is required at once by the treaty and by international law.
It seemed to me that such facts, when proved, imbued with the character of culpable negligence many acts of subordinates in wniat acts 0( 8ub.
the British service for which, otherwise, the government SnotrespmSe
might not be held responsible; as, for instance, acts of the for-
collector of customs at Liverpool respecting the Florida and the Alabama; acts of the authorities at Nassau respecting the arming of the
Florida at Green Bay, and subsequently respecting her supplies of coal;
acts of the authorities at Bermuda respecting the Florida; and acts of
the authorities at Melbourne respecting the Shenandoah. There were
many such acts of subordinates which, taken individually and by themselves, would not form a just basis for holding culpable a government
which was honestly and with vigilance striving to perform its duty as
a neutral; but which, taken in connection with each other, and with the
proofs of animus which we offered, establish culpability in the government itself.
(<?.) That  the insurgents established and  maintained, unmolested
throughout the   insurrection,  administrative  bureaus on
British soil, by means of which the several cruisers were s«rgen\Tdm?mstr£
dispatched from British ports, or were enabled to make them British usoaaa swant
bases of hostile operations against the United States, and
that the British government was cognizant of it.
(e.) That Great Britain, from the outset, denied, and to the last persisted in denying, that the departure of vessels like the   Br;tish de„ini ot
Alabama and the Florida, under any circumstances, could ,iability-
be a breach of international duty; and had refused to exercise diligence
to prevent such departure.
(/.) That in point of fact no such diligence had been exercised; and
that, while there were particular facts as to each vessel, tending to fix
responsibility upon Great Britain, these general indisputable facts were
sufficient to carry responsibility for the acts of all the cruisers.
The treatment of this line of argument exhausted five chapters of the
Case.   These five chapters were printed in a memorandum
„ -, -i-i.-i, i .1 n      Submission of- this
form, and were submitted to several gentlemen, some of partofcasetopubn-
whose names I may mention without violating confidence;
only remarking, in justice to them, that they should not be held responsible for the views in this part of the Case, by reason of having read
it in advance.
1. They were sent to President Woolsey, who made many
i-i-i j_- J51.--U J J President Woolsey
valuable suggestions, most of which were adopted.
2. Mr. William Beach Lawrence, the eminent publicist, permitted me
to consult him, not only after these chapters were written, Mr. Beach Law
but also during their composition. I did not adopt his well- rence-
known views respecting the Queen's proclamation and the unfriendliness of the British cabinet; nor do I suppose that he, knowing my convictions to be otherwise, had any idea that I would adopt them. I did,
however, receive from him valuable hints, which improved the work.
Tl4
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
3. Mr. E. B. Hoar, one of the members of the joint high commission,
read these chapters at my request, and expressed his general approval.   I think that he made several suggestions,
and that all were adopted.
4. The veteran statesman and scholar, General Cushing, made several
valuable contributions, all of which were embodied in the
General Cushing. , '
work.
5. The different members of the Cabinet were consulted, and, so far
as they made suggestions, their views were adopted.   It is
rhe cab.. within your own knowledge that I received several valuable
contributions or hints from you.
It was not until I had thus received and acted on the advice of a wide
circle of statesmen, jurists, and publicists, competent to criticise the
work, of whose patriotic desire to have the interests-of their country
represented with dignity at Geneva no one could doubt, that the final
chapter of the work was written. This chapter contained the formal
La.t chapter not statement of the claims submitted for adjudication under
submitted lor advke. ^e treaty. Among them were those which have since become known as "the indirect claims." To prevent misapprehension it
should be said that this chapter was not sent out for criticism as the
others had been. The statements were presented in the exact language of
the protocol made by the two parties jointly for the purpose of defining
the claims to be submitted to the tribunal. They were accompanied by
references to the proofs respecting the individual claims, and the national
claims for the pursuit of the cruisers; and with a request
a particular™™ r!£. that the tribunal would estimate the national losses in the
tribunal alK transfer of the commercial marine, and in the prolongation
of the war. And, in order that the statement might be complete, some reasons were added why, should the tribunal be of opinion
that Great Britain was responsible for the prolongation of the war, the
prolongation should be dated from July, 1863.
The Case, as thus revised, was reprinted, and was, in accordance with
the terms of the treaty, taken to Geneva, and there delivered to the arbitrators and to the British agent in the
official English, (and also in a French translation, made for the convenience of the arbitrators,) together with seven volumes of accompanying documents, correspondence and evidence.
The facts which were disclosed in the Case were, undoubtedly, such as
of called for the reprobation of just-thinking persons; but these
facts were told, so far as I was able to do so, in simple and
temperate language, without harshness or violence. Nothing could
have been further from my expectations than the outburst which followed.
In about a fortnight after we left Geneva, it began to be said in the
London newspapers that the good faith of the British
government was called in question m the American Case,
and soon the whole press, with the exception of the newspaper universally recognized as the leading journal, opened an attack upon the
chapter on unfriendliness.
The Standard thought we had "sacrificed the consistency and dignity of onr pleadings to satisfy popular prejudice at home." The Telegraph spoke of the " effrontery" with which the American demands
were set forth, and said that "it must be borne in mind that General
Grant seeks re-election." The Saturday Beview spoke of the narrative
as " perverted and spiteful," and " a malignant composition," and said that
I if the Americans wish to express still more hostile feelings, they must
Delivery   of
ase at Geneva.
The   1
the case
Comments   of th
British press.REPORT  OF  THE  AGENT  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES. 5
discontinue verbal controversy." The. Pall-Mall Gazette, usually fair
and courteous, though hostile, charged that the claims had been bought
up by "American legislators and officers of state even among the higher
and more influential grade." The Spectator charged us with " sharp
practice," and " a discreditable forcing of the natural meaning of the
treaty in order to win popularity at the elections." The Daily News
called the claims " extravagant demands intended as an electioneering
card," and complained that the case was a " long and passionate pleading," in which " chapter after chapter is devoted to the presumed motives of our [British] public men."
In fact, fault was found indiscriminately with nearly everything in
the Case except the one thing afterward made the main subject of complaint, namely, the allegation that it contained demands whiGh were not
included in the submission in the treaty. That was an objection which
did not appear in the British press until weeks after the exchange ot
the documents at Geneva, and, so far as I am aware, was not taken by
any person entitled to speak by the authority of the government until
a still later day.
Even as late as the middle of January negotiations were going on
between the respective agents and counsel regarding the *Aclion ot the Briti3h
times and the manner of making supplemental arguments government.
at Geneva, (should the tribunal call for any,) without an intimation that
there might be a difference as to the subjects to be argued. It was not
until the 3d of February that the ministry announced officially that
they had not anticipated that the claims which have improperly become
known as the " indirect claims" would be presented at Geneva.
Indeed, there is some evidence that the British government was occupied with the parts of the Case which had offended the Brit- contemplated re.
ish press; for I gather from General Schenck's telegram of oKL Americanise
the 27th of February,- reporting to you an interview with Lord Granville, that the cabinet had under consideration at one time the propriety
of asking for the absolute withdrawal of the American Case, on other
grounds than its presentation of the " indirect claims."1
For several weeks, I may say months, the London press continued to
discuss our national claims. This discussion was conducted opinions of the
with a vehemence, and with insinuations or charges of bad ^oSbieTLfvAtei
faith, which attracted the attention of the Continental states-
press. In all the principal capitals of Europe, the Alabama claims became the subject of comment. The unanimity of the verdict in favor
of our construction of the treaty was as complete as was the unanimity
of the English press in favor of Great Britain, and it was universally
conceded that England could not retire from the arbitration without dishonor.    I inclose a variety of extracts on this subject.
During all this time I was occupied in Paris in the preparation of
the counter-case, and the other duties of the agency. On ^KehKage of the
the 15th of April I was able to comply with the require- COUDter case3-
ments of the treaty and the directions of the tribunal by delivering
the counter-case and accompanying documents to Mr. Favrot for the
British agent and for the arbitrators.   The volume of evidence accom-
1" He [Lord Granville] then said to me that in his note of the 3d he had stated the
views of Her Majesty's government as to indirect claims; that there were other portions of [the] American Case they regret, and some of which appear to introduce matters not germane to reference; that he has not been able to consult cabinet here, but is
individually prepared to recommend to them, and he thinks with reasonable expectation of success, that they should not press for withdrawal of American Case if the Government of the
United States," &c, &c.—(Correspondence respecting Geneva Arbitration, page 5.)ff
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Friendly «
the British a
panying the counter-case was selected and arranged under the directions
of the counsel. At the same time I delivered French translations of
these documents, and also two volumes containing French translations
of selected pieces from the seven volumes of evidence submitted with
the case in December.
This, and much of the subsequent work, could not have been com-
industry and zeal pleted in season had not the secretaries been willing, when
of the secretaries.' caiied upon, to work day and night for the purpose.
Lord Tenterdenmet me at Geneva in April with unreserve, and in the
spirit of conciliation. Under instructions from his government, he lodged with the secretary of the tribunal a notice
to the individual arbitrators of the action taken by Her Majesty's government on the 3d of February, in order that the act of filing the British
counter case should not be deemed to be a waiver of that action. But he
did not conceal his own strong desire to save the treaty, and he left on my
mind the conviction that the judicial solution which the tribunal subsequently made of the political difficulty raised by the British note of
the 3d of February would be accepted by the British government.
The time between the 15th of April and the 15th of June was occupied by the counsel in the preparation of their argument.
This argument has attracted great attention throughout
Europe, and has received universal praise as a masterly vindication of our rights.
On the 15th of June the tribunal re-assembled, the agents and counsel
on both sides being present. The argument of the United
States was duly delivered, (together with the French translation made for the convenience of the arbitrators;) but the British
agent, instead of filing the British argument, asked for an adjournment of several months, in order to enable the two
governments to arrange politically the questions in dispute.
I had already discussed with General Cushing the probability of adjusting these differences by the action of the tribunal. Instead of assenting to the proposed adjournment, I therefore,
with the full concurrence of the counsel, asked for an adjournment of two
days, in order to give us time to consider the position. Before the tribunal convened again, steps were taken for removing the difficulty
through the action of that body. In the proceedings which followed we
acted as a unit on our side. Happily they resulted in a solution by
the tribunal, which proved to be acceptable to both governments. The
Adjudication on the arbitrators announced their opinion that the claims known
indirect claims. a ^e infj|rect; claims did not constitute, on principles of
international law applicable to such cases, good and sufficient foundation for an award of compensation or computation of damages between
nations. On the side of Great Britain the solution was a practical one;
no damages were to be awarded for this class of claims. On our side
the solution was reached in the manner pointed out by the treaty, viz,
by the action of the court. On the suggestion of the other side, this
unofficial act was then formally entered as an official judgment, in the
following language:
Count Sclopis, on. behalf of all the arbitrators, then declared that the said several
claims for indirect losses mentioned in the statement made by the agent of the United
States on the 25th instant, and referred to in the statement just made by the agent of
Her Britannic Majesty, are, and from henceforth will be, wholly excluded from the
consideration of the Tribunal, and directed the secretary to embody this declaration ia
the protocol of this day's proceedings.
The argument by
the counsel regarded
as masterly.
United States argu
ment filed.
British  move  foi
long adjournment.
Consequent  neg
tiations.^n
REPORT   OF   THE  AGENT   OF   THE   UNITED   STATES. 7
In all these proceedings, I found the British agent and   fA^mL^Ln
-counsel sharing our sincere and earnest desire to save the both sMei
itreaty.
The British argument was next filed, with my consent, and an effort
was then made on their side to re-open argument and secure
It. ii it t • mi   • British   argument
rearing on the whole question.   This was success- filed. Motion for fur
fully resisted, and the tribunal took a recess for a fortnight.
On Monday, the 15th of July, it re-assembled. The efforts on the
part of Great Britain to secure re-argument were renewed. The neutral
.arbitrators said that they had examined the whole case, and that they
wanted no re-hearing. It was decided by the tribunal to give the
■opinion of the arbitrators seriatim on each cruiser, beginning with the
Florida.
Sir Alexander Cockburn presented the facts and reasoning affecting
•this vessel at an extreme length, holding Great Britain   opinions on the
free of blame.   The other arbitrators held her responsible, Flor!da-
xeserving, however, the question as to the effect of a commission.
Sir Alexander Cockburn, then, in vigorous language, and with
great warmth of manner, urged the tribunal to permit an argument
upon the meaning of the words " due diligence," upon the effect of a
■commission, and upon the law respecting the supplies of coal. The
tribunal granted the request. I was, myself, in favor of allowing further
arguments, within some defined scope. I thought that we had nothing
to lose by an argument, in which we had the reply, in the hands of such
masters of discussion as General Cushing, Mr. Evarts, and Mr. Waite.
The hearings were ordered, and, before the dissolution of the tribunal, arguments had be*en made (always on the suggestion
■of England) on the following points, the British counsel agreementsmoerder".i
leading and ours following: 1, on the meaning of the words
■" due diligence;" 2, on the effect of a commission on the offending vessel;
o, on supplies of coal; 4, on the recruitment of men for the Shenandoah,
at Melbourne; 5, on the effect of the entry of the Florida into the port
of Mobile; 6, on the subject of interest; 7, on the general subject of the
statement of claims. These arguments were presented generally both
in the English and the French languages.
The protocols which accompany this dispatch show the order in which
these various papers were delivered, and the order in which the arbitrators considered the various cruisers. It was not until after the arguments on the first four subjects that the formal votes
required by the treaty were taken separately upon the
responsibility of Great Britain as to each cruiser. The tribunal decided
unanimously that there was responsibility for the acts of the Alabama.
Count Sclopis, Mr. Stampfli, and Mr. Adams held that there was responsibility for the acts of the Shenandoah after leaving Melbourne,
but not before. Great Britain was released from responsibility as to the
other vessels, except the Florida; Mr. Adams holding that there was
responsibility for the acts of the Betribution, and Mr. Stampfli holding
that there was responsibility for the acts of that vessel only so far as
related to the Emily Fisher. The formal vote on the Florida was taken
•at a subsequent conference, after agument by counsel on the special
question of the effect of the entry into Mobile. Count Sclopis, Viscount
d'ltajuba, Mr. Stampfli, and Mr. Adams held there was responsibility
for her acts.
The deliberations of the tribunal, on the subject of damages, were
held with closed doors.   The arbitrators asked each party
for comparative tables, which were furnished.   On our side.
Decisions   of the
tribunal.
Dfunagears
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Award,
we limited ourselves to the request of the tribunal.   On the other side,,
new tables were put in with new and elaborate criticisms upon our list
of claims.   We did not object to this irregular criticism, but claimed
the right of reply given by the treaty.
The tribunal, at length, announced that a result had been reached—
that fifteen and a half millions of dollars would be awarded
as a gross sum, to be paid by Great Britain to the United
States.   It does not appear in the protocols how the arbitrators arrived
at this amount.   I am informed that it was reached by mutual concessions.
The neutral arbitrators and Mr. Adams, from the beginning of the
Determination to proceedings, were convinced of the policy of awarding a
grosLd a '     i sum in gross.   For some weeks before the decision was
given, I felt sure that the arbitrators would not consent to send the
case to assessors until they should have exhausted all efforts to agree
themselves upon the sum to be paid.   We therefore devoted our energies toward securing such a sum as should be practically an indemnity
to the sufferers.   Whether we have or have not been successful can be
determined only by the final division of the sum.
It is due to our counsel to state that in all the proceedings which were
counsel advised on taken since their arrival in Europe no step was made with-
every stage. ou^ khejr advice and consent, and many important ones were
taken on their suggestion and origination. That their labors have been
incessant any one may imagine who sees the mass of able papers which
came from their pens.
The opinions which the neutral arbitrators presented bear testimony to the sagacity, good judgment, and knowledge of
awiitypeof enneutrai the principles of law and fact at issue, which they brought to
bear on the case, and to the untiring labor with which they
mastered the varied and difficult questions submitted by the parties for
their decisions. It only remains to say that they exhibited throughout
marked patience and good temper, and that these admirable qualities-
were sometimes needed. These opinions will undoubtedly be read with
interest. I take the liberty, in closing, to make a few remarks upon- the
main points at issue, as they are treated in the opinions of the different
arbitrators.
1. Due DILIGENCE.
We maintained in the Case that the diligence of the neutral should u be
proportioned to the magnitude of the subject, and to the
dignity and strength of the power which is to exercise
by it," (page 158,) and that it should be "gauged by the
. character and magnitude of the matter which it may
affect, by the relative condition of the parties, by the ability of the party
incurring theliability to exercise the diligence required by the exigencies
of the case, and by the extent of the injury which may follow negligence," (page 152.) We thought, for instance, that it would not be justr.
to hold Brazil, with its extended coast, sparse population, and feeble-
means of internal communication, and Great Britain, with its compact-
population, itsnet-work of railways aud telegraphs, and its administrative-
system always under the control of the central government, to an identical standard of active vigilance.
Due diligence.
What was
the United !
Ppsition-of Great Britain.
On the other side it was said
Her Majesty's government knows of no distinction between more dignified and less,
dignified powers; it regards all sovereign states as enjoying equal rights, and equally:-REPORT OF THE AGENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
&
subject to all ordinary international obligations; and it is firmly persuaded that tbere
is no state in Europe or America which would be willing to claim or accept any immunity in this respect, on the ground of its inferiority to others in extent, military force,,
or population.
Count Sclopis, in his opinion, says
Views of Count Sclopis.
The words due diligence necessarily imply theldea of a relation between the duty
and its object. It is impossible to define a priori and abstractly an absolute duty of
diligence. The thing to which the diligence relates determines its degree. * * *
As to the measure of activity in the performance of the duties of a neutral, I think the
following rule should be laid down; that it should be in a direct ratio to the actual
danger to which the belligerent will be exposed through the laxity of the neutral, and in
an inverse ratio to the direct means which the belligerent can control for averting the
danger.
The Tribunal, in its award, says :
Decision of   the
bunal.
The due diligence referred to in the first and third of the said rules ought to be
exercised by neutral governments in exact proportion to the risks to which either
of the belligerents may be exposed from a failure to fulfill the obligations of neutrality
on their part. *       *       The circumstances out of which the facts consti
tuting the subject-matter of the present controversy arose were of a nature to call
for the exercise, on the part of Her Britannic Majesty's government, of all possible
solicitude for the observance of the rights and duties involved in the proclamation
of neutrality issued by Her Majesty, on the 13th of May, 1861.
2. Toleration of insurgent operations in England,
and English feeling against the United States.
Unfriendliness   ot
England.
Count Sclopis says, respecting this point:
Views  of    Count
The British government was fully informed that the confederates had established
in England a branch of their means of attack and defense against the United States.
Commissioners representing the government of Richmond were domiciled in London,
and had put themselves in communication with the English government. Lord Russell had received these confederate representatives in an unofficial way. The first
visit took place on the 11th of May, 1861, that is to say, three days before the Queen's
proclamation of neutrality, and four days before Mr. Adams arrived in London as the
minister of the United States. And further, the English government could not but
know that great commercial houses were managing the interests of the confederates
at Liverpool, a town which,from that time, was very openly pronounced in favor
of the South. In Parliament itself opinions were before long openly expressed in
favor of the insurgents. The Queen's-ministers themselves did not disguise that in
their opinion it would be very difficult for the American Union to re-establish itself as
before.        *       *       *       * It results from this, in my opinion, that the
English government found itself, during the first years of the war of secession, in the
midst of circumstances which could not but have an influence, if not directly upon
itself, at least upon a part of the^population subject to the British Crown. No government is safe against certain waves of public opinion, which it cannot master at its
will. I am far from thinking that the animus of the English government was hostile
to the Federal Government during the war. Yet there were grave dangers for the
United States in Great Britain and her colonies which there were no direct means for
averting. England therefore should have fulfilled her duties as a neutral by the
exercise of a diligence equal to the gravity of the danger.       * *       It cannot
be.denied that there were moments when its watchfulness seemed to fail and when
feebleness in certain branches of the public service resulted in great detriment to the
United States.
Yiscount d'ltajuba has not placed on record his opinion on this subject, unless it can be gathered from a single passage in his views oi viscoum
remarks upon the effect of a commission on an offending de'ltajuba-
crniser, when he says, "By seizing or detaining the vessel the neutral
only prevents the belligerent from deriving advantage from the fraud
committed within its territory by the same belligerent; while, by not
proceeding against a guilty vessel it eocposes itself to having its good faith
fustly called in question by the other belligerents10
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
It would seem from some of Mr. Adams's expressions that he did not
views of Mr concur in these views of his colleagues.   While regretting
Adams- ' that he did not do so, because the views seem to me to be
in accordance with the facts, and also in accordance with general principles which all maritime powers would desire to maintain, I must bear
testimony to the perfect and dignified impartiality with
His impartiality. wMch, not only in this respect, but throughout the proceedings, Mr. Adams maintained his position as a judge between the two
contending nations. Of him, at least, it may be said that his love of
country never controlled his sense of justice, and that at no time did he
appearas an advocate.
3. Duty to detain an offending cruiser when it comes again
within the neutral's jurisdiction, and effect of a commission upon such cruiser.
Effect ol
lission.
Position   ol
United States
British posit
Views of Vise
'Itajuba.
It was maintained in the American Case that, by the true construction of
the second clause of the first rule of the treaty, when a vessel
like the Florida, Alabama, Georgia, or Shenandoah, whichhas
been especially adapted within a neutral port for the use of a
belligerent in war, comes again within the neutral's jurisdiction, it is the duty of the neutral to seize and detain it. This construction was denied .by Great Britain. It was maintained
in the British papers submitted to the tribunal, that the
obligation created by this clause refers only to the duty of preventing
the original departure of the vessel, and that the fact that the vessel
was, after the original departure from the neutral port, commissioned as
a ship of war protects it against detention.
To this point we rejoined that a commission is no protection against
seizure in such case, and does not operate to release the
neutral from the obligation to detain the offender.
The Viscount d'ltajuba seemed to favor the American
construction.   He said:
According to the latter part of the first rule of Article VI of the Treaty of Washington, the neutral is bound also to use due diligence to prevent the departure from its
.jurisdiction of any vessel intended to cruise or carry on war as above, [viz, against a
belligerent,] such vessel having been specially adapted, in whole or in part, within
its jurisdiction to warlike use.      *       * If, then, a vessel built on neutral ter
ritory for the use of a belligerent, fraudulently and without the knowledge of the neutral, comes again within the jurisdiction of the sovereign whose neutrality it has violated, it ought to be seized and detained.
Count Sclopis says, on this point:
It is on the nature of these special circumstances that the first rule laid down in
Article VI of the Treaty of Washington specifically rests. The operation of that rule
would be illusory, if it could not be applied to vessels subsequently commissioned.
The object in view is to prevent the construction, arming, and equipping of the vessel,
and to prevent her departure when there is sufficient reason to believe that she is intended to carry on war on behalf of one of the belligerents ; and when probability has
become certainty, shall not the rule be applicable to the direct and palpable consequences which it originally was intended to prevent ?
In the award the Tribunal says that—
The effects of a violation of neutrality committed by means of the construction,
equipment and armament of a vessel are not done away with by any
commission which the government of the belligerent power, benefited
by the violation of neutrality, may afterward have granted to th at vessel;
and the ultimate step by which the offense is completed cannot be admissible as a
ground for the absolution of the offender, nor can the consummation of his fraud become the means of establishing his innocence.   The privilege of exterritorality, ac-
Decision     ol
rlbunaLREPORT OF THE AGENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
11
corded to vessels of war, has been admitted into the law of nations, not as an absolute
right, but solely as a proceeding founded on the principles of courtesy and mutual
deference between different nations, and therefore can never be appealed to for the
protection of acts done in violation of neutrality.
It will be observed that the Tribunal, instead of adopting the recognition by the Viscount d'ltajuba of a positive obligation on the part of the
neutral to detain the vessel, in the case supposed, limited itself to expressing the opinion that, in such case, the neutral would have the right
to make such detention.
4. Supplies of coal.
It was maintained in the American Case that the proofs showed that the
insurgent cruisers were permitted to supply themselves with
coal in British ports in greater quantities and with greater poTtfonV^be
freedom, and with less restrictions than were imposed upon
the United States; audit was insisted that, in consequence of these
facts, there was an absence of neutrality, which made those ports bases
of hostile operations against the United States under the second rule
of the treaty.
On this point the award says that—
In order to impart to any supplies of coal a character inconsistent with the second
rule, prohibiting the use of neutral ports or waters, as a base of naval
operations for a belligerent, it is necessary that the said supplies should tribunal""1 °f  t*
be connected with special circumstances of time, of persons, or of place,
which may combine to give them such character.
It does not appear by the terms of the award that Great Britain is
held responsible for the acts of any vessel solely in consequence of illegal supplies of coal. The question is, therefore, a speculative one, so far
as relates to this controversy. The opinions of the four arbitrators who
signed the award furnish, however, the explanation of what they mean
when they speak of '"special circumstances of time, of persons, or of
place."
Mr. Adams says:
I perceive no other way to determine the degree of responsibility of a neutral in these'
cases, than by an examination of the evidence to show the intent of the
grant in any specific case.   Fraud or falsehood in such a case poisons AXmI" 3 °f ?
everything it touches.   Even indifference may degenerate into willful
negligence, and that will impose a burden of proof to relieve it before responsibility
can be relieved.
Count Sclopis says:
1 will not say that the simple fact of having allowed a greater amount of coal than
was necessary to enable a vessel to reach the nearest port of its country constitutes in itself a sufficient grievance to call for an indemnity.
As the lord chancellor of England said on the 12th of June, 1871, in the
House of Lords, England and the United States equally hold the principle that it is no
violation of the law of nations to furnish arms to a belligerent. But if an excessive supply of coal is connected with other circumstances which show that it was used as a veritable res hostilis, then there is an infraction of the second article of the treaty. * * *
Thus, for example, when I see the Florida and the Shenandoah choose for their fields
of action, the one the stretch of sea between the Bahama archipelago and Bermuda, to
cruise there at its ease, and the other Melbourne and Hobson's Bay, for the purpose
immediately carried out, of going to the Arctic Seas, there to attack the whaling vessels, I cannot but regard the supplies of coal in quantities sufficient for such services,
infractions of the second rule of Article VI.
Mr. Stampfli says of the Sumter:
The permission given to the Sumter to remain and to take in coal at Trinidad does*'
not of itself constitute a sufficient basis for accusing the British authorities of having failed in their duties as neutrals, because the fact can-
Views   of   Count
not be considered by itself, since the Sumter both before and after that
views
ampflL
of   Mr.'Wm^^^^m&m.
12 ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
time was admitted into the ports of many other States where it staid and took in coal
.   *       * so that it cannot be held that the port of Trinidad served as a base
of operations.
But of the Shenandoah he says:
A supply of coal was .not a necessary condition of neutral asylum, and in supplying
her with so large a quantity of coal, the capacity of the ship for making war was increased just as much as by the recruitment of her crew which took place.
The Yiscount d'ltajuba, at the thirty-first conference, while signing
views ofviscount the decision, remarked with regard to the recital concern-
d'ltajuba. jng fljg supply of coals, that he is of the opinion that every
government is free to furnish to the belligerents more or less of that
article.
5. The municipal laws of England.
It was maintained in the American Case that the liability of Great Bri
Municipal laws oi tain shouldbemeasured by the rules of international law; and
8et8updinc7u8°tmebae- that it could not be escaped by reason of any alleged defi-
t,0D- ciencies in any internal legislation enacted for the purpose
of enabling the government to fulfill its international duties.
The pleadings and arguments on the part of Great Britain are filled
with denials of this proposition in every possible way, from the opening
Case to the last supplemental argument of Sir Boundell Palmer.
The award says, " the government of Her Britannic Majesty cannot
justify itself for a failure in due diligence on the insufficiency of the
legal means of action which it possessed."
6. The Sumter, the Nashville', &c.
It was maintained in the American Case that, under the terms of the
treaty of Washington the parties had agreed to submit to
m»one the "sumTert the decision of the tribunal of arbitration, not only the
wifh8taneaingB'rit°sh claims growing out of the acts of the Florida, the Alabama,
the Georgia, and the Shenandoah, which originally proceeded from ports of Great Britain, but also all claims growing out of
the acts of other cruisers, such as the Nashville, the Sumter, &c, which
could in any way be shown to have used British ports as bases of supplies. The British Case and Counter Case strenuously contended that
the submission was limited to the four vessels first above named. The
tribunal unanimously, including Sir Alexander Cockburn, took no notice
of this claim of Great Britain, and considered all the claims presented
and decided them upon their merits.
dis«nttnECo0jin,io™'s 7.  THE DISSENTING  OPINION  OF SlR A. COCKBURN.
The frankness with which Sir Alexander Cockburn confesses in this
opinion that he sat on the Tribunal, not as a judge, but as>
sreat " in some sense the representative of Great Britain^ one of the
parties to the controversy, places before the world the
knowledge of a fact of which, otherwise, it would have been better to
take no public notice.
The chief justice calls legal propositions made by General Cushing, Mr.
Evarts, and Mr. Waite, over their signatures and under the
His charges against ..   -.. , n ,      ,     , . . . ,. ..
the American coun- responsibility ot counsel, "strange misrepresentations," and
" assertions without the shadow of a foundation." He says
that "their imaginations must have been lively, while their consciences
slept." He finds in a portion of their argument" an extraordinary series
of propositions," and " the most singular confusion of ideas, misrepre-
He is the   rei
/ sentative   of   G
Britain,REPORT  OF  THE  AGENT   OF   THE   UNITED   STATES. 13
sentations of facts, and ignorance both of law and history, which werer
perhaps, ever crowded into the same space." He calls" the part of
their argument on which he was commenting, " an affront offered to
this tribunal, by such an attempt to practice on our supposed credulity
or ignorance," and says that he " is at a loss to understand how counsel,
familiar with English law, can take upon themselves to make statements
of this sort."
I need not assume in the United States to vindicate the accuracy of
statements or the soundness of reasonings which have the They need no Tin-
guarantee of the names of our distinguished counsel. The dicatio,>-
charges are sanctioned by the chief justice alone. I have no hesitation
in expressing my conviction that they would have been indignantly repudiated by each and all of his colleagues had feredtop?o3erytne"
the paper in which they are made been publicly read, or
had its contents been made known at the time when the Tribunal ordered
it to be recorded. This voluminous paper was, in fact, not read in the
Tribunal; its author presented it in bulk without any statement respecting its character; no one had any reason to imagine its contents; and
it was not made public until several days after the dissolution of the
Tribunal and the separation of its members. As Sir Alexander Cockburn says of the charges of unfriendliness which were made in the
American Case against members of Lord Palmerston's cabinet, "The
world must judge between the accusers and accused."
The British arbitrator also charges that the Case of the United States
u pours forth the pent-up venom of national and personal
hate."   He speaks of.the "abuse" it "freely bestows," and J^wiS^eS
r*n hostility
complains of the " hostile and insulting tone thus offensively
and unnecessarily adopted toward Great Britain, her statesmen, and her
institutions."
These charges appear to be founded upon the proof of the desire of
various members of the British government for the success ^ reasoa for
of the insurgents in the South, taken from the mouths of those charge8-
the speakers and presented for the consideration of the Tribunal, and
upon the legitimate application which was made of that proof in the
issue respecting " due diligence" which was pending before the tribunal
at Geneva.
A complete vindication of the line of argument in the Case (if any
were needed) could be drawn from Sir Alexander Cock- ThejU3tice of the
burn's paper. "There can be no doubt," he says, "that ItoAnSr^
these speeches not only expressed the sentiments of the admitted-
speakers, but may be taken to be the exponent of the sentiments generally entertained at that time;" and he adds, " though partiality does
not necessarily lead to want of diligence, yet it is apt to do so, and in
case of doubt would turn the scale." With such an admission as this,
it is surprising that a man of the robust sense of the chief justice should
have reproduced the rash imputations of the British press.
. That I charged individual members of Lord Palmerston's cabinet with
a partiality for the insurgents, is true; equally true is it that I supported
the charge by proof from their own lips.
But I never questioned their right to entertain- such partiality, or to
express it in any manner that suited them. I never even assumed to
criticise its justice before a tribunal created to try other issues. I confined myself strictly to the issues before that body, and I argued that
this partiality of individual members of the government would be apt
to lead to want of diligence, and in case of doubt would turn the scale—
a line of argument which is now admitted to be just.14
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
If I argued that these acts of individual members of the British gov-
Lord'-Rweii iu.- ernment were inconsistent with the "due diligence"   re-
uffesit. quired by the treaty, I did only what Lord Bussell had
said to Mr. Adams must be the inevitable result of an arbitration.
" Save the British government acted with due diligence, or, in other words,,
with good faith and honesty?" was the question by which he said the
liability of England was to be determined.
If I urged that, in any instance, the neutrality of Great Britain was
xord westbury n°t sincere, I did but pursue the line of argument which
•fcsunefrit. Lord Westbury had defended in advance in the House of
Lords, and I did it nearly in his own language.
I find no fault that Sir Alexander Cockburn does not agree with
me, and with most of the world outside of England, as to the force
of the evidence which was presented respecting these points. That is
a subject on which persons may honestly differ. But I must be permitted to express some surprise that a lawyer of his deservedly great
reputation should have made such a disagreement the cause of totally
unfounded allegations against the Case of the United States and
its author.
With the exception of these personal remarks, this long dissenting
opinion (twice the length of the American case) adds little or nothing
new to the arguments previously put forth by Great Britain in vindication of her course toward the United States. There are several
material errors in its statements of facts, but I shall not follow its-
example of injustice in attributing them to design. All right-thinking
persons will heartily echo the wish with which the paper closes, " that
in the time to come no sense of past wrong unredressed will stand in
the way of the friendly and harmonious relations which should subsist
between two great and kindred nations."
Thus, surrounded by difficulties, which at one time seemed insuperable,,
conclusion. this great cause has reached its conclusion.   Nations have,,
ere now, consented to adjust by arbitration questions of figures and
The results of the questions of boundaries; but the world has had few, if any,
«ron of the policy™! earlier examples of the voluntary submission to arbitration
arbitration. 0f a question in which a deep-seated conviction of injuries
and wrongs which no possible award could compensate, animated a
whole nation. It is out of such sentiments and feelings that wars come.
The United States elected the path of peace. Confident of receiving:
iustice, they laid the story of their wrongs before an impartial tribunal.
This story, so grievous in its simple truthfulness, threatened for a time
to break up the peaceful settlement which the parties had promised
each other to make. Notwithstanding all obstacles, however, the great
experiment has been carried to a successful end ; and hereafter it cannot be denied that questions involving national sentiment may be decided by arbitration, as well as questions of figures.
The commander who had been permitted, by Providence, to guide
some of the greatest military events in history, has thus, in civil life,,
assisted in presenting to the nations of the world the most conspicuous
'example of the settlement of international disputes by peaceful arbitration.
It is within my personal knowledge that your own counsels have-
also had a large share in shaping this great result.
I have, &c,
J. C. BANCROFT DAVIS.
Hon. Hamilton Fish,
Secretary of State.II.—PROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES OF THE ARBITRATORS.
PROTOCOL I.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration under the provisions
of the treaty between the United States of America and Her Britannic
Majesty^ concluded on tlie 8th of May, A. D. 1871, at the first conference
held at Geneva in Switzerland, on the fifteenth day of December, in the-
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy-one.
The conference was convened at the Hotel de Ville at Geneva, in
compliance with notices from Mr. J. C. Bancroft Davis, agent of the
United States, and Lord Tenterden, agent of Her Britannic Majesty, in
the form following:
The undersigned having been appointed agent of the United States to attend the
tribunal of arbitration about to be convened at Geneva under the provis-'-S
ions of the treaty between the United States and Great Britain of the 8th delivery of'cases.811
of May last, has the honor to acquaint Count Sclopis that it is proposed by
the Government of the United States that the first meeting of the tribunal should be held
at Geneva, if not inconvenient to the arbitrators, on the 15th instant.
J. C. BANCEOFT DAVIS.
The arbitrators who were present and produced their respective powers,,
which were examined and found to be in good and due form, were:
Charles Francis Adams, esquire, the arbitrator named by the President of the United States of America; the Right Honorable Sir Alexander
Cockburn, the Lord Chief Justice of England, the arbitrator named by
Her Britannic Majesty; his excellency Count Sclopis, the arbitrator
named by His Majesty the King of Italy ; Mr. Jacques Stsempfli, the
arbitrator named by the President of the Swiss Confederation, and his
excellency the Baron d'Itajub4, the arbitrator named by His Majesty
the Emperor of Brazil.
J. C. Bancroft Davis, Esquire, attended the conference as the agent ot
the United States; the Right Honorable Lord Tenterden attended as the
agent of Her Britannic Majesty.
Mr. Adams proposed that Count Sclopis, as being the arbitrator
named by the power first mentioned in the treaty after Great Britain
and the United States, should preside over the labors of the tribunal.
The proposal was seconded by Sir Alexander Cockburn, and was-
unanimously adopted, and Count Sclopis, having expressed his acknowledgments, assumed the presidency.
On the proposal of Count Sclopis the tribunal of arbitration requested
the arbitrator named by the President of the Swiss Confederation to
recommend some suitable person to act as the secretary of the tribunal.
The Swiss arbitrator named M. Alexandre Favrot as a suitable person, and M. Alexandre Favrot was thereupon appointed by the tribunal
of arbitration to act as its secretary during the conferences, and entered
upon the'duties of that office.
Mr. J. C. Bancroft Davis then presented in duplicate, to each of the arbitrators and to the agent of Great Britain, the printed case of the United16
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
States, accompanied by the documents, official correspondence, and other
evidence on which they rely.
Lord Tenterden in like manner presented to each of the" arbitrators and to the agent of the United States the printed case of the
government of Her Britannic Majesty, accompanied by the documents,
official correspondence, and other evidence on which it relies.
The tribunal of arbitration thereupon directed that the respective
counter cases, additional documents, correspondence, and evidence called
for or permitted by the fourth article of the treaty should be delivered
to the secretary of the tribunal at the hall of the conference in the Hotel
de Ville at Geneva, for the arbitrators and for the respective agents on
or before the 15th day of April next.
The arbitrators further directed that either party desiring, under the
provisions of the fourth article of the treaty, to extend the time for delivering the counter cases, documents, correspondence, and evidence,
shall make application to them through the secretary, and that the secretary shall thereupon convene a conference at Geneva at an early day
to suit the convenience of the respective arbitrators, and that the notice
thereof shall be given to the agent of the other party.
The tribunal of arbitration proceeded to direct that applications by
either party, under the provisions of the fourth article of the treaty, for
copies of reports or documents specified or alluded to, and in the exclusive possession of the other party, shall be made to the agent of the
other party with the same force and effect as if made to the tribunal of
arbitration.
The tribunal of arbitration further directed that, should either party,
in accordance with the provisions of the fourth article, call upon the
other party, through the arbitration, to produce the originals or certified copies of any papers adduced as evidence, such application shall be
made by written notice thereof to the secretary within thirty days after
the delivery of the cases, and that thereupon the secretary shall transmit
to the agent of the other party a copy of the request; and that it shall be
the duty of the agent of the other party to deliver said originals or certified
copies to the secretary, as soon as may be practicably convenient.
The arbitrators also agreed that for the purpose of deciding any ques
tion arising
upon the foregoing rules, the presence of three of their
number shall be sufficient.
The conference was adjourned to the following day, 16th of December,
at 3 o'clock p m.
J. C. BANCROFT DAYIS.
TENTERDEN.
ALEX. FAVBOT,
Secretary.
PROTOCOL II.
«
Record oj the proceedings of the arbitration at the second conference held
at Geneva in Switzerland on the 16th day of December, A. D. 1871.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbitrators
Adjournment  to were present.
June is. Mr< j c Bancroft jyaYis and Lord Tenterden attended
the conference as agents of the United States and of Her Britannic Majesty, respectively.
The record of the proceedings of the conference held on the 15th in-PROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES.
17
stant was read and approved, and the secretary was directed to attest
it. Mr. J. C. Bancroft Davis and Lord Tenterden were requested also
to sign this and all subsequent records as agents of their respective
governments.
The tribunal of arbitration directed that when an adjournment of the
conference should be entered, it should be entered as an adjournment
until the 15th day of June next, subject to a prior call by the secretary
as provided for in the proceedings at the first conference.
The tribunal then directed the secretary to make up the record of
the proceedings at the second conference as far as completed, which
was done, and the record was read and approved.
The tribunal of arbitration then adjourned to meet at Geneva, on the
15th day of June next, unless sooner convened by the secretary, in the
manner provided in the proceedings at the first conference.
J. C. BANCROFT DAVIS.
TENTERDEN.
ALEX. FAVROT, Secretaire.
PROTOCOL III.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the third conference held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 15th day of June, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbitrators
were present.
Mr. J. C. Bancroft Davis and Lord Tenterden attended the conference
as agents of the United States and Her Britannic Majesty, respectively.
Mr. J. C. Bancroft Davis then delivered in duplicate to each of the
arbitrators, and to Lord Tenterden, the agent of Her Britan-   De]ivery of Amer.
nic Majesty, a printed argument, showing the points and ica"argumeat-
referring to the evidence on which his Government relies.
Lord Tenterden then, on behalf of Her Britannic Majesty's government, presented the note, of which a copy is annexed, re- British motion««
questing an adjournment of the tribunal for the reasons tt*">urmoent-
therein stated, for such, a period as might enable a supplementary convention to be concluded and ratified between the United States and Her
Britannic Majesty.
Mr. Bancroft Davis stated that he could not say what would be the
views of his Government on this motion until he should know the time
for which the adjournment was asked.
Lord Tenterden stated that Her Britannic Majesty's government believed that, in order to afford time for the consideration of a supplementary convention by the Senate of the United States in their session
commencing in December next, and for its subsequent consideration by
Her Britannic Majesty's government, and for its ratification by the high
contracting parties respectively, it would be requisite that the adjournment should be for a period of eight months, but that power might be
reserved for the arbitrators to meet at any earlier date, upon being
convened for that purpose by the secretary of the tribunal, upon the
joint request, in writing, of the agents of the two governments.
Mr. Bancroft Davis said that his instructions did not yet enable him to
state to the arbitrators the views of the Government of the United States
on this motion in full.   He said that he was in telegraphic communica-
2 B18
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
tion with his Government, and he asked an adjournment until Monday,
the 17th instant.
The tribunal decided that the protocols should be signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the agents'of the two governments.
The conference was then adjourned to Monday, the 17th day of June,
at 2 o'clock.
FREDERICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BANCROFT DAVIS.
TENTERDEN.
ALEX. FAVROT, Secretary.
ANNEX.
The undersigned agent of Her Britannic Majesty is instructed by Her
Majesty's government to state to Count Sclopis,* the arbitrator named
by His Majesty the King of Italy, that they regret to be under the
necessity of informing the arbitrators that the difference between Her
Majesty's government and the Government of the United States, referred
to in the note which the undersigned had the honor to address to Count
Sclopis when presenting the British counter case on the 15th of April
last, has not yet been removed.
Her Majesty's government have, however, been engaged in negotiations with the Government of the United States, which have continued
down to the present time, for the solution of the difficulty which has
thus arisen; and they do not abandon the hope that, if further time
were given for that purpose, such a solution might be practicable.
Under these circumstances, the course which Her Majesty's government would respectfully request the tribunal to take is to adjourn the
present meeting for such a period as may enable a supplementary convention to be still concluded and ratified between the high contracting
parties.
Having lodged the present application, the undersigned is instructed
to withhold the written or printed _argument which the undersigned, as
agent of Her Majesty, is directed to put in under the 5th article of the
treaty, although that argument has been duly prepared and is in the
hands of the undersigned.
The undersigned is further directed to say that Her Majesty's government (while they would consider the tribunal to have full power to
proceed at the end of the period of adjournment, if the difference between the high contracting parties should then have been removed, notwithstanding the nou-delivery on this day of the argument by the undersigned) continue,
Her Majesty's right
arrived at, in the same manner as was expressed in the note addressed
by the undersigned to Count Sclopis on the 15th of April.
The undersigned has the honor to renew to Count Sclopis the assur
ance of his highest consideration.
TENTERDEN.
Geneva, June 15,1872.
while requesting this adjournment, to reserve all
o, in the event of an agreement not being finallv
A similar note was addressed to each of the arbitrators.TT
PROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES.
PROTOCOL IV.
19
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the fourth conference held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 17th day of June, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbitrators
were present.
Mr. J. C. Bancroft Davis and Lord Tenterden attended A*™nt-
the conference as agents of the United States and Her Britannic Majesty,
respectively.
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, and was
signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the agents of
the two governments.
Mr. Bancroft Davis stated that he was still without definite instructions from his.Government regarding the request of the British agent
for adjournment, and suggested a further adjournment of the tribunal
until Wednesday, the nineteenth instant.
Lord Tenterden said that he could make no objection. The conference
was then adjourned to Wednesday, the 19th instant, at 2 o'clock^
FREDERICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BANCROFT DAVIS.
TENTERDEN.
ALEX. FAVROT, Secretary.
PROTOCOL V.-
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the fifth conference held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 19th of June, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment.   All the arbitrators were present.
Mr. J. C. Bancroft Davis and Lord Tenterden attended ciare ^""indirect
,! n j?   ti tt     • ±.     i     ci±. -i     T-r claims not a subject
the conference as agents ot the United btates and Her % computation of
Britannic Majesty, respectively.
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, and was
signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the agents of
the two governments.
Count Sclopis, as president of the tribunal, inquired whether Mr.
Bancroft Davis had yet received definitive instructions from his Government. #
Mr. Bancroft Davis replied that he had not.
Count Sclopis then, on behalf of all the arbitrators, made the following statement:
The application of the agent of Her Britannic Majesty's government being now before the arbitrators, the president of the tribunal (Count Sclopis) proposes fco make the
following communication on the part of the arbitrators to the parties interested:
The arbitrators wish it to be understood that in the observations which they are
about to make they have in view solely the application of the agent of Her Britannic
Majesty's government, which is now before them, for an adjournment, which might be
prolonged till the month of February in next year; and the motives for that application,
viz, the difference of opinion which exists between Her Britannic Majesty's government and the Government of the United States as to the competency of .the tribunal,
under the treaty of Washington, to deal with the claims advanced in the case of the
United States in respect of losses under the several heads of—1st, "The losses in the
transfer of the American commercial marine to the British flag;" 2d, "The enhanced
payments of insurance;" and 3d, "The prolongation of the war, and the addition of a
J^M20
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
large sum to the cost of the war and the suppression of the rebellion ;" and the hope
which Her Britannic Majesty's government does not abandon, that if sufficient time
were given for that purpose, a solution of the difficulty which has thus arisen, by the
negotiation of a supplementary convention between the two governments, might be
-r j „„nn+;/,ni,u
found practicable.
The arbitrators do not propose to express or imply
snts as to the interpretation or effect of the
any opinion upon the point thus
in difference between the two governments as to the interpretation or effect of the
treaty; but it seems to them obvious that the substantial object of the adjournment
must be to give the two governments an opportunity of determining whether the
claims in question shall or shall not be submitted to the decision of the arbitrators,
■between the two governments on this point may make the
pon the p
aii award of compensation or computation of damages between nations, anc .
upon such, principles, be wholly excluded from the consideration of the tribunal in
making its award, even if there were no disagreement between the two governments as
to the competency of the tribunal to decide thereon.
With a view to the settlement of the other claims to the consideration of which by
the tribunal no exception has been taken on the part of Her Britannic Majesty's government, the arbitrators have thought it desirable to lay before the parties this expression of the views they have formed upon the question of public law involved, in
order that after this declaration by the tribunal it may be considered by the Government of the United States whether any course can be adopted respecting the first-mentioned claims which would relieve the tribunal from the necessity of deciding upon
the present application of Her Britannic Majesty's government.
Count Sclopis added that it was the intention of the tribunal that
this statement should be considered for the present to be confidential.
Count Sclopis then asked whether the agents or either of them wished
to say anything touching the declaration just made.
Mr. Bancroft Davis said that he was necessarily without instructions
to meet the contingency which had arisen from the action thus taken by
the arbitrators. He therefore left it with the tribunal to say whether,
in view of this fact, it ought not of its own motion to make an adjournment sufficient to afford time for the proper consideration of the new
position created by the announcement of the tribunal.
The tribunal then ordered this conference to adjourn until Wednesday
the 26th instant, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon.
FREDERICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BANCROFT DAVIS.
TENTERDEK
ALEX. FAVROT, Secretary.
PROTOCOL VI.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the sixth conference held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 25th of June, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to a call by the president, Count
Sclopis.   All the arbitrators were present.
The United States -._-      T     ~    -_ ~W       *"	
Mr. J. C. Bancroft Davis and Lord Tenterden attended
acquiesce in the d
ctsion.
the conference as agents of the Uuited States and Her
Britannic Majesty, respectively.
Count Sclopis, as president of the tribunal, stated that he had re-PROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES.
21
ceived from Mr. Bancroft Davis the information that he was prepared
to communicate to the tribunal the action authorized by his Government respecting the declaration made by the arbitrators at the last conference.
Count Sclopis added that, being desirous of advancing the work of
the tribunal, he had, therefore, convoked the conference this day, instead of Wednesday, the day to which the adjournment had been
made.
Mr. Bancroft Davis stated as follows :
The declaration made by the tribunal, individually and collectively, respecting the
claims presented by the United States for the award of the tribunal for—1st. " The
losses in the transfer of the American commercial marine to the British flag;" 2d. "The
enhanced payments of insurance;" and 3d. " The prolongation of the war and the addition of a large sum to the cost of the war and the suppression of the rebellion," is
accepted by the President of the United States as determinative of their judgment
upon the important question of public law involved.
The agent of the United States is authorized to say that, consequently, the above-
mentioned claims will not be further insisted upon before the tribunal by the United
States, and may be excluded from all consideration in any award that may be made.
Lord Tenterden then said:
I will inform my government of the declaration made by the arbitrators on the 19th
instant, and of the statement now made by the agent of the United States, and request
their instructions.
The conference was then adjourned to Thursday, the 27th instant, at
11 o'clock in the morning.
FREDERICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BANCROFT DAVIS.
TENTERDEN.
ALEX. FAVROT, Secretary.
Hi
PROTOCOL VII.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the seventh
conference', held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 27th of June, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to "adjournment.   All the arbitrators were present.
Decision made official. British argument filed.    Sir ft.
the conference as agents of the United States and Her ™ ment.
Mr. J. C. Bancroft Davis and Lord Tenterden attended
mer moves for re-
Motion
denied.
Britannic, Majesty, respectively.
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, and was
signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal, and the agents
of the two governments.
Count Sclopis, as president of the tribunal, inquired whether Lord
Tenterden had received the instructions from his government for which
he had said that he would apply at the last conference.
Lord Tenterden then read the following statement:
"The undersigned, agent of Her Britannic Majesty, is authorized by Her Majesty's
government to state that Her Majesty's government find in the communication on the
part of the arbitrators, recorded in the protocol of their proceedings of the 19th instant, nothing to which they cannot assent, consistently with the view of the interpretation and effect of the treaty of Washington hitherto maintained by them; and
being informed of the statement made on the 25th instant by the agent of the United
States, that the several claims particularly mentioned in that statement will not be
further insisted upon before the tribunal by the United States, and may be excluded22
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
from all consideration in any award that may be made; and assuming that the arbitrators will, upon such statement, think fit now to declare that the said several claims
are, and from henceforth will be, wholly excluded from their consideration, and will
embody such declaration in their protocol of this day's proceedings; they have instructed the undersigned, upon this being done, to request leave to withdraw the
application made by him to the tribunal on the 15th instant for such an adjournment
as might enable a supplementary convention to be concluded and ratified between the
high contracting parties; and to request leave to deliver the printed argument, now
in the hands of the undersigned, which has been prepared on the part of Her Britannic
Majesty's government under the fifth article of the treaty with reference to the other
claims, to the consideration of which by the tribunal no exception has been taken on
the part of Her Majesty's government.
"TENTERDEN."
Mr. Bancroft Davis said that he made no objection to the granting of
the request made by Lord Tenterden to be permitted to withdraw his
application for an adjournment, and to file the argument of Her Britannic Majesty's government.
Count Sclopis, on behalf of all the arbitrators, then declared that the
said several claims for indirect losses mentioned in the statement made
by the agent of the United States on the 25th instant and referred to
in the statement just made by the agent of Her Britannic Majesty, are,
and from henceforth shall be, wholly excluded from the consideration of
the tribunal, and directed the secretary to embody this declaration in
the protocol of this day's proceedings.
He at the same time informed Lord Tenterden that the tribunal assented to his request for leave to withdraw his application for a prolonged adjournment, and also to his request for leave to deliver the
printed argument which had been prepared on the part of Her Britannic
Majesty's government.
Lord Tenterden then presented copies of the argument in duplicate
to each of the arbitrators and to the agent of the United States.
Count Sclopis stated that the tribunal no longer desired the proceedings to be considered confidential so far as publication of them by the
United States and British governments is concerned.
He then proceeded to read an address as follows:
Messieurs : Au moment oh le nceud qui menacait d'entraver pour longtemps encore
rexecution du traite" de Washington vient d'etre si henreusement tranche", a l'heure ou
nos travaux vont prendre un cours libre et regulier, pertnettez-moi devous dire, mes-
. sieurs et tres-honores collegues, combien j'apprecie l'honneur de sieger avec vous dans
ce tribunal d'arbitrage, sur lequel sont fixes aujourd'hui les regards du monde civilise.
Laissez-moi ensuite vous exprimer tout ce que j'eprouve de reconnaissance pour la
marque flatteuse de confiance qu'il vous a plu de m'accorder en m'appelant a occuper
ce fauteuil.
Je comprends parfaitement tout le prix de cette distinction si pen meritce: mais je
comprends mieux encore le besoin que j'aurai d'etre soutenu par le concours de vos
lumieres, et par l'appui de votre indulgence dans l'exercice des fonctions que vous
m'avez confines. Ce sera a vous que je le devrai, si je De vais pas paraltre trop au-des-
sous de ma tache.
La reunion de ce tribunal d'arbitrage signale, a elle senle, nne nouvello direction
impriniee aux idees qui gouveruent la politique des nations les plus avancees sur la
voie de la civilisation.
Nous sommes arrives a une epoque ou, dans les spheres les plus e"leve"es de la politique,
l'esprit de moderation et le sentiment d'cquitc commencent partout a preValoir sur les
tendances des vieilles routines d'uu arbitraire insolent ou d'une indifference coupable.
Diminuer les occasions de faire la guerre, attenuer les malheurs qu'elle tralne a sa suite,
placer les interets de Phumanite au-dessus de ceux de la politique, voila l'ceuvre vers
laquelle se dirigent toutes les grandes intelligences, tous les cceurs haut places. Aussi
avec quel bonheur n'a-t-on pas salue le voiu si noblement exprimc par le congee's de Paris
en 1856, que les 6tats entre lesquels s'cleverait un dissentiment serieux, avant d'en
appeler aux armes, eussent recours, en tant que les circonstances l'admettraient, aux
bons offices des puissances amies ! Que de bons effets n'avait-on pas a attendre de la
declaration do ce meme congres concernant l'abolition de la course, et le respect de la
propriete privee?   Entin nous ne saurions oublier ici cette convention de Geneve, quiPROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES.
23
parvint a placer sous la protection sp6ciale du droit des gens les elans de la charite sur
les champs de bataille.
On a bien du regretter que les vues si droites et si sages du congres de Paris n'aient
pas ete promptement second^es paries evenemeuts. De cruels dementis ont ete donn€s
aux aspirations des ames d'eiite;1 mais Pautorite morale des principes proclam6s a
cette 6poque ne s'est point affaiblie.
Grace a Pinitiative des hommes d'etat qui president aux destinies de PAm6rique et
de PAngleterre, cette idee g6nereuse commence a porter ses fruits.
Le grand essai de Papplication des regies austeres et calmes du droit aux questions
ardentes de la politiqne va se faire. L'histoire conteroporame racontera a la posterite
que, meme dans la chaleur des plus vives recriminations, on a toujours sooge" des deux
cotes de l'Atlantique a tenir ouvertes les voies d'un accommodement acceptable par les
amis de la paix et dii progres.
A travers des ne"gociations ne"cessairement longues, sous Paction des courants variables
de Popinion publique, inevitables chez les gouvernements a base populaire, le but de
ces magnanimes efforts ne fat jamais perdu de vue. Personne, certes, ne pouvait en
contester Putilite; mais d'en venir au point d'accepter purement et simplement le sy-
steme de Parbitrage, de renoncer a ce privilege, si cher aux ambitions vulgaires, de se
faire justice de sa main, voila ce qui exigeait une rare fermete de conviction, un
devouement a toute epreuve aux interets de Phuuianite. Aussi le premier ministre
d'Angleterre a-t-il eu raison de parler du traite de Washington dans des termes qui
caracterisent a la fois la grandeur et les difficnltes de Pentreprise. " II se peut," disait-
il, " que ce soit une esperance trop eclatante pour etre realis6e dans ce monde de
miseres ou nous vivons; Pexperience du moins est digne de l'effort. On recherche, s'il
est possible, de soumettre ces conflits d'opiniou entre deux nations au jngement d'un
tribunal de raison, an lieu de Parbitrage sanglant des armes. L'histoire se souviendra
a Pegard des Etats-Unis et du Royaume-Uni que, ayant a vider de s6rieux conflits, et
se sentant peu disposes de part et d'autre a ceder le terrain, ils se sont ne"anmoins appliques a assurer la paix, et non-seulement h regler leurs propres conflits, mais aussi &
donner un exemple qui sera fe~eond en bienfaits pour les autres nations."2
On a dit que le triomphe d'uae idee utile n'est jamais qu'une question de date. Felicitous-nous, messieurs, d'assister a la realisation d'un dessein qui doit etre fecond des
meilleurs resultats; esperons qu'il tiendra dans Pavenir tout ce qu'il promet aujour-
d'hui.
Nous avons entendu ce cri terrible "la force prime le droit:" c'est un defi porte a la
civilisation. Nous voyous maintenant la politique s'adresser a la justice, pour ne pas
abuser de la force; c'est un hommage que la civilisation doit recevoir avec bonheur.
Ne nous plaignons pas trop si les questions que nous sommes appeies a resoudre nous
arriventa la suite d'agitations prolongees. Reconnaissons plut6t Pimportance des documents qui nous ont ete fournis et des raisonnements dont ils ont ete accompagnes.
Les longues investigations preparent les ineillenres solutions. On navigue plus
surement sur les rivieres qui ont ete le mieux sondees.
Le droit des gens a ete trop souvent regarde comme un sol mobile, sur lequel, au
moment ou Pon croit avancer, le pied glisse en arriere. Serait-ce un espoir indiscret
que celni de parvenir par nos efforts a rendre ce sol un peu mieux raffermi ?
L'objet de nos deliberations demande des etudes aussi variees que serieuses. Nous
aurons a Pexaminer a des points de vue differents. Ce sera tan tot avec la large perception de Phomme d'etat, tant&t avec Pceil scrutateur d'un president aux assises,.
toujours avec un profond sentiment d'equiteet avec une impartialite absolue.
Nous nous promettons beauconp de Paide empressee des agents des deux puissances
qui ont eu recours a ce tribunal; leur haute intelligence et leur zele edaire nous sont
■egalement connus.
Enfin le tribunal se confie dans Passistance des conseils des hautes parties presentes
a la barre, de ces jurisconsultes eminents dont le nom vaut un eioge. Nous nous at-
tendons qui'ls coopereront franchement avec nous dans ce qui doit etre,non-seulement
un acte de bonne justice, mais encore un travail de grande pacification.
Puissions-nons repondre completement aux louables intentions des puissances qui
nous out honores de leur choix; puissions-nous remplir, avec Paide de Dieu, une mission qui mette fin a de longs et penibles differends; qui, en reglant de graves interdts,
apaise de douloureuses emotions, et qui ne soit pas saus quelque heureuse influence sur
lemaintien de la paix du monde et les progres de la civilisation.
ut In the performance of a melancholy duty," dit Sir Robert Phillimore dans la
preface a la deuzieme edition des Commentaries upon International Law, 1871, " I am
obliged to close this chronicle of events by the admission that the suggestion contained
in the last protocol to the treaty of Paris, 1856, has remained a dead-letter, except perhaps in the'case of Luxemburg. Neither of the belligerents in the present horrible war
would listen to the suggestion of such an arbitration."
2 Discours prononc6 par Monsieur Gladstone au banquet d'installation du nouveau.
lord-maire, le 9 novembre 1871.24
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA,
Vos vceux, tres-honores collegues, s'accorcleront sans doute avec les miens pour que
1'essai que Pon va faire serve a ecarter dans Pavenir les occasions de luttes sanglantes
et a raffermir Pempire de la raison.
Dans cette douce prevision, j'aime a rappeler cesparoles da beros de PAmerique, de
George Washington: "S'il y a une v6rite fortement etablie, c'est qu'il y a ici-bas un
lien indissoluble entre les pures maximes d'une politique honnete et magnanime et les
solides recompenses de la prosperite et du bonheur public."1
Lord Tenterden then stated that Sir Boundell Palmer, Her Britannic
Majesty's counsel, had prepared, for the consideration of the tribunal,
a statement of certain points of importance, as to which he desires to
have an opportunity of submitting to the tribunal further arguments,
in answer to those contained in the argument of the United States delivered on the 15th instant; and that Sir Boundell Palmer would now,
with the permission of the tribunal, read such statement, of which,
with a translation which would be prepared without delay, copies will
be delivered to the several arbitrators and to the agent of the United
States in the course of the day: and, as the preparation of any further
arguments on those, or any other points, will ncessarily require some
time to be allowed, he begged respectfully to suggest that the counsel
on both sides should be informed of the time which the tribunal will be
willing to allow, before requiring their further attendance for the purpose of any arguments. If the interval so granted can be extended to
the first of Angust next, it is believed that this will meet the views of
the counsel and agents of both parties, and mav probably enable the
counsel, when again before the tribunal, to discharge their duty in a
shorter time than might otherwise be requisite.
Sir Boundell Palmer then read a statement.
Mr. Bancroft Davis then said that upon being furnished with a copy
of the paper, now presented on the part of Her Britannic Majesty's
counsel, he would lay the same before the counsel of the United States,
and would present their views to the tribunal after such consultation.
Count Sclopis then stated that the tribunal had, at the request of the
agent of Her Britannic Majesty, granted permission to Sir Boundell
Palmer to read the statement requesting the tribunal to authorize him
to furnish the arbitrators with further arguments on the points therein
specified, and that, with reference to this request, Mr. Adams, as one of
the arbitrators, had suggested a preliminary question, viz, whether
under the terms of Article V of the treaty of Washington it is competent for the agents or counsel to make requests of this nature, and that
the tribunal, after discussion, and having in view the precise terms of
the treaty, ,had decided that the arbitrators alone have the right, if
they desire further elucidation with regard to any point, to require a
written or printed statement or argument, or oral argument by counsel
upon it, under the terms of the said article.
The conference was then adjourned until Friday, the 28th instant, at
11 o'clock a. m.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS,
J. C. BANCEOFT DAVIS.
TENTEBDEN.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
discours prononce le 30 avril 1789 dans la seance du Senat americain, lors de la
proclamation de Washington a la presidence, et de John Adams a la vice-presidence,
des Etats-Unis.PROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES. 25
PBOTOCOL VIII.
Record of  the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the eighth
conference, held at Geneva, Switzerland, on the 28th of June, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbitrators
and the agents of the two governments were present.
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, and was
signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the agents of
the two governments.
Sir Alexander Cockburn, as one of the arbitrators, then proposed to
the tribunal to require a written or printed statement or Sir A CockbBm
argument by the counsel of the two governments for further ™;*t<! feiS'p
elucidation on the following points, viz: I,ied-
1. What is the "due diligence" required from a neutral state,
according to the general rules of international law, and according to
• the rules of the sixth article of the treaty of Washington?
2. What were the international obligations of neutral states in
respect to the construction, sale, and fitting out, within neutral territory,
of ships intended for warlike use by a belligerent, independently of the
municipal legislation of the neutral state, and of the rules laid down by
the treaty of Washington ?
3. What rights are conferred upon a belligerent power by the municipal legislation of a neutral state for the maintenance of its neutrality,
if such legislation exceeds the limits of the obligations previously imposed upon n"eutral States by international law?
4. Is a neutral state under any international obligation to detain in,
or exclude from, its ports vessels fitted out in violation of its neutrality,
after such vessels have been commissioned as public ships of war by a
belligerent power, whether such power be or be not recognized as a
sovereign state?
5. Whether Her Majesty's proclamation of neutrality, recognizing the
belligerency of the Confederate States, is in any, and what, way material
to the question of the liability of Great Britain for losses sustained by
the United States, in consequence of the acts of the vessels referred to
in the treaty of Washington ?
G. Whether the laws of Great Britain, during the civil war, were, or
were not, sufficient, if properly enforced, for the fulfillment of Her Britannic Majesty's neutral obligations'?
7. If a vessel, which has been fitted out in violation of the neutrality
of a neutral state, has escaped from the neutral territory, through some
want of due diligence on the part of the neutral government, ought
such neutral state to be held responsible to the other belligerent for
captures made by such vessel ?
If so, to what period does this responsibility extend? May it be
modified or terminated by circumstances afterward supervening, (as,
for instance, by assistance afterward rendered to the vessel by an independent power, without which her capacity for warlike purposes would
nave ceased, or by her entrance into a port of the belligerent to whom
she belongs,) or does it necessarily extend to the end of the war ?
Furthermore, does this responsibility still exist, when the persons
who made such ^captures were insurgent citizens of the state against
which they waged war, to whom, upon the conclusion of the war, such
illegal acts have been condoned ?
8. If a vessel, which has not been fitted out or armed in violation of
HI26
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
the neutrality of a neutral state, is afterward permitted to receive supplies of coal and repairs in a neutral port, does the neutral state, in
whose port she receives such supplies and repairs, incur on that account
a responsibility for her subsequent captures, or any of them?
After deliberation a majority of the tribunal decided not to require
such statement or argument at present.
The tribunal then decided that, in the course of their discussions and
deliberations, the agents should attend the conferences, accompanied by
the counsel of their respective governments, except in cases when the
tribunal should think it advisable to conduct their discussions and deliberations with closed doors.
The tribunal then determined to permit publicity to be given to the
statement made by the agent of Her Britannic Majesty at the third
conference, the declaration of the arbitrators made at the fifth conference, the subsequent statements of the agent of the United States made
at the sixth conference, and of the agent of Her Britannic Majesty made
at the seventh conference, and the address of the president of the tribunal delivered at the seventh conference.
The tribunal then adjourned until Monday, the loth proximo, at 2
o'clock in the afternoon.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TEXTEBDEN.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
PBOTOCOL IX.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the conference
held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 15th of July, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbitrators
and the agents of the two governments were present.
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, and was
signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the agents of
the two governments.
Count Sclopis, as president, said that it would be necessary in the
order of proceed- first place to determine the method and order of proceeding
in the consideration of the subjects referred to the tribunal.
Mr. Staempfli stated that he had prepared, and proposed to submit,
for the adoption of the tribunal, a written programme on this question.
After discussion the consideration of this programme -was deferred to
the next conference.
The tribunal then adjourned until Tuesday, the 16th instant, at 2
o'clock in the afternoon.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXOBOFT DAVIS.
TENTEBDEX
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.PROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES.
27
PBOTOCOL X.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the tenth conference held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 16lh of July, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment.   All the arbitrators and the agents of the two governments were present.
■ „, , ?        ,.   ,, ,       , P j j Order of proceed-
The protocol of the last conlerence was read and ap- :»«=. Mr. st^mpm-a
proved, and was signed by the president and secretary of *W& renewed»
.1        .    .-, . t   ii \,  »      n  j_t i j_ t-on for argument,
the tribunal and the agents of the two governments.
The following programme, submitted, by Mr. Stsempfli at the last
meeting, was taken into consideration:
A.—Indications generales.
I. Question a decider.
II. Delimitation des faits.
III. Principes generaux.
J?.—Decision rela tire a chacun des croiseurs-
Observations preliminaires.
I. Le Sumter:
a Faits.
Z> Considerants.
c Jugenient.
II. Le Nashville:
a Faits.
b Considerants.
c Jugement.
III. Le Florida:
a Faits.
b Considerants.
c Jugement.
IV. I?Alabama:
a Faits.
6 Considerants.
' c Jugement.
V. Le Retribution :
a Faits.
b Considerants.
c Jugement.
VI. Le Georgia:
a Faits.
b Considerants.
c Jugement.
VII. Le Tallahassee, ou le Olustee:
a Faits.
b Considerants.
c Jugement.
VIII. Le Chickamauga:
a Faits.
b Considerants.
c Jugement.
IX. Le Shenandoah:
a Faits.
b Considerants.
c Jugement.
C—Determination   du   tribunal   d'adjuger
une somme en bloc.
1>.—Examen des elements pour fixer une
somme en bloc.
E.—Conclusion   et   adjudication   definitive
d' une somme en bloc.
Sir Alexander Cockburn, one of the arbitrators, submitted the following propositions to the consideration of the tribunal:
I. That the complaint of the Government of the United States is of a threefold
character, and may be stated under the three following heads, viz:
1. That, by want of due diligence on the part of the British government, vessels of
war were suffered to be equipped in ports of Her Majesty, and to depart therefrom, to
the injury of American commerce;
2. That such vessels, having been again found in British ports or waters, were not
seized or detained, but were suffered to go forth again on the same destructive
service;
3. That such vessels received undue assistance,' or were permitted to remain an
unduly long time, in ports within Her Majesty's dominions.
II. That on each of these heads of complaint the decision of the tribunal must
depend, not only on the facts relating to each vessel, but also on the principles of
international law applicable to the particular subject.
III. That the rational, logical, and most convenient course to be pursued will be,
before proceeding to deal with each of these heads of complaint, to consider and
determine what are the principles of law applicable to the subject, and by which the
decision of the tribunal must ultimately be determined.28
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
IV. That it will be convenient to take the three heads of complaint separately, and
in the order hereinbefore stated.
V. That there is nothing in the Vllth article of the treaty which prevents the
adoption of this mode of proceeding, the only object and effect of that article being
to insure the separate consideration of the facts relating to each vessel, and a separate
and distinct judgment of the tribunal on the complaints specifically referable to each
in particular.
VI. That the consideration of the first-mentioned head of complaint, reference being
had to the Vlth article of the treaty, and the rules therein laid down, necessarily
involves three questions of law: the first, what effect is to be given to the term " due
diligence," with reference to the different allegations of the want thereof put forward
by the United States Government; the second, whether the general principles of
international law, referred to iu such Vlth article, have relatively to the rights and
duties of neutrals any and what effect in determining what constitutes due diligence
or the want of it, or in extending or limiting the liability of a neutral state with
reference to this head of complaint; the third, whether a government acting in good
faith, and honestly intending to fulfill the obligations of neutrality, is to be held liable
by reason of mistake, error in judgment, accidental delay, or even negligence on the
part of a subordinate officer.
VII. That it will be convenient, and indeed necessary, to commence our proceedings
with-the consideration of these questions of law.
VIII. That, looking to the difficulty of these questions, and the conflict of opinion
which has arisen among distinguished jurists on the present contest, as well as to
their vast importance in the decision of the tribunal on the matters in dispute,
it is the duty, as it must be presumed -to be the wish of the arbitrators, in the interest
of justice, to obtain all the assistance in their power to enable them to arrive at a just
and correct conclusion. That they ought, therefore, to call for the assistance of
the eminent counsel who are in attendance on the tribunal to assist them with their
reasoning and learning, so that arguments scattered over a mass of documents may be
presented in a concentrated and appreciable form, and the tribunal may thus have the
advantage of all the light which can be thrown on so intricate and difficult a matter,
and that its proceedings may hereafter appear to the world to have been characterized
by the patience, the deliberation, and anxious desire for information on all the points
involved in its decision, without which it is impossible that justice can be duly or
satisfactorily done.
After discussion, the tribunal decided to proceed with the case of the
Florida at the next meeting, according to the programme of Mr. Stsem-
pfii.
The tribunal then adjourned mil
o'clock in the afternoon.
il Wednesday, the 17th instant, at 1
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TEXTEBDEX
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
PBOTOCOL XI.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the eleventh
conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 17th of July, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbitrators and the agents of the two governments were present.
. The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, and was
signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal, and the agents
of the two governments.
On the proposal of Sir Alexander Cockburn it was decided that the
written opinions or statements read by the arbitrators to the tribunal
should be printed, and distributed to the arbitrators and to the agents
and counsel of the two ffovernments.PROTOCOLS   OF   THE   CONFERENCES'. 29
The tribunal then proceeded with the consideration of the
The Florida
case of the Florida.
The conference was adjourned until Friday, the 19th instant, at 1
o'clock in the afternoon.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TEXTEBDEX.
ALEX. FAVROT, Secretary.
PBOTOCOL XII.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the twelfth conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 19th of July, 1872. •
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbitrators and the agents of the two governments were present.
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, and was
signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the agents
of the two governments.
The tribunal continued with the consideration of the case
The Florida.
of the Florida.
The tribunal decided that the meetings should, for the present, be
held on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays.
The conference then adjourned until Monday, the 22d instant, at
half past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TEXTEBDEX.
ALEX. FAVROT, Secretary.
PROTOCOL XIII.
Record of the proceedings of tlie tribunal of arbitration at the thirteenth
conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 22d of July, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbitrators and the agents of the two governments were present.
The proctocol of the last conference was read and approved, and
was signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal, and the
agents of the two governments.
The tribunal continued with the consideration of the case of the
Florida.
Sir Alexander Cockburn, as one of the arbitrators, proposed to the
tribunal under the'fifth article of the treaty of Washington, to call for
the assistance of counsel upon the effect of the term of ' sir A. cockbum-a
" due diligence," and as to the principles of international law SSS'^SS"^
applicable to the case under the terms of that article. bimia-
After deliberation, a majority of the tribunal decided that it does not
at present require the assistance of the agents and counsel upon the
point proposed by Sir Alexander Cockburn; but that it reserves the
right of requiring that assistance on any point, if necessary, according
to the fifth article.of the treaty.30
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
The tribunal also decided to consider at the next conference the case
of the Alabama, and the questions of " due diligence," and the effect
of a commission in connection with that vessel.
The conference was adjourned until Thursday, the 25th instant, at
half past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. 0. BAXCROFT DAVIS.
TEXTERDEX.
ALEX.  FAVROT, Secretary.
PROTOCOL XIV.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the fourteenth
conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 25th of July, 1872.
The* conference was held pursuant to adjournment.   All the arbitra-
Arwment ordered tors and the agents of the two governments were present.
Effectdoef «S     The protocol of the last conference was read and ap-
sions and supplies of pr0yed, and was signed by the president and secretary of
rie Alabama.      the tribunal and the agents of the two governments.
On the proposal of Baron d'ltajuba, as one of the arbitrators, the tribunal decided to require a written or printed statement or argument
from the counsel of Great Britain upon the following questions of law:
1. The question of due diligence, generally considered;
2. The special question, as to the effect of the commissions of confederate ships of war entering British ports;
3. The special question, as to supplies of coal in British ports to confederate ships;
With the right to the other party to reply either orally or in writing,
as the case may be.
Baron d'ltajuba proposed that when a proposition should be made to
the tribunal, the discussion of that proposition should always be put off
to the next following conference; which was agreed to.
The tribunal then proceeded with the case of the Alabama.
The tribunal also decided to consider at the next conference the cases
of the Sumter, Xashville, and Chickamauga, successively.
The conference was then adjourned until Monday, the 29th instant, at
half past 12 o'clock.
FREDERICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TEXTEBDEX.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
PROTOCOL XV.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the fifteenth
conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 29th of July, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment.   All the arbitra-
British argument tors and the agents of the two governments were present.
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, and was signed by the president and secretary of
the tribunal and the agents of the two governments.
argume
submitted: Sumt(
Nashville, and Chick-
amauga.PROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES.
31
Lord Tenderden, agent of Her Britannic Majesty, announced that he
had already delivered to the secretary a written statement or argument
from the counsel of Her Britannic Majesty upon the three questions of
law required by the tribunal at the preceding conference.
The tribunal then proceeded with the cases of the vessels the Sumter,
the Xashville, and the Chickamauga, as decided at the last meeting.
The tribunal also decided to consider at the next conference the cases
of the Olustee or Tallahassee, the Betribution, and the Tuscaloosa.
The conference was then adjourned until Tuesday, the 30th instant,
at half past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TEXTEBDEX.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
PBOTOCOL XVI.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the sixteenth con-
. ference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 30#& of July, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbitrators
and the agents of the two governments were present. Tallahassee and
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, Ketrib,ition-
and was signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the
agents of the two governments.
The tribunal then proceeded with the cases of the vessels the Tuscaloosa, the Tallahassee, and the Betribution.
The tribunal also decided to devote the next conference to receiving
the written or oral statement or argument of the counsel of the United
States, in reply to the argument presented at the last conference by the
counsel of Her Britannic Majesty.
The conference was then adjourned until Monday, the 5th of August,
at half past 12 o'clock.
FREDERICK SCLOPIS.
J. 0. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TEXTEBDEX.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
PBOTOCOL XVII.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the seventeenth
conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 5th of August, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment.   All the arbitrators
and the agents of the two governments were present. 0ra] ^n^t of
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, Mr-Evarts-
and was signed by the presideut and secretary of the tribunal and the
agents of the two governments.
The tribunal proceeded with the hearing of the oral argument by Mr.
Evarts, counsel of the United States, in reply to the argument presented32
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
by Sir Boundell Palmer, counsel of Her Britannic Majesty, at the fifteenth conference.
The tribunal then adjourned until Tuesday, the 6th instant, at half
past 12 o'clock.
FEEDERICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCROFT DAVIS.
TEXTERDEX.
ALEX. FAVROT, Secretary.
PROTOCOL XVIII.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the eighteenth
conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 6th of August, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment.   All the arbitrators
and the agents of the two governments were present.
F.varte^ndVenerai     The protocol of the last conference was read and approved,
and was signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the agents of the two governments.
Mr. Evarts concluded the oral argument on the part of the counsel of
the United States in reply to the argument on the part of the counsel
of Her Britannic Majesty.
Mr. Cushing delivered to the tribunal a written argument on the part
of the counsel of the United States in reply to a portion of the argument presented by the counsel of Her Britannic Majesty.
The tribunal then adjourned until Thursday, the 8th instant, at half
past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TEXTERDEX.
ALEX. FAVROT, Secretary.
PROTOCOL XIX.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the nineteenth
conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 8th of August, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment.   All the arbitrators
Retribution; argu- and the agents of the two governments were present.
ment of Mr. waite.     The protocol of the last conference was read and approved,
and was signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the
agents of the two governments.
The tribunal concluded the examination of the case of the Betribution.
Mr. Waite delivered to the tribunal a written argument on the part
of the counsel of the United States, in reply to a portion of the argument presented by the counsel of Her Britannic Majesty.
The tribunal then adjourned until Wednesday, the 14th instant, at
half past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCROFT DAVIS.
TEXTERDEX.
ALEX. FAVROT, Secretary.PROTOCOLS   OF  THE  CONFERENCES. 33
PBOTOCOL XX.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the ttventieth
conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the l&th of August, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adj ournment.   All the arbitrators
and the agents of the two governments were present.
Mosicr'and' v.avn.     The protocol of the last conferen ce was read and approved,
and was signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the agents of the two governments.
Mr. Bancroft Davis, in reply to an inquiry from Count Sclopis on
behalf of the tribunal, stated as follows:
The claims for losses growing out of the acts of the Sallie, the Jeff. Davis, the Music,
the Boston, and the V. H. Joy, are respectfully submitted for the determination of the
tribunal.
The agent of the United States has no instructions regarding them, except what.
appears in the list of claims presented on the 15th of December last, and in the revised
list of claims presented on the 15th of April last.
The tribunal directed this statement to be recorded, and passed to the
consideration of the question of U due diligence," generally considered.
The conference was adjourned until Thursday, the 15th instant, at
half past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCROFT DAVIS.
TEXTERDEX.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
Record of th
conference
PBOTOCOL XXI.
he proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the twenty-first
!, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 15th of August, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbi-
tratrators and the agents of the two governments were   Effect .t commis-
sions; new evidence
present. submitted by q, &.
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, and was
signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the agents of
the two governments.
The tribunal proceeded to consider the effects of the commissions of
confederate ships of war entering British ports, and the supplies of
coal in British ports to confederate ships.
Lord Tenterden, as agent of Her Britannic Majesty, submitted the
following statement:
As the tribunal is now approaching the consideration of the case of the Georgia, I
beg respectfully to submit that in the argument of the United States, with respect to
that vessel, (pages 224,225,) it is (for the first time) suggested that the British government ought to have informed themselves, by inquiry, what ships were being built in
February, 1863, for the Emperor of China ; and certain inferences appear to be drawn
from the (assumed) fact that they omitted to do so.
P<
a,rbitrators,icopies of four letters:
No. 1. From Mr. Hammond to Mr. Lay, the agent of the Emperor of China, dated
..->th February, 1863, (in which the inquiry, which the United States suggest as proper
to have been made, was actually made by Earl Russell's direction;)
3B *
OS34
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
No. 2. From Mr. Lay to Mr. Hammond, dated 2d March, 1863, (communicating the
information desired;)
No. 3. From Earl Russell to Mr. Adams, dated 5th March, 1863, (communicating to
Mr. Adams the information so obtained from Mr. Lay;) and
No. 4. From Mr. Adams to Earl Russell, dated 11th March, 1863, (acknowledging
the receipt of No. 3.)
Mr. Bancroft Davis, as agent of the United States, stated in reply:
I have examined the letters which Lord Tenterden wishes to present. They appear
to contain nothing which we regard as important, in themselves; but we can find no
authority in the treaty authorizing the tribunal either to call for or to admit new evidence from either party at this stage of the proceedings. I must leave the tribunal to act
upon the application as in its judgment it may see fit.
The tribunal decided to receive the letters from Lord Tenterden, who
thereupon presented them.
The tribunal also decided to consider the case of the Georgia at the
next meeting.
The conference was then adjourned until Friday, the 16th instant, at
12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TEXTEBDEX.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
PBOTOCOL XXII.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the twenty-second conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 16th of August,
1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment.   All the arbitrators, and the agents of the two governments were present.
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, and was
signed Dy the president and secretary of the tribunal and the agents of
the two governments.
The Georgia.        The tribunal considered the case of the Georgia.
The tribunal decided to proceed with the consideration of the case of
the Shenandoah at the next meeting.
The conference was adjourned until Monday, the 19th instant, at half-
past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TEXTEBDEX.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
PBOTOCOL XXIII.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the twenty-
third conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 19th of August,
1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbitrators and the agents of the two governments were present.
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, and was
signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the agents of
the two governments.PROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES.
35
Pbennmloah :   new
tables presented by
The tribunal considered the case of the Shenandoah.
Count Sclopis having expressed some doubts concerning the went.
the chief point of this discussion, requested the tribunal to permit the
counsel to afford further elucidation with regard to that point.
The tribunal decided to hear these explanations at the next conference.
In compliance with a request of the tribunal, Mr. J. C. Bancroft Davis,
as agent of the United States, and Lord Tenterden, as agent of Her
Britannic Majesty, respectively, presented to the tribunal tables of
figures relating to the losses for which compensation is claimed by the
United States, with explanatory statements and observations.
The conference was adjourned until Wednesday, the 21st instant, at
half-past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TENTEBDEX.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
PBOTOCOL XXIV.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the twenty-fourth
conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 21st of August, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbitrators and the agents of the two governments were present.       Shenandoah:; If
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, Sn0V t0he"ftdry0o"
and was signed by the president and secretary of thetribu- no^* ^Mobile..
nal and the agents of the two governments.
The tribunal continued the consideration of the case of the Shenandoah, by hearing explanations from Sir Boundell Palmer and Mr. C.
Cushing.
At the close of his remarks, Mr. C. Cushing requested to be informed
by the tribunal whether the questions outside of that of enlistment,.
on which the elucidation called for specially turned, remain open before
the tribunal.
After deliberation, a majority of four to one declared the tribunal
sufficiently enlightened.
Count Sclopis then concluded the statement of his opinions, which he-
had not completed at the meeting of the 19th instant.
Sir Alexander Cockburn, as one of the arbitrators, then proposed to
the tribunal to require further elucidation by counsel upon the following question:
The legal effect, if any, of the fact that the Florida, after leaving the Bahamas,.did,
before entering on her employment as a vessel of war and taking any vessel of the
"United States, go into Mobile, a confederate port, and after a delay of four months,
proceed from thence on her cruise against the shipping of the United States, under the
circumstances appearing in the evidence.
The tribunal decided to adopt the proposal.
The conference was then adjourned until Friday, the 23d instant, at
half-past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TEXTEBDEX.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
<-Jl36
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
PBOTOCOL XXV.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the twenty-fifth
conference, held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 23d of August, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment.   All the arbitra-
Lord Tenderden's tors and the agents of the two governments were present.
biefTresenu" by     The protocol of the last conference was read and approved,
SenuwtoFtorfdS; and was signed by the president and secretary of the trib-
snndry decisions. ' unai and the agents of the two governments.
Lord Tenterden, as agent of Her Britannic Majesty, read the following
statement:
As agent of Her Britannic Majesty, I have the honor respectfully to represent to the
tribunal that the tables of claims which were pro forma presented to the arbitrators by
the agent of the United States on Monday, 19th instant, but of which I was only furnished with copies on the night of the 21st instant, contain new and additional claims
of the following description.
1. a. Claims for wages of crews of captured vessels from time of capture.
b. Claims for loss of personal effects of officers and crews.
There is no evidence as to the number of the crews, nor as to the long and varying periods for which their wages are calculated, nor as to any such personal effects having
been in fact lost.
In short, these claims are wholly conjectural in amount and unsupported by any
evidence whatsover.
2. Additional claims for shares of vessels not claimed for up to the present time, e. g.:
where an individual claimant has only claimed for four-fifths of the value of a vessel,
an arbitrary claim is now advanced for the first time on the part of the United States
Government for the value of the remaining fifth.
It is not alleged that the part owner who had not previously claimed has now given
any authority for this claim to be advanced. The strong presumption indeed is that
he may have already received the value of his share from English or other foreign
insurance companies, with whom it was insured, and who are not entitled under the
treaty to advance any claim.
3. Claims previously presented have been increased in amount without any ground
appearing for such increase.
The total amount of these three classes of claims, which are now for the first time
advanced on the part of the United States Government, appears, in round numbers, to
be at least two millions of dollars.
Independently of the fact tbat these additional claims are unsupported by any evidence, it is my duty respectfully to submit to the tribunal that the additional statement
of any new claims whatever, in this stage of the arbitration, for the purpose of influencing or affecting the judgment of the tribunal upon any matter within its authority,
is contrary to the provisions of the treaty.
The treaty contemplates that the statements of facts and evidence, constituting the
whole case of each party, should be brought before the tribunal within the times and
in the manner specified in Articles 3, 4 and 5, subject only to such further statements
_V   **.«,«**«*.    .J^v/V..**^.*    .~    «... «..w*~v.    «,      *    WJU   v,    w«.«jwu      V"-.J      V.J    OllV.ll    1U1UJ
or arguments as under Article 5 the arbitrators may think.fit to require or permit for
"~, or arising out of, the documents previously
not author-
the elucidation of any point contained in
put in by either party.
I have also to submit that the introduction of such additional claims is
ized by the request made by the arbitrators.
This request was that comparative statements of the results in figures of the claims
already made, as appearing in the papers previously presented, according to the views
of the respective parties, should be prepared, with explanatory observations, and laid
before the tribunal, and it could not have been intended to afford the opportunity
for bringing forward new, or increasing former, claims.
Under these circumstances, I respectfully request. the arbitrators to disallow, as
unauthorized by them, and as contrary to the treaty, the tables containing such additional claims, presented by the agent of the United States, and the memorandum relating to them, without prejudice to his right to present other tables, accompanied by
any explanatory observations, which shall be limited to the particular claims already
set forth in the case and counter-case of the United States, and the appendices thereto.
The tribunal decided to adjourn the consideration of this matter until
the next conference.
Sir Boundell Palmer, as counsel of Her Britannic Majesty, then read
the argument required by the tribunal on Sir Alexander Cockburn'sPROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES.
37
proposal, upon the question of law mentioned in Prococol XXIV, and
Mr. Evarts, as counsel of the United States, replied to it.
On the proposal of Viscount d'ltajuba, one of the arbitrators, the
tribunal decided to adjourn until the next conference the further discussion upon the Florida, and to proceed with the definitive vote on
■each vessel separately.
The tribunal then decided that it had to consider only such vessels
with regard to which claims were presented in the'case and counter-case
of the United States; every other question being consequently understood as dismissed from consideration.
Count Sclopis, as president of the tribunal, having read the Article
VII of the Treaty of Washington, asked the tribunal whether, as to the
Sumter, Great Britain has, by any act or omission, failed to fulfill any of
the duties set forth in the three rules mentioned, in Article VI of the
treaty, or recognized by the principles of international law, not inconsistent with such rules.
The tribunal unanimously replied "Xo."
The same question was asked as to the Xashville, and the tribunal
unanimously replied "Xo."
The same question was renewed as to the Betribution.
Mr.
Adams answered "Yes, for all the.acts of this vessel."
Mr. Staempfli answered | Yes, as to the loss of the Emily Fisher."
Sir Alexander Cockburn, Viscount d'ltajuba, and Count Sclopis answered I Xo."
The same question was asked as to the Georgia, and the tribunal
unanimously answered "Xo."
The same question was repeated as to the Tallahassee and Chickamauga, separately, and the tribunal unanimously answered "Xo"for
each of these vessels.
The same question having been repeated as to the Alabama, the tribunal unanimously answered "Yes."
The same question was renewed as to the Shenandoah, and Mr. Adams,
Mr. Staempfli, and Count Sclopis answered "Yes; but only for the acts
committed by this vessel after her departure from Melbourne on the
18th of February, 1865." Viscount d'ltajuba and Sir Alexander Cockburn answered " Xo."
. The definitive vote on the Florida was adjourned until the next meeting.
The conference was then adjourned until Monday, the 26th instant,
at half past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BAXCBOFT DAVIS.
TEXTEBDEX.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
PBOTOCOL XXVI.
Recor
eon
"d of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the twenty-sixth
mference held at Geneva in Switzerland, on 26th of August, 1872.
The conference was held pursuant to adjournment. All the arbitrators and the agents of the two governments were present.      Lord Tentene
j O c -\ i i      presents new taolea
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, f£nDdj& ^piSHo
and was signed by the president and secretary of the tribu- ^JJ^f^;
nal and the agents of the two governments. %%$&&.
i38
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Lord Tenterden, as agent of Her Britannic Majesty, delivered to the
tribunal and the agent of the United States tables of figures relating
to the claims contained in the tables presented on the part of the
United States on the 19th instant.
The tribunal concluded the discussion of the question concerning the
entrance of the Florida into Mobile, and her stay at that port, and proceeded to the definitive vote on this vessel.
Count Sclopis, as president of the tribunal, having asked, under the
VII article of the treaty of Washington, whether, as to the Florida,
Great Britain had, by any act or omission, failed to fulfil any of the duties set forth in the rules mentioned in Article VI of the treaty, or recognized by the principles of international law not inconsistent with
such rules, Mr. Adams, Viscount d'ltajuba, M. Stsernpfii, and Count
Sclopis answered "Yes, " and Sir Alexander Cockburn answered "Xo."
As a question of principle, the tribunal then unanimously declared
that Great Britain should be considered as responsible for the tenders
in the same degree as for the vessels to which they were attached.
The same question as had been put with regard to the Florida, was
next asked by Count Sclopis as to the Tuscaloosa, a tender to the Alabama, and the tribunal unanimously answered " Yes."
The same question was asked separately as to the Clarence, the Ta-
cony, and the Archer, as tenders to the Florida, and Mr. Adams, Mr.
Stsempfli, Viscount d'ltajuba, and Count Sclopis answered " Yes," for
each of these vessels, and Sir Alexander Cockburn answered "Xo" for
each of these vessels.
The tribunal then proceeded to the consideration of the representation made by the agent of Her Britannic Majesty, at the last conference.
Mr.
lowing statement in reply:
L'agent de sa Majeste britannique apr6sente" au tribunal uu memorandum destine"
a critiquer le resume" des indemnites demande"es par les Etats-Unis, et dans lequel le
tribunal est prie" de remettre ce resume a l'agent des Etats-Unis comme non avenu.
L'agent des Etats-Unis soutient respectueusement que sou resume" est parfaitement
en regie et en tout conforme aux droits des Etats-Unis aussi Men qu'a la demande par-
ticuliere du tribunal.
1. Les objections de l'agent de sa Majeste" britannique portent sur les points suivants:
a) Les gages des equipages des navires capture's par les vaisseaux armes des confe"-
de"r£s ;
b) Les pertes des personnes de ces Equipages, tant officiers que matelots;
c) Des parties indivise"es d'un navire qui ne paraissent pas expresse"ment dans les
a bleaux originaux;
d) Augmentation pre"tendue du montant total des reclamations.
2. L'agent de sa Majeste" britannique objecte aussi:
a) En matiere de forme;
b) En matiere de competence.
Nous repondrons seriatim h, toutes ces objections:
I. Quant a la forme, il est evident que les arbitres, pour faciliter leurs investigations,
ont dlsire" avoir sous les yeux un abrege" comparatif de ce que les Etats-Unis re"clament
et de la critique de ces reclamations par l'Angleterre, critique portant sur les chiffres
aussi bien que sur les chefs des reclamations. Ces resumes faits par les deux parties
ne lient d'aucune maniere les arbitres: ce sont tout simplement d.es renseignements
propres a guider le tribunal a travers la masse de chiffres et de details renfermes dans
les memoires et les pieces justificatives des deux gouvernements.
L'agent de sa Majeste britannique pretend que les Etats-Uni? doivent calquer leur
resume sur le modele du resume de l'Angleterre, non-seulement quant a la forme, mais
aussi quant au fond. C'est-a-dire que, s'il plait a l'Angleterre d'omettre dans son resume quelque chef de reclamations, l'Amerique doit aussi l'omettre. Ce serait une
etrange table synoptique.
La raison requiertl'explication des differences qui existent entreles chiffres de chaque
chef de reclamations. Mais elle requiert aussi l'explication des differences qui existent
entre les chefs memes des reclamations.   Sans cela, l'Angleterre n'aurait qu'a supprimer
J. C. Bancroft Davis, as agent of the United States, read the fol-PROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES. 39
dans son resume le chef des assurances, on celni des frets, ou celui d'un navire quelcon-
que, pour soustraire ce chef a la couuaissanee des arbitres. Ce ne serait pas le moyeu
de renseiguer le tribunal, mais plu6t celni de le tromper. Une telle id6"e a l'air d'une
plaisanterie, et nullement d'une objection serieuse an tableau des Ejbats-Unis.
Le tribunal examinera les resumes des deux gouvernements. A la lumiere de ces
resumes, le tribunal examinera tous les documents relatifs compris dans les memoires
et coutre-memoires des deux gouvernements. C'est le droit et c'est le devoir de chaque
gouvernement de soumettre au tribunal les preuves respectives sans retranchement
d'un c6te et sans suppression de 1'autre.   Alors le tribunal jugera.
II. Quant a la competence :
a) Le traite comprend toutes les reclamations des JStofe- Unis qui sont d4sign6es sous le
nom ge'nerique de reclamations de VAlabama.
b) Le tribunal, par son opinion preiiminaire, a limite la generalite de ces mots, en
ecartant des reclamations certaines pertes nationales alieguees par les Etats-Unis.
Mais, a la suite de cette opinion, le tribunal reste saisi de la question de toutes les
reclamations faites par les Etats-Unis dans l'inter&t des individus leses, et comprises
sous le nom generique de reclamations de 1'Alabama.
Les pertes des officiers, et en general des equipages des navires captures, ne sont pas
moins valables que celles des armateurs et des assureurs. Le doute est impossible a
cet egard.
c) Des reclamations pour les pertes personnelles des equipages des navires captures
sont formuiees de la maniere la plus explicite dans le memoire des Etats-Unis, comine
suit:
" Reclamations pour dommages ou mauvais traitements infliges aux personnes, et
qui ont ete le resultat de la destruction des vaisseaux appartenanfc, aux deux classes
precedentes.
* * * *• *#*
" H est impossible a present pour les Etats-Unis de soumettre au tribunal un etat
detailie des dommages ou mauvais traitements personnels qui sont resultes de la destruction de chaque classe de vaisseaux. Les officiers et l'equipage de chaque vaisseau
avaient droit a la protection du drapeau americain; leurs reclamations doivent etre
incluses dans la somme totale que le tribunal peut allouer. D'apres les elements d'ap-
preciation qui leur sont founds, il ne sera pas difficile aux arbitres de connaltre les
noms et le tonnage des batiments detruits, de determiner le nombre de ces hardis ma-
rins sans ressources qui ont ete prives ainsi de leurs moyens de subsistence et de fixer
la somme totale qui de ce chef devraitefcre placee dans les mains des Etats-Unis. Elle
ne peut pas &tre inferieure a des centaines de mille dollars" et elle peut s'eiever a des
millions.   (Traduction francaise, pp. 377,378.)
dl) Nous prions les arbitres de lire ces extraits attentivement. Ils verront que les
Etats-Unis ont presente les reclamations de cette classe de la maniere la plus claire et
la plus positive, commeuu chef capital desindemnitesdemandees a la Grande-Bretagne.
Nous ajoutous que ce sont des reclamations reelles et meritees.
L'incertitude du chiffre ne nuit pas a sa reclamation.
Nous aurons plus tard quelque chose a dire a ce sujet.
e) Les pertes d'effets, soit d'officiers, soit de matelots, sont expresseinent recitees dans
plusiears cas. Dans les autres, ces pertes sont estimees d'apres le chiffre des pertes
actuellement exprimees.
Quant aux gages et au chiffre des equipages, nous avous essaye de rassembler tous
les renseignements possibles, et nos estimations sont fondees sur les faits developpes
dans les pieces justificatives.
Nous distinguons entre les gages des equipages des baleiniers et ceux des navires
marchands proprement dits.
Pour les deux classes de navires les gages ont ete perdus, ou par les armateurs qui
les avaient payes, ou pour les equipages qui ne les avaient pas recus.
Pour les baleiniers, la perte etait plus serieuse, parce que dans la plupart des cas le
montant des gages se fixait, en tout ou en partie, selonles benefices, et les families des
matelots recevaient de l'armateur une partie notable de ces gages pendant le temps du
voyage.
Dans ces cas, les matelots des baleiniers avaienb ete victimes des frais des six ou
neuf premiers mois d'un voyage, en attendant les benefices qui devraieut etre recus
dans les trois mois h venir.
De deux choses l'une; pour indemniser ces gens, il faut leur allouer, on des benefices
en perspective, ou des gages se rapportant a ces benefices. .
Pour les navires marchands, il peut se faire que la question des gages des matelots
soit compliquee de la question des frets. En supposant que les indemnites demandees
sous le chef de fret soient, comme nous le croyons, les pertes actuelles des armateurs
dans cette relation, il s'ensnit que nous avous droit a etre indemnises pour les gages.
Pour la plupart des navires, les Etats-Unis reclament sous le nom de gages la perte
du temps des matelots, aussi bien que les frais de leur transport du lieu de capture aux
lieux respectifs de leur residence habituelle.; et sous ce chef nous allouons des gages
I40
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
durant six mois ou durant neuf mois, selon que la capture a ete faite dans les eanx de
l'Atlantique ou bien dans celles du Pacifique.
En effet, nous donnons des gages doubles, pendant trois mois pour le premier cas et
pendant quatre mois et demi pour le second cas. Quoique ceci ne soit qu'une estimation, le resultat est au-dessous de la verite plutdt qu'au-dessus.
Nous avons estime le chiffre de l'equipage de chaque navire conformement aux
donnees qu'on tronve dans nos pieces justificatives, en distinction du chiffre des baleiniers, quinecessitent un plus grand nombre d'hommes que les navires marchands.
III. Les Etats-Unis redament pour toutes les parties indivisees d'un navire, soit que
le proprietaire d'une partie mineure quelconque paraisse ou non, parce que les Etats-
Unis auront a repondre a tous les proprietaires dans le cas oh le tribunal accorderait
en bloc une somme aux Etats-Unis. Sans cela, il y aurait injustice evidente. L'objet
du traite est d'iudemniser les Etats-Unjs pour toutes les pertes subies parlours citoyens,
et non d'imposer une partie de cette indemnification aux Etats-Unis eux-m&mes.
IV. L'agent de sa Majeste britannique objecte que nous avons augmente le montant
des reclamations en ajoutant les chiffres appartenantaux trois chefs suivants :
Gages     $939,597
Effets       441,050
Int6rets indivises         42,273
1,422,920
H s'agit de moins d'un million et demi, et non des deux millions aliegues dans le
memorandum de l'agent de sa Majeste britannique.
II est vrai de dire qu'il y a de plus une addition a la valeur de certains navires. C'est
une meprise de l'expert employe dans les calculs relatifs a ces navires. Cette erreur est
expliquee et corrigee dans une note placee a la suite de ce memorandum.
Mais, en m&me temps, nous avous mis de c6t6 les reclamations fondees sur des benefices en perspective, qui est le double des additions faites.
V. Enfin, et pour resumer le debat:
L'Angleterre a compose un tableau, non des faits actnels, mais tout d'estimations,
d'appreciations et de moyennes arbitraires et supposees.
Notre tableau est compose de faits actuels et prouves, pour la plupart, avec un petit
nombre d'appreciations tres-simples, et celles-ci fondees sur des preuves et des analogies
evidentes et appuy6es par les documents.
Nous avons pleinement le droit de nous plaindre du tableau tout entier presente au
nom de 1'Angle.terre: elle n'a h critiquer que quelques chiffres secondaires du mfeme ordre
appartenant au memorandum des Etats-Uuis.
L'agent de sa Majeste parait supposer que les Etats-Unis ont eu l'intention, dans
tout ceci, de preparer notre estime de maniere a exercer une influence f&eheuse sur la
conscience des arbitres. Est-ce le tribunal qu'on soupgonne? Est-ce l'agent des Etats-
Unis ? On pourrait s'y meprendre. On pourrait meme imputer de tels motifs a l'agent
de sa Majeste. Mais ce ne serait digne ni de lui, ni de nous, en vue des relations cour-
toises des agents et des conseils des deux gouvernements.
Mais a quoi bon cette critique de part ou d'autre ?
Si les arbitres allouent une somme en bloc, cette somme sera necessairement une appreciation en partie, sans quoi le resultat des travaux des arbitres ne serait pas une indemnification reelle des Etats-Unis.
S'il y a quelques defauts secondaires dans les preuves des Etats-Unis, il y a un manque
presque total de preuves definies de la part de la Grande-Bretagne.
Mais si le tribunal renvoie ces reclamations a des assesseurs, l'Angleterre sera tenue
par les stipulations du traite de payer aux Etats-Unis la somme adjugee par les assesseurs, sans restriction, ni de preuves affirmatives, ni de preuves negatives. Alors, les
matelots qui n'onb pas presente leurs reclamations, et memo les armateurs, assureurs ou
autres, auront le droit de reclamer devant les assesseurs. Tel est le sens evident du
traite.
En attendant, tout ce qui se fait, soit de la part de l'Amerique, soit de la part de
l'Angleterre, tend a essayer d'eclairer, par les moyens qui sont a notre disposition, le
jugement du tribunal.
Enfin, nous protestons contre certaines appreciations du traite de Washington, qui sont
I ou exprimees ou impliquees dans le memoire de l'agent de la Grande-Bretagne, sans
nous arreter pour les discuter ici.
NOTE.
A.—Les reclamations pour les gages des baleiniers et des pecheurs des navires detrnits ou detenus par 1'Alabama, par le Florida, ou par le Shenan-.
doah apres sa sortie de Melbourne, (la correction etant faite des erreurs
notees dans le memorandum qui accompagne nos tableaux,) estimees
d'apres les preuvas soumises, s'eleven t a  $588,247 50PROTOCOLS 'OF THE CONFERENCES.
41
Ce montant doit fitre sonstrait de la somme totale dans le sommaire
annexe, si le tribunal accorde les reclamations des baleiniers pour la
peche perspective et pour l'intexruption du voyage.
B.—Les reclamations pour les gages des officiers et des homines des navires
marchands ainsi detruits ou detenus, estimees' d'apres les preuves sou-
mises, s'eievent a..  $408,070 00
Quelques-uns des navires detruits ou detenus etaient sur lest. En tous
cas pareils, nous insistons sur ce que le tribunal nous accorde le total des
gages reclames. Plusieurs, ou meme la plupart, des navires etaient
charges de fret. Dans tous les cas oh le tribunal est convaincu que le fret
reclame est fret pur, il doit aecorder les reclamations pour gages; mais
dans tous les cas oh le tribunal est convaincu que la reclamation pour
fret est pour fret brut, il doit refuser d'accorder les reclamations pour
gages. Ceci est expose d'une maniere tres-precise dans le memorandum
qui accompagne nos tableaux.
C.—Les estimations des reclamations pour les effets personnels des officiers
et des hommes des navires ainsi detruits ou detenus s'eievent a     421,000 00
Les Etats-Unis insistent sur ce qu'il leur soit accorde la somme totale
de ces reclamations.
D.—Les tableaux presentes par l'agent des Etats-Unis comprenaient tous
les navires detruits par le Shenandoah. Depuis .que ces tableaux ont
ete termines le tribunal a decide que la Grande-Bretagne n'est pas re-
sponsable des actes dn Shenandoah avant sa sortie de Melbourne. Le
montant des reclamations a deduire par suite de cette decision s'eieve h>..    453,290 49
E.—II y a une erreur palpable de la part du comptable dans le tableau
intitule "Shenandoah, supplement, classe A." Lavaleur estimee de huit
navires detenus (c'est-a-dire, $80,000 chacun)fut retenue par le comptable
par megarde, et jointe aux chiffres de la colonne des totaux de pertes.
Dans la discussion detailiee devant le tribunal, on se serait apercu tout
de suite de cette erreur, qui etait demeuree inapercue dans la hate des
preparatife pour rediger les tableaux. On fournit ci-inclus un tableau
nouveau sous le mfeme titre. Le montant de cette erreur, qui se trouve
corrigee ici, est de     640,000 00
F.—L'expose" revise ci-joint: totaux des reclamations comparees, exhibe
ces corrections: c'est-a-dire, que les montants D et E, qui s'eievent a
$1,093,290.49, sont deduits.
C'est au tribunal a decider si une partie quelconque des montants A et B
doit 6tre deduite.
TOTAUX DES RECLAMATIONS COMPAREES.
Montants r6claiu6s Montants accorded
jlans le rapport
ajoute & V argument britannique.
$460,893 00
618.538 00
2,004,376 0.0
136,021 00
47,850 00
3,267,678 00
Alabama
dans les tableaux
americains.
.Classe  A  $1,314,286 99
Classe  B  1,396,430 83
Classe C  3,309,876 10
Classe D  413,288 33
Classes E et F  123,807 78
' 6,557,690 03
Florida, y compris le Clarence Classe A  228,941 92 108,569 00
etleTacony. Classe B         1539,179 10 644,709 00
1 Le comptable, qui a fait l'arrangement des navires dans nos tableaux, a place dans
la classe C deux navires qui auraient du gtre dans la classe B, savoir :
L'Oneida     $471,849 12
Le Windward        22,598 00
494,447 12
Cette erreur corrigee, la somme totale de la classe B (sous le nom du Florida)
serait de $1,033,626.22, et de la classe C, $2,844,962.90. Comme les sommes totales
des reclamations sous le nom du Florida ne seraient aucunement changees par la correction de cette erreur, purement formelle, j'ai pense qu'il ne valait pas la peine de
changer les tableaux detailles.
ik||iiP42
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
TOTAUX DES RECLAMATIONS COMPAREES—Continues.
Montants reclames
dans les tableaux
americains.
Florida, y compris le Claraence Classe C  $3,339,410 02
et le Tacony—Continuee.         Classe D  138,929 17
Classes E et F  278,618 62
Classe  G  91,225 10
4,616,303 93
Shenandoah: Classe A et supplement  3,263,149 55
Recapitulation: Alabama  6,557,690 03
Florida  4,616,303 93
Shenandoah  3,263,149 55
14,437,143 51
Reclamations actuelles des Etats-Unis ppur les de-
penses causees a leur marine par suite des actes
du Florida, de 1'Alabama et du Shenandoah      6,735,062 49
21,172,206 00
Reclamations provenant de l'interruption des voyages
et des pertes sur benefices en perspective      4,099,302 50
Montants
dans le
ajoute
ment
que.
$1,776
44
61
accordes
rapport
[i l'argu-
britanni-
375 00
,570 00
,350 00
2,635,573 00
1,171,464 00
3,267,678 00
2,635,573 00
1,171,464 00
7,074,715 00
940,460 24
8,015,175 24
SOMMAIRE.
Totaux des reclamations, (y compris les reclamations provenant de
l'interruption des voyages et des pertes sur benefices en perspective)      $25,281,508 50
Si les susdites reclamations sont comprises, il faut deduire, (vide A).. 588,247 50
24,693,261 00
Ou
Totaux des reclamations, (non compris les dites reclamations)     $21,272,206 20
Dansle cas ou une pareille elimination serait faite, il faudrait ajouter
25_%" sur la valeur des navires et des equipements, (vide le memorandum qui accompagne les tableaux)  400,127 91
21,672,334 11
En tous cas il faut ajouter Pinteret de 1% par an jusqu'au jour du paiement indiqne
par les termes du traite.
After deliberation, the tribunal gave its decision as follows:
The tribunal does not see fit to order the withdrawal of the tables presented on the
part of the United States as requested by Lord Tenterden; but it declares that it considers these documents only as simple elucidations, such as were required by one of
the arbitrators, Viscount d'ltajuba^ to which the tribunal will give such attention as
is right.
The tribunal determined to devote the next conference to the consideration of the questions concerning the claims for § expenditure incurred
in pursuit of the cruisers, prospective profits, freights, and interest," and
decided to deliberate with closed doors.
' Sir Alexander Cockburn, as one of the arbitrators, declared that he
objected to this latter decision.
The conference was then adjourned until Thursday, the 29th instant,
at half past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
J. C. BANCROFT "DAVIS.
TENTERDEN.
ALEX. FAYBOT, Secretary.K
PROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES
43
PBOTOCOL XXVLL
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the twenty-seventh
conference held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 29<tfy of August, 1872.
The conference was held with closed doors, pursuant to adjournment.
All the arbitrators were present. Sundry ctaMe9 of
The protocol of the last conference was read; the ap- claima resected-
proval and signing of the same was deferred until the next meeting.
The tribunal proceeded to consider the questions concerning the
claims for u expenditure incurred in pursuit of the cruisers, prospective
profits, and freights."
As to the claims for expenditure incurred in pursuit of the cruisers,
a majority of the tribunal decided to reject them as comprised in the
costs of the war; Mr. Staempfli and Mr. Adams declared them to be admissible, as belonging to the direct losses, reserving to appreciate their
amount according to the bases laid down in the table at page 120 of
the seventh volume of the appendix to the case of the United States.
As to the claims for prospective profits the tribunal unanimously
decided to reject them, reserving, however, the questions as to the
wages for the whalers and the interest for the value of the vessels and
their outfit.
As to the claims for freights, the tribunal unanimously decided not to
admit of the gross freight, but only the net freight.
The tribunal also decided to consider at the next conference the questions concerning the valuation of the destroyed vessels and the claims
for interest.
Lastly the tribunal decided to adjourn this conference until Friday,
the 30th instant, at 12 o'clock, and to deliberate again with closed doors.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
PBOTOCOL XXVIII.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the twenty-eighth
conference held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 36th of August, 1872.
The conference was held with closed doors, pursuant to adjournment.
All the arbitrators were present. ©S|l ordered
The protocol of the twenty-sixth conference having been ".pectins interest.
corrected was approved, and the protocol of the last conference was
read and approved, and was signed by the president and secretary of
the tribunal.
On the proposal of Sir Alexander Cockburn, as one of the arbitrators,
the tribunal permitted that the counsel of Her Britannic Majesty
should present, on the question of interest, a note which should be
directly communicated by the agent of Her Brittannic Majesty to the
agent of the United States,- in order that the latter may prepare a reply
to it, if he thinks fit.
The tribunal desired that these two communications on the part of
the respective agents should be presented at the conference which will
be held with closed doors on Monday, the 2d of September, at half past
12 o'clock.44
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
The tribunal proceeded to the consideration of the matters submitted
to them, and unanimously declared that the " double claims" should be
dismissed.
The tribunal having discussed in general the award of a gross sum,
requested Mr. Stasmpfli, one of the arbitrators, to present for the next
conference copies of a synoptical table which he has prepared on the
subject.
The conference was then adjourned until Monday, the 2d of September, at half past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
PBOTOCOL XXIX.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the twenty-ninth
conference held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 2d of September, 1872.
The conference was held with closed doors, pursuant to adjournment
All the arbitrators were present.
statementanfsir i?     The protocol of the last conference was read and ap-
Cockburn's     memo- -. -. . -itj-i • t        , ^ > _*?
randum regarding a proved, and was signed by the president and secretary of
the tribunal. Count Sclopis, as president of the tribunal,
acknowledged the receipt, by the arbitrators, of the note presented by
the agent of Her Britannic Majesty on the question of interest, and of
the reply to the same, presented by the agent of the United States.
The tribunal then proceeded to consider that question, and a majority
of four to one decided that interest should be admitted as an element
in the calculation for the award of a sum in gross.
Mr. Staempfli, as one of the arbitrators, presented to the tribunal
copies of the synoptical table which he had prepared as a proposition
for the determination of a sum in gross:
'Estimate of Mr. Staempfii for the determination of a sum in gross.
Amount of claims	
Expenditure in pursuit.
Prospective profits and interruption of voyagf
After the
last American table.
British
allowance.
§14, 437, 000        $7, 074, 000
6, 735, 000 I 940, 000
C [Struck out as
such, but for
4 (lftQ 1 no J    waSes	
4,uu9,iuo^ 25 per cent, on
j   the values of
L  vessels
Mean.
$10, 9 05, 00
Struck out.
583,000
400,000
11,893,000
Bound sum.
Interest from the 1st January, 1864, to the 15th September, 1872.
$12,000,000
1. At 5 per cent, during eight years and eight and one-half months. .8  x $600,000=$4,800,000
8i x    50,000=     425,000
 $5,225,000
17,225,000
Eventually one year's interest more      17,825,000
■MPROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES.
45
2. At 6 per cent, during eight years and eight and one-half months. .8 x $720,000=$5,760,000
8£x    60,000=    510,000
6,270,000   $18,270,000
Eventually one year's interestmore      18,990,000
3. At 7 per cent, during eight years and eight and one-half months . 8 x $840,000=$6,720,000
8J- x    70,000=     595,000
7,315,000   $19,315,000
Eventually one year's interest more  840,000
20,155,000
Round sum      20,000,000
Sir Alexander Cockburn, as one of the arbitrators, then presented
the following memorandum on Mr. Stsempfli's estimate:
Memorandum on Mr. Stmcepfli's estimate.
The figures in Mr. Stsempfli's paper require some material corrections, as to "which,
as soon as they are pointed out, there can be no doubt.
The total claim by the United States of $14,437,000 will be found, on an inspection
of the United States tables, to include the following amounts:
a. All the double claims, without exception, notwithstanding the clear expression of
opinion on the part of the tribunal that they were to be struck out These double
claims amount to $1,682,243.
b. The gross freights of the merchant-vessels, amounting to $1,007,153, as to which
the tribunal has decided that at the utmost only half, that is to say $503,576, should be
allowed. *
c. The new claim of $1,450,000, advanced for the first time on the 19th of August last,
as to which claim Mr. Stsempfli declared he would exclude it from consideration. It
is important to observe that this new claim comprises over and above the entirely unsupported claims for shares of vessels, and for additional personal effects, the claims
for wages extending over very long and varying periods. The tribunal has decided
that one year's wages in respect of the whalers are to be allowed in lieu of prospective
catch. For this one year's wages, Mr. Stsempfli has made a separate allowance of $588,000
(an allowance which can-be shown to be excessive by at least $88,000,) and he has
therefore included in his calculation the claim for wages twice over.
It is therefore clear that Mr. Stsempfli, while he excludes some of the items of claim
which tbe tribunal has disallowed, has omitted to strike out the other items, against
which the tribunal has pronounced its opiuion; but it is equally clear that all the disallowed items must be excluded before a comparison can be fairly or usefully made between the United States claim and the British estimate.
It is necessary, therefore, in the first place, to deduct from the United States claim
the three amounts specified in paragraphs a, b, and c, respectively, which will leave, as
is shown by the annexed table, a properly reduced claim of $10,801,324, as against the
British estimate of $7,465,764, if the difference between paper and gold currency be for
the present purpose disregarded.
It must, however, be carefully borne in mind that the claim of $10,801,324 includes
the following items:
1. A claim of $659,021 for secured earnings, which ought beyond a doubt to be reduced
by an amount equivalent to the wear and tear of the whalers and their outfits, and the
consumption of stores, which must have taken place before these earnings could be
secured, and for which a deduction should be made, inasmuch as the full original values
of the vessels and their outfits have been allowed.
2. The claims in respect of the merchant vessels.—These are valued in the United States
tables at more than $60 per ton on the average, although, according to tbe well-known
official report presented to Congress in 1870, the cost of a first-class perfectly new American vessel, made ready for sea, did not average that amount per ton, and although,
according to the same report, the average value of American vessels engaged in the
foreign trade was, in 1861, only $41, and has been since only $45per ton.
3. The claims in respect of cargoes, the insurances, commissions, and profits of the same,
which profits are sometimes claimed at the rate of twenty, fifty, and even one huudred
per cent. The various important considerations mentioned at page 13 of the British
report, and the fact that numerous claims for cargoes, presented for the first time in
April last, are unsupported by any vouchers, bills of lading, or like documents, undoubtedly require that a very considerable reduction should be made under this head.,
4. Several large claims not supported by any affidavit or declaration on oath.46
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
• 5. Numerous clearly extravagant claims specified in the British reports, such as the
claim of $7,000 by a harpooner for personal injuries, the claim, by a passenger, of
$10,000 for loss of office as consul, all the numerous claims by the masters of whalers
for wagesr sometimes at the rate of $15,000 or $20,000 a year, and which are, of course,
superseded by Mr. Stsempfli's allowance of $588,000, and many other equally exorbitant claims, more particularly specified in the British reports.
From these considerations it is manifest that more than ample justice will be done
to the United States by taking a mean between the claim of $10,301,324, and the
British estimate of $7,464,764, and by adding thereto the allowance of $588,000 in lieu
of prospective catch.
Mr. Stsempfli has also adde'd, for some unknown reason, 25 per cent, on the values
of the whalers, an addition which can be easily shown to be equivalent to altogether allowing over and above the original values of the whalers and their outfits
a percentage exceeding 90 per cent., and this although the question of interest is still
left open to the decision of tbe tribunal.
Admittingvhowever, this extraordinary addition of 25 per cent., and the excessive
estimate of the wages, it is shown by the annexed table that if Mr. Stsempfli's figures
be properly corrected, the estimate would scarcely exceed $10,000,000, even without
any allowance being made for the great difference between the values of the paper
and the gold currency.
Mr. Stsempfli's calculations of interest (supposing interest to be allowed) are made
at the alternative rates of 5,6, and 7 per cent., for the period of eight and one-half years,
from the first of January, 1864, to the 15th of September, 1872.
But to this he proposes to add another year's interest for the period of delay in payment after the date of the award which is allowed by the treaty.
The tribunal has no power, under the treaty, to award payment of a gross sum with
interest. The amount awarded is to be paid without interest, and if the tribunal
were to add a year's interest to the gross sum which they would otherwise award, in
respect of the year allowed for payment by the treaty, they would be doing indirectly
what they have no authority to do directly, and would (it is submitted) be contravening
the true intent of theTireaty, and charging interest where it was the intention of the
treaty that interest should not be paid.
This is the more objectionable because it is proposed to charge a whole year's interest at either 5, 6, or 7 per cent., whereas the British government has the option, under
the treaty, to pay the sum awarded at any time within the year allowed for that purpose, and might certainly raise the money, (if that operation were necessary,) at a
considerable lower rate of interest than 5 per cent.
Table in reference to the estimate of Mr. Stmmpfli.
Total United States claim in the last revised tahles $14, 437,143
Necessary reductions to he made from the above suppposed total:
Double claims     $1,682, 243
New claims      1,450, 000
One-half gross freight         503, 576
 3, 635, 819
MaMng the total reduced claim     10, 801 324
As against the British estimate of      7,464 764
The mean of these two sums is      9 133 044
Add to this Mr. Stsempfli's allowances in lieu of prospective catch:
One year's wages        $588 000
Twenty-five per cent, on the values of vessels         40o| 000
 988,000
10,121,044
The tribunal also considered the question of the award of a sum in
gross.
After a detailed deliberation, a majority of the tribunal of four to one
decided, under the Vllth article of the treaty of Washington, to award in
gross the sum of $15,500,000, to be paid in gold by Great Britain to the
United States, in the time and manner provided by the said article of
the treaty of Washington.
The conference then adjourned until Friday, the 6th instant, at half
past 12 o'clock, to be held with closed doors.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
ALEXANDEB FAYBOT, Secretary.PROTOCOLS OF THE CONFERENCES.
47
PBOTOCOL XXX.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the thirtieth
conference held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 6th of September, 1872.
The conference was held with closed doors pursuant to adjournment.
All the arbitrators were present.
The protocol of the last conference was read and ap- ofa^S-Ji8draaght
proved, and was signed by the president and secretary of
the tribunal.
The tribunal proceeded to consider a draught of their decision.
At the request of the tribunal, Mr. Adams 'and Sir Alexander Cockburn kindly undertook to provide for the translation into English of the
French text of this act of decision.
The conference was then adjourned until Monday, the 9th instant, at
half past ^welve o'clock, to be held with closed doors.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
PBOTOCOL XXXI.
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the thirty-first
conference held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the 9.th of September, 1872.
The conference was held with closed doors pursuant to adjournment.
All the arbitrators were present.
The protocol of the last conference was read and ap- *Z™a.0{•$££$
proved, and was signed by the president and secretary of supXsVSotins
the tribunal.
Mr. Adams and Sir Alexander Cockburn presented the English translation of the act of decision, which they had kindly undertaken to prepare.
The tribunal definitely adopted the act of decision, which was considered at the last conference, and decided to have it printed.
Yiscount d'ltajuba, as one of the arbitrators, made the following
statement:
Viscount d'ltajuba, while signing the decision, remarks, with regard to the recital
concerning the supply of coals, that he is of opinion that every government is free to
furnish to the belligerents more or less of that article.
The tribunal resolved that the decision should be signed at the next
conference, which was to be held with open doors, and adjourned until
Saturday, the 14th instant, at half past 12 o'clock.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
_p48
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
PBOTOCOL XXXIL
Record of the proceedings of the tribunal of arbitration at the thirty-second conference held at Geneva, in Switzerland, on the IMh of September, 1872.
The conference was held with open doors, pursuant to adjournment.
All the arbitrators and the agents of the two governments
Signature of award .
and dissolution of were present.
The protocol of the last conference was read and approved, and was signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal.
The president then presented the decision of the tribunal on the question of the "Alabama claims," and directed the secretary to read it;
which was done, and the decision was signed by Mr. Charles Francis
Adams, Count Frederic Sclopis, Mr. Jacques Stgempfli, and Viscount
d'ltajuba, arbitrators, in the presence of the agents of the two governments.
A copy of the decision thus signed was delivered to each of the agents
of the two governments, respectively, and the tribunal decided to have
a third copy placed upon record; they further decided that the decision
should be printed and annexed to the present protocol.1
Sir Alexander Cockburn, as one of the arbitrators, having declined
to assent to the decision, stated the grounds of his own decision, which
the tribunal ordered to be recorded as an annex to the present protocol.2
The tribunal resolved to request the council of state of Geneva to
receive the archives of the tribunal and to place them among its own
archives.
The president, Count Sclopis, then directed the secretary to make up
the record of the proceedings of the tribunal at this thirty-second and
last conference, as far as completed; which was done, and the record
having been read and approved, was signed by the president and secretary of the tribunal and the agents of the two governments.
Thereupon the president declared the labors of the arbitrators to be
finished and the tribunal to be dissolved.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
. J. C. BANCBOFT DAVIS.
TENTEBDEN.
ALEX. FAVBOT, Secretary.
1 For a copy of this paper, see post1; No. iii.
2 This paper was not annexed to the official protocol delivered to the agent of the
United States. A paper entitled "Reasons of Sir Alexander Cockburn for dissenting
from the award of the tribunal of arbitration" was published in the supplement to the
London Gazette of the 24th of September, 1872, and a copy of this number of the
Gazette was transmitted to the agent of the United States as the paper that should
have been annexed to the protocol. This paper is printed hereafter uuder the title
| Sir A. Cockburn's Opinions."Recital of provisions of the treaty
of Washington.
III.—DECISION   AND   AWARD
Made by the tribunal of arbitration constituted by virtue of the first article
of the treaty concluded at Washington the 8th of May, 1871, between the
United States of America and Her Majesty tlie Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
The United States of America and Her Britannic Majesty having
agreed by Article I of the treaty concluded and sighed at
Washington the 8th of May, 1871, to refer all the claims
| generically known as the Alabama claims " to a tribunal of
arbitration to be composed of five arbitrators named:
One by the President of the United States,
One by Her Britannic Majesty,
One by His Majesty the King of Italy,
One by the President of the Swiss Confederation,
One by His Majesty the Emperor of Brazil;
And the President of the United States, Her Britannic Majesty, His
Majesty the King of Italy, the President of the Swiss Con-   Appointment of »r-
federation, and His Majesty the Emperor of Brazil having bitrators-
respectively named their arbitrators, to wit:
The President of the United States, Charles Francis Adams, esquire;
Her Britannic Majest}', Sir Alexander James Edmund Cockburn,
baronet, a member of Her Majesty's privy council, lord chief justice
of England;
His Majesty the King of Italy, His Excellency Count Frederick Sclopis,
of Salerano, a knight of the Order of the Annuuciata, minister of state,
senator of the Kingdom of Italy ;
The President of the Swiss Confederation, M. James Stampfli;
His Majesty the Emperor of Brazil, his Excellency Marcos Antonio
d'Araujo, Viscount d'ltajuba, a grandee of the Empire of Brazil, member of the council of H. M. the Emperor of Brazil, and his envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary in France.
And the five arbitrators above named having assembled at Geneva (in
Switzerland) in one of the chambers of the Hotel de Ville organization o f
on the 15th of December, 1871, in conformity with the terms tribunai- ,
of the second article of the treaty of Washington, of the 8th of May of
that year, and having proceeded to the inspection and verification of
their respective powers, which were fouud duly authenticated, the
tribunal of arbitration was declared duly organized.
The agents named by each of the high contracting parties, by virtue
of the same Article II, to wit:
For the United States of America, John C. Bancroft Davis, esquire:
And for Her Britannic Majesty, Charles Stuart Aubrey, Lord Tenterden, a peer of the United Kingdom, companion of the Most Honorable Order of the Bath, assistant under-secretary of state for foreign
affairs;
Whose powers were found likewise duly authenticated, then delivered
to each of the arbitrators the printed case prepared by
each of the two parties, accompanied by the documents, the
official correspondence, and other evidence on which each relied, in conformity with the terms of the third article of the said treaty.
4 B
Delivery of cases,50
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
In virtue of the decision made by the tribunal at its first session, the
Delivery of count- counter-case and additional documents, correspondence, and
er-case*. evidence referred to in Article IV of the said treaty were
delivered by the respective agents of the two parties to the secretary of
the tribunal on the 15th of April, 1872, at tbe chamber of conference,
at the Hdtel de Ville of Geneva.
The tribunal, in accordance with the vote of adjournment passed at
Delivery of argu- their second session, held on the 16th of December, 1871,
menu. re-assembled at Geneva on the 15th of June, 1872; and the
agent of each of the parties duly delivered to each of the arbitrators,
and to the agent of the othe? party, the printed argument referred to
in Article V of the said treaty.
The tribunal having since fully taken into their consideration the
of treaty, and also the cases, counter-cases, documents, evidence, and arguments, and likewise all other communications made to them by the two parties during the progress of their sittings, and having impartially and carefully examined the same,
Has arrived at the decision embodied in the present award:
Deliberations
tribunal.
Whereas, having regard to the Vlth and Vllth articles of the said treaty,
the arbitrators are bound under the terms of the said Vlth article, " in
deciding the matters submitted to them, to be governed by the three
rules therein specified and by such principles of international law, not
inconsistent therewith, as the arbitrators shall determine to have been
applicable to the case;"
And whereas the u due diligence" referred to in the first and third of
Definition of due the said rules ought to be exercised by neutral governments
diligence. jn exact proportion to the risks to which either of the bel
ligerents may be exposed, from a failure to fulfil the obligations of neutrality on their part;
And whereas the circumstances out of which the facts constituting the
subject-matter of the present controversy arose were of a nature to call
for the exercise on the part of Her Britannic Majesty's government of all
possible solicitude for the observance of the rights and the duties involved
in the proclamation of neutrality issued by Her Majesty on the 13th day
of May, 1861 ]
And whereas the effects of a violation of neutrality committed by
Effect of a com- means of the construction, equipment, and armament of a
mission. vessel are not done away with by any commission which the
government of the belligerent power, benefited by the violation of neutrality, may afterwards have granted to that vessel; and the ultimate
step, by which the offense is completed, cannot be admissible as a ground
for the absolution of the offender, nor can the consummation of his
fraud become the means of establishing his innocence;
And whereas the privilege of exterritoriality accorded to vessels of
Exterritoriality 0r w&r has been admitted into the law of nations, not as an
ves3eisofwar. absolute right, but solely as a proceeding founded on the
principle of courtesy and mutual deference between different nations,
and therefore can never be appealed to for the. protection of acts done
in violation of neutrality;
And whereas the absence of a previous notice cannot be regarded as a
of failure in any consideration required by the law of nations,
in those cases in which a vessel carries with it its own condemnation ;
And whereas, in order to impart to any supplies of coal a character
supplies of coai.     inconsistent with the second rule, prohibiting the use of
Effect of want
notice.DECISION  AND  AWARD   OP  THE  TRIBUNAL. 51
neutral ports or waters, as a base of naval operations for a belligerent,
it is necessary that the said supplies should be connected with special
circumstances of time, of persons, or of place, which may combine to
give them such character;
And whereas, with respect to the vessel called the Alabama, it clearly
results from all the facts relative to the construction of the aeSpOMibilityror
ship at first designated by the number "290" in the port of act3oflheAlabam!i-
Liverpool, and its equipment and armament in the vicinity of Terceira
through the agency of the vessels called the " Agrippina" and the " Bahama," dispatched from Great Britain to that end, that the British government failed to use due diligence in the performance of its neutral
obligations; and especially that it omitted, notwithstanding the warnings
and official representations made by the diplomatic agents of the United
States during the construction of the said number " 290," to take in due
time any effective measures of prevention, and that those orders which
it did give at last, for the detention of the vessel, were issued so late that
their execution was not practicable;
And whereas, after the escape of that vessel, the measures taken for
its pursuit and arrest were so imperfect as to lead to no result, and
therefore cannot be considered sufficient to release Great Britain from
the responsibility already incurred ;
And whereas, jn despite of the violations of the neutrality of Great
Britain committed by the "290," this same vessel, later known as the
confederate cruiser Alabama, was on several occasions freely admitted
into the ports of colonies of Great Britain, instead of being proceeded
agaiust as it ought to have been in any and every port within British
jurisdiction in which it might have been found ;
And whereas the government of Her Britannic Majesty cannot justify
itself for a failure in due diligence on the plea of insufficiency of the
legal means of action which it possessed:
Four of the arbitrators, for the reasons above assigned, and the fifth
for reasons separately assigned by him,
Are of opinion—
That Great Britain has in this case failed, by omission, to fulfill the
duties prescribed in the first and the third of the rules established by the
Vlth article of the treaty of Washington.
And whereas, with respect to the vessel called the "Florida," it results
from all the facts relative to the construction of the | Oreto"
in the port of Liverpool, and to its issue therefrom, which
facts failed to induce the authorities in Great Britain to resort to measures adequate to prevent the violation of the neutrality of that nation,
notwithstanding the warnings and repeated representations of the agents
of the United States, that Her Majesty's government has failed to use
due diligence to fulfil the duties of neutrality;
And whereas it likewise results from all the facts relative to the stay
of the " Oreto" at Nassau, to her issue from that port, to her enlistment of
men, to her supplies, and to her armament, with the co-operation of the
British vessel "Prince Alfred," at Green Cay, that there was negligence
on the part of the British colonial authorities;
And whereas, notwithstanding the violation of the neutrality of Great
Britain committed by the Oreto, this same vessel, later known as the
confederate cruiser Florida, was nevertheless on several occasions freely
admitted into the ports of British colonies;
And whereas the judicial acquittal of the Oreto at Nassau cannot relieve Great Britain from the responsibility incurred by her under the
principles of international law; nor can the fact of the entry of the52
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Florida into the confederate port of Mobile, and of its stay there during
four months, extinguish the responsibility previously to that time incurred by Great Britain:
For these reasons,
The tribunal, by a majority of four voices to one, is of opinion—
That Great Britain has in this case failed, by omission, to fulfil the
duties prescribed in the first, in the second, and in the third of the rules
established by Article VI of the treaty of Washington.
And whereas, with respect to the vessel called the | Shenandoah," it results from all the facts relative to the departure from Lon
don "afterleS don of the merchant;vessel the | Sea King," and to the transformation of that ship into a confederate cruiser under the
name of the Shenandoah, near the island of Madeira, that the government of Her Britannic Majesty is not chargeable with any failure, down
to that date, in the use of due diligence to fulfil the duties of neutrality;
But whereas it results from all the facts connected with the stay of
the Shenandoah at Melbourne, and especially with the augmentation
which the British government itself admits to have been clandestinely
effected of her force, by the enlistment of men within that port, that
there was negligence on the part of the authorities at that place:
For these reasons,
The tribunal is unanimously of opinion—
That Great Britain has not failed, by any act or omission, " to fulfil any
of the duties prescribed by the three rules of Article, VI in the treaty of
Washington, or by the principles of international law not inconsistent
therewith," in respect to the vessel called the Shenandoah, during the
period of time anterior to her entry into the port of Melbourne;
And, by a majority of three to two voices, the tribunal decides that
Great Britain has failed, by omission, to fulfil the duties prescribed by
the second and third of the rules aforesaid, in the case of this same vessel, from and after her entry into Hobson's Bay, and is therefore responsible for all acts committed by that vessel after her departure from
Melbourne, on the 18th day of February, 1865.
And so far as relates to the vessels called—
The Tuscaloosa, (tender to the Alabama,)
And of the Tusca- ~.        „... '   * ''
looaa,   Clarence, Ta- 1 ne ClarenCC,
cony, and Archer. m,        m '      -
The Tacony, and
The Archer, (tenders to the Florida,)
The tribunal is unanimously of opinion—
That such tenders or auxiliary vessels, being properly regarded as accessories, must necessarily follow the lot of their principals, and be submitted to the same decision which applies to them respectively.
And so far as relates to the vessel called "Betribution,"
The tribunal, by a majority of three to two voices, is of
No   responsibility . 7      *j u u ?
for the Retribution,   ODirilOIl	
Georgia,   Sumter, mi       l  f*\ -r-»    ■       •       i n   -i •'
^e^chickamau"!" lhat Oreat Britain has not failed by any act or omission
to fulfil any of the duties prescribed by the three rules of
Article VI in the treaty of Washington, or by the" principles of international law not inconsistent therewith.
And so far as relates to the vessels called—
The Georgia^
The Sumter,
The Nashville,
The Tallahasse, and
The Chickamauga, respectively,DECISION  AND   AWARD   OF  THE  TRIBUNAL.
53
The Sallie, Jefferson Davis, Music,
Boston, and V. H.
Joy not taken into
consideration.
The tribunal is unanimously of opinion—
That Great Britain has not failed, by any actor omission, to fulfil any
of the duties prescribed by the three rules of Article VI in the treaty of
Washington, or by the principles of international law not inconsistent
therewith.
And so far as relates to the vessels called—
The Sallie,
The Jefferson Davis,
The Music,
The Boston, and
The V. H. Joy, respectively,
The tribunal is unanimously of opinion—
That, they ought to be excluded from consideration for want of evidence.
And whereas, so far as relates to the particulars of the indemnity
claimed by the United States, the costs of pursuit of the con- CIaim9 lor cost or
federate cruisers are not, in the judgment of the tribunal, pur8uitnot allowed-
properly distinguishable from the general expenses of the war carried
on by the United States:
The tribunal is, therefore, of opinion, by a majority of three to two
voices—
That there is no ground for awarding to the United States any sum
by way of indemnity under this head.
And whereas prospective earnings cannot properly be made the subject of compensation, inasmuch as they depend in their na- And for pr0SPect-
ture upon future and uncertain contingencies: iTe earnin«3-
The tribunal is unanimously of opinion—
That there is no ground for awarding to the United States any sum
by way of indemnity under this head.
And whereas, in order to arrive at an equitable compensation for the
damages which have been sustained, it is necessary to set   Net freighte only
aside all double claims for the same losses, and all claims for a,lowed-
" gross freights," so far as they exceed " net freights;"
And whereas it is just and reasonable to allow interest at a reasonable rate;
And whereas, in accordance with the spirit and letter of the treaty
of Washington, it is preferable to adopt the form of adjudication, of a
sum in gross, rather than to refer the subject of compensation for further
discussion and deliberation to a board of assessors, as provided by
Article X of the said treaty:
The tribunal, making use of the authority conferred upon it by Article
VII of the said treaty, by a majority of four voices to one, $15,500,000 com-
awards to the United States a sum of $15,500,000 in gold, pensation'awarded-
as the indemnity to be paid by Great Britain to the United States, for
the satisfaction of all the claims referred to the consideration of the
tribunal; conformably to the provisions contained in Article VII of the
aforesaid treaty.
And, in accordance with the terms of Article XI of the said treaty,
the tribunal declares that " all the claims referred to in the   The Bayment to be
treaty as submitted to the tribunal are hereby fully, per- abar-
fectly, and finally settled."
Furthermore it declares, that "each and everyone of the said claims,
whether the same may or may not have been presented to the notice of,
or made, preferred, or laid before the tribunal, shall henceforth be considered and treated as finally settled, barred, and inadmissible."
In testimony whereof this present decision and award has been made54
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
in duplicate, and signed by the arbitrators who have given their assent
thereto, the whole being in exact conformity with the provisions of
Article VII of the said treaty of Washington.
Made and concluded at the Hdtel de Ville of Geneva, in Switzerland,
the 14th day of the month of September, in the year of our Lord one .
thousand eight hundred and seventy-two.
CHABLES FEANCIS ADAMS.
FBEDEBICK SCLOPIS.
STAMPFLI.
VICOMTE d'ITAJUBA.IV.—OPINIONS OF THE ARBITRATORS.
1. Opinions of Count Frederick Sclopis.
2. Opinions of Viscount d'Itajoba.
3. Opinions of Mr. Jacques Stjempfli.
4. Opinions of Mr. Charles Francis Adams.
5. Opinions of Sir Alexander Cockburn.
OPINIONS  OF  COUNT  SCLOPIS.
I. The three questions of law on which the tribunal of
ARBITRATION, IN ITS SITTING OF THE 25TH JULY, 1872, REQUESTED ELUCIDATIONS FROM THE COUNSEL OF THE HIGH PARTIES
PRESENT AT  THE  BAR.
In its sitting of the 25th July, 1872, on the proposal of Viscount
d'ltajuba, one of the arbitrators, the tribunal decided to require a written or printed statement or argument from the counsel of Great Britain
upon the following questions of law:
1. The question of due diligence generally considered.
2. The special question as to the effect of the commissions of confederate ships of war entering British ports.
3. The special question as to supplies of coal in British ports to confederate ships, with the right to the other party to reply either orally or
in writing, as the case may be; the whole under the terms of Article V,
of the treaty of Washington.
The questions refer to Article VI of the treaty of Washington, which
is as follows:
. Article VI. In deciding the matters submitted to the arbitrators they shall be governed by the following three rules, which are agreed upon by the high contracting
parties as rules to be taken as applicable to the case, and by such principles of inter-
Opinions du Comte Er6deric Sclopis sur les trois questions de droit sur lesquelles le tribunal
d'arbitrage, dans sa stance du l&juillet 1872, a demande" des e'claircissemenis aux conseils des
hautes parties presentee a la barre.
Dans la stance du 25 juillet 1872, sur la proposition de M. le Vicomte d'ltajuba^ l'un
des arbitres, le tribunal d6cida de demander au conseil de la Grande-Bretagne line
exposition ou argumentation, 6crite ou imprim6e, sur les trois questions de droit sui-
vantes:
1. La question des dues diligences, traite"e d'nue maniere geherale;
2. La question sp6ciale de savoir quel a ete" l'eft'et des commissions posse"dees par
les vaisseaux de guerre confe"de"res qui sont entre"s dans des ports britanniques;
3. La question speciale des approvmonnenients de charbon accordes aux vaisseaux
conf6deres dans les ports britanniques.
Tout en reservant a la partie adverse le droit de r6pondre, soit oralement, soit par
e"crit, selon le cas, le tout aux termes de l'artiele V du traite" de Washington, les questions se r€ferent k l'artiele VI du traite" de Washington, ainsi concu :
"Article VI. Dans la decision des matieres a eux soumises, les arbitres seront guide's
par les trois regies suivantes, dont les hautes parties contractantes convienneut de
faire une application speciale a cette question, et par les principes du droit des gens56
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
national law not inconsistent therewith as the arbitrators shall determine to have been
applicable to the case:
RULES.
A neutral government is bound—
1. To use due diligence to prevent the fitting out, arming, or equipping, within its
jurisdiction, of any vessel which it has reasonable ground to believe is intended to
cruise or to carry on war against a power with which it is at peace; and also to use
like diligence to prevent the departure from its jurisdiction of any vessel intended to
cruise or carry on war as above, such vessel having been specially adapted, in whole or
in part, within such jurisdiction, to warlike vise.
2. Not to permit or suffer either belligerent to make use of its ports or waters as the
base of naval operations against the other, or for the purpose of the renewal or augmentation of military supplies or arms, or the recruitment of men.
3. To exercise due'diligence in its own ports and waters, and, as to all persons within
its jurisdiction, to prevent any violation of the foregoing obligations and duties.
Her Britannic Majesty has commanded her high commissioners and plenipotentiaries
to declare that Her Majesty's government cannot assent to the foregoing rules as a
statement of principles of international law which were in force at the time when the
claims mentioned in Article I arose, but that Her Majesty's government, in order to
evince its desire of strengthening the friendly relations between the two countries, and
of making satisfactory provision for the future, ageees that in deciding the questions
between the two countries arising out of those claims, the arbitrators should assume that
Her Majesty's government had undertaken to act upon the principles set forth in these
rules. And the high contracting parties agree to observe these rules as between themselves in future, and to bring them to the knowledge of other maritime powers, and to
invite them to accede to them.
Sir Boundell Palmer, formerly attorney-general, on behalf of Great
Britain, General C. Gushing, Messrs. Evarts and Waite, on behalf of
the United States, have been heard by means of their respective arguments.
qui, sans 6tre en disaccord avec ces regies, auront ete reconnus par les arbitres comme
ayant ete appJieables dans l'espece :
" REGLES.
"Un gouvernement neutre est tenu—
■■"1. De faire les dues diligences pour pre>enir l'armement en guerre ou l'e'quipement,
dans les limites ou s'exerce sa juridiction, de tout vaisseau qu'il peut raisonnablement
soupgonner 6tre destine" a croiser ou faire la guerre contre une puissance avec laquelle
ce gouvernement est en paix; de faire meme diligence pour empScher le depart hors
des limites de sa juridiction de tout navire destine" a croiser ou faire la guerre, comme
il est dit ci-dessus, quand ce navire aura ete spe~cialement adapte", en tout ou en partie,
daus les limites de sa dito juridiction, a des usages bellige"rants.
"2. De ne permettre ni souffrir que l'un des bellige'rants fasse usage de ses ports ni
de ses eaux comme d'une base d'operations navales contre l'antre belligeYant, ni pour
renouveler ou augmenter ses munitions militaires et son armement, ou s'y procurer ses
recruls.
"3. D'exercer les dues diligences dans ces eaux, et d'emp§cher qu'aucune personne,
dans l'enceiute de sa juridiction, ne viole les obligations et les devoirs precedents.
"Sa Majeste" britannique a charge" ses hauts commissaires et ple"nipotentiaires de
declarer que le gouvernement de sa Majeste" ne saurait donuer son assentiment aux
regies pre"ce"dentes comme a un exposl de principes du droit des gens en vigueur
au moment oh se sont e"lev6es les reclamations mention€es a l'artiele I; mais, pour
donner nu t<5moignage de son de"sir de fortifier les relations amicales entre les deux
pays et de prendre en vue de l'avenir des precautions satisfaisantes, le gouvernement
de sa Majeste consent a ce qu'en decidant les questions qui naissent de ces reclamations entre les deux pays les arbitres tiennent pour accorde que le gouvernement de
sa Majeste a voulu agir en conformity avec les principes enonces dans ces regies. Les
hautes parties coutractantes s'engagent a observer ces regies dans leurs rapports
mutuels a l'avenir, et a les porter a'la connaissance des antres puissances maritimes,
en les invitant a y adherer."
Ont ete entendus, daus leurs plaidoyers respectifs, Sir Roundell Palmer, ci-devant
attorney-general, pour la Grande-Bretagne, MM. le general C. Cushing, Evarts et
Waite, pour les Etats-Unis.OPINIONS   OF   COUNT  SCLOPIS. 57
1.—Due diligence.
We are about to enter on the discussion of questions of principle.
The first which presents itself, which will serve as a moral
Sfe    1* ™i.— „  *    j_i_ ■  -• liii .n Due diligence.
pole-star in the opinions we shall have to form as we come
to the different practical cases which await our decision, is the true signification to be attached to the words " due diligence," which have been
employed in the first of the three rules laid down in Article VI of the
treaty of Washington. A lengthy discussion has taken place between
the two powers as to the greater or less scope to be given to the
signification of these words. It assuredly cannot be said that there has
been any want of explanations on this point. In the Original American
case we find the whole of a long passage from the Pandects of Ayliffe,
with copious quotations from the works of Story and Jones, as well as
statements of the practice followed on this point by the Supreme Court
of the United States and by the Scotch courts, besides eleven simple
quotations from different authors.
The original British case mentions " due diligence," and gives a definition of it, (p. 24 of the English text,) which is not absolute, and which
refers to historical facts. In its counter case the British government
enters into fuller explanations on the subject, (p. 21 of the English
text,) and it agrees with that of the United States in considering
that .the words due diligence do not create any new or additional
obligation. They exact from the neutral, in the discharge of the duties
imposed on him, that measure of care, and no other, which is required by the ordinary principles of international jurisprudence, and
the absence of which constitutes negligence; and to support this doctrine the British counter case cites a long passage from Beddie's work,
I Besearches in Maritime and International Law.' Sir Boundell Palmer
takes these words in the sense that a neutral should employ all the legitimate means in his power, attaching to these words a reasonable construction. The United States seek to increase the measure of responsibility, and they maintain that the belligerent has a right to require the
I.—" DUE DILIGENCE.""
Nous allons aborder les questions de principes. La premiere qui s'offre a nos yeux,
celle qui nous servira comme de boussole morale dans les appreciations qu'il nous
faudra faire, parcourant les differents cas pratiques qui attendent notre decision, c'est
la veritable signification a aftribuer aux mots "due diligence," qui ont ete employes
dans la premiere des trois regies etablies par l'artiele VI du traite de Washington.
Une longue discussion s'est etablie. entre les deux puissances sur le plus ou le moins
d'etendue qu'il fallait donner a la signification de ces mots. On ne peut pas dire
assurement qu'il y ait defaut d'eclaircissements sur cette matiere. Dans le premier
" Case" americain, on nous a donne tout un long passage des pandectes d'Ayliffe, de
copieuses citations des ouvrages de Story et de Jones, ainsi que des indications de la
jurisprudence suivie daus la matiere par la Cour supreme des Etats-Unis et par les
cours ecossaises; de plus, onze simples citations d'auteurs.
Le premier " Case" anglais parle de la "due diligence," et il en donne une definition
(page 24, texte anglais) qui n'est point absolue, et qui s'en rapporte aux faits histo-
riques. Dans le " Counter-case,"- le gouvernement britannique entre dans de plus am-
ples explications a cet egard, (page 21, texte anglais,) et il s'accorde avec celui des
Etats-Unis a conside'rer que ces mots, les dues diligences, ne creent aucune obligation
nouvelle ou suppl6mentaire. Ils exigent du neutre, dans l'accomplissement des devoirs
qui lui sont imposes, cette mesure.de soin (et pas d'autre) qui est requise en vertu des
principes ordinaires de la jurisprudence internationale, soin dont l'absence constitute la
negligence et, pour appuyer sa doctrine, le "Counter-case" anglais produit un long
passage du livre-de Reddie, " Recherches sur le droit maritime et international." Sir
Roundell Palmer prend ces mots dans le sens qu'un neutre doit employer tous les moyens
legitimes en son pouvoir en donr.ant a ces mots une portee raisohnable. Les Etats-
Unis etondent le cas de responsabilite et ils soutiennent que le belligerant a le droit de
w
I58
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
neutral to enforce its municipal laws, and also the proclamations of its
executive. They assert, moreover, that the belligerent has the right to
require that the powers with which the neutral is armed should be augmented by legislative measures.
Copious explanations have been furnished on either side by the parties
in dispute.
It seems to me that the most simple method of arriving at a definitive opinion upon the legal bearing of the question is to keep steadily
in view the following ideas:
The words due diligence necessarily imply the idea of a relation between the duty and its object: it is impossible to define a priori and
abstractly an absolute duty of diligence. The thing to which the diligence relates determines its degree. Taking the scale of degrees of default according to the Boman law, descending from the dolus by the
culpa lata and culpa levis to the culpa levissima, we find that their applicability changes according to the objects to which they refer. I pass
over the responsibility of the guardian, of the trustee, and several other
cases specified in the law, and will only cite as examples cases-in which
responsibility is incurred by the culpa levis and even levissima. Such is
that, for instance, which attaches to persons charged with the care of
explosive substances, or with looking after the safety of dams in time
of inundation, or in whose charge are deposited papers of exceptional
importance. All these persons, from the fact alone of their having accepted these functions, are bound to exercise an amount of diligence
determined by the special object of these same functions.
In treating of political questions, the greatest extent which could be
given to the duties of diligence incumbent on a (neutral would be to
require that he should act with regard to the belligerent as he would
act in similar circumstances in his own interest.
It is undoubtedly right to take into account the requirements of a
belligerent with regard to a neutral, but these must not be pushed to
such a point as to embarrass the neutral in the normal exercise of his
rights, or in the organization of his administrative, functions.
demander au neutre de mettre a execution ses lois d'ordre interieur ainsi que les proclamations de son pouvior ex6cutif; ils preteudent, de plus, que le belligerant a le droit
de demander que les pouvoirs dont le neutre est arme" soient augmentes par raesure
legislative.
De grandes explications ont ete fournies de part et d'autre par les puissances en
desaccord.
II me paralt que la voie la plus simple pour arriver a fixer legalement nos idees sur
la matiere est de se fixer sur les idees suivantes:
Les mots diligence due, contiennent necessairement l'idee d'un rapport du devoir a la
chose; il est impossible de detinir d,priori abstraitement un devoir absolu de diligence.
C'est ia chose a laquelle cette diligence se rapporte qui en determine le degre. Prenons
l'echelle des imputabilites selon le droit romaiu, en partant du dolus pour descendre
par la culpa lata et la culpa levis jusqu'a la culpa levissima, et nous trouverons que les
applicabilites se modifient d'apres les objets auxquels elles se referent. Je passe sur
la responsabilite du tuteur, du depositaire, et sur plusieurs autres cas specifies dans les
lois, pour ne citer que l'exemple des cas ou la responsabilite est encourue par la culpa
levis, ou meme par la levissima. Telle est celle, par exemple, qui frappe celui qui est
charge de garder des niatieres explosibles, ou qui doit veiller a la surete des digues
dans le temps des inondations, celui qui garde un dep6t de papiers d'une importance
exceptionnelle. Toutes ces personnes, par le seul fait qu'elles ont accepte ces fonctions,
sont tenues d'exercer une diligence determinee gar l'objet special de ces inemes
fonctions.
En se portant sur le terrain politique, la plus grande etendne que l'on puisse
attribuer aux devoirs de diligence d'un neutre sera de lui imposer d'en agir a l'egard
du belligerant comme il agirait pour son propre inter&t dans des cas analogues.
II est juste sans doute de tenir des exigences d'un belligerant a l'egard d un neutre,
mais il ne faut point les pousser au point de gener le neutre dans Faction normale de
ses droits, dans l'organisme de ses fonctions gouvernantes.OPINIONS   OF  COUNT  SCLOPIS.
59
I willingly admit, on the other hand, that the duties of the neutral
power cannot be determined by the laws which that power may have
made in its own interest. This would be an easy means of eluding
positive responsibilities which are recognized by equity and imposed by
the law of nations. There exists between nations a general law, or, if
it is preferred, a common tie, formed by equity and sanctioned by respect for reciprocal interests; this general law receives especial development in its application to acts which take place at sea, where no
frontiers are marked out, and where there is the greater necessity that
liberty should be secured by a. common law, without which it would
be impossible to defend one's self by positive guarantees from the most
flagrant acts of injustice. This is what prompted the saying of one who
had been brought up in habits of servility, to say, | The "Emperor is
master of the earth, but the law is the mistress of the sea."* I grant
then the right of the belligerent to require that the neutral should not
shelter his responsibility under rules made by himself in his own interest,
and I enter fully into the views of Article VI of the treaty of Washington, which simply gives the preference to rules of general equity
over the provisions of any particular system of legislature, whatever it
may be.
It does not, however, seem to me admissible that a belligerent should
be able to require of a neutral that, in order to fulfill his neutral duties,
he should increase his military establishments or his ordinary system of
defense. This would be an encroachment on the independence of a state,
which is not bound to abdicate a portion of its material sovereignty
because it finds itself involuntarily in a special position with regard to
the belligerent. The neutral may be asked to put the powers of his
government into full activity in order to maintain his neutrality; he cannot reasonably be expected to modify the organization of his administrative machinery to serve the interests of another power.
We must beware of rendering the condition of neutrals too difficult
and almost impossible.   The importance of circumscribing war is a mat-
J'admets volontiers, d'autre part, que les devoirs du neutre ne puissent pas fetre
determines par les lois que cette puissance se serait faites dans son propre inter&t.
II y anrait la un moyen facile de se sonstraire a des responsabilites positives, que
l'equite reconnait et que le droit des gens impose. Les nations ont entre elles un droit
cornmun, ou, si on aime mieux un lien commuu, forme par l'equite et sanctionne par le
respect des inter&ts reciproques ; ce droit cornmun se develbppe snrtout en s'appliquant
aux faits qui se passent sur la mer, la ou les confins ne sont point traces, ou la liberte
doit etre d'autaint plus assuree par un droit cornmun sans lequel il serait impossible de
se mettre a couvert des'plus flagrantes injustices par des garanties positives. C'est ce
qui faisait dire a cet ancien, nourri dans les habitudes du servilisme: " L'Empereur est
le maltre de la terre, mais la loi est la maitresse de la mer." J'accorde, done, au
belligerant d'exiger que le neutre ne mette point a couvert sa reponsabillite sous des
regies qu'il se serait fixees dans des vues de son seul interet, et j'entre pleinement dans
les vues de l'artiele VI du traite de Washington, qui ne fait que donner la preference
aux regies de l'equite g6nefale sur les dispositions d'une legislation particuliere quelle
qu'elle puisse 6tre.
II ne me paralt pas cependant admissible qu'un belligerant puisse exiger du neutre
que, pour remplir ses devoirs deheutralite, il augmente son pied militaire, son systeme
ordinaire de defense. II y aurait la une infraction a l'independance de chaque etat, qui,
pour se trouver involontairement dans une position speciale a l'egard du belligerant,
n'est pas tenu d'abdiquer une portion de sa souverainete materielle. On peut demander
au neutre de mettre en pleine activite les ressorts de sen gouvernement pour maintenir
sa neutralite; on ne peut pas raisonnablement attendre de lni qu'il modifie l'organisa-
tion de sa machine gouvernementale, pour servir les intents d'une autre puissance.
II faut bien se garder de rendre la condition des neutres par trop difficile et presque
impossible.   On parle toujours de l'importance de circonscrire la guerre, et si on acca-
* Dix, lib. i, de Lege Rhodia.60
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
ter of continual remark, and if neutrals are to be overwhelmed with a
burden of precautions and a weight of responsibility which is in excess
of the interest they have to remain neutral, they will be forced to take
an active part in the war; instead of a proper inaction we should have
an increase of hostilities. There will no longer be any medii between
combatants; the disasters of war will be multiplied, and the part of
mediators, which neutrals have often undertaken and brought to a sue-1
cessful conclusion, will forever disappear.
Let us then take a view which will induce neutrals and belligerents
mutually to respect one another. Let us take as a basis the two conditions of neutrality laid down by Dr. L. Gessner.*
These are:
1. To take absolutely no part in the war, and to abstain from all that
might give an advantage to one of the belligerent parties.
2. Not to permit on the neutral territory any proximate hostile act of
one party against the other.
As to the measure of activity in the performance of the duties of a
neutral, I think the following rule should be laid down:
That it should be in a direct ratio to the actual danger to which the
belligerent will be exposed through the laxity of the neutral, and in an
inverse ratio to the direct means which the belligerent can control for
arresting the danger.
This rule leads us to a solution of the question, so often discussed in the
documents presented, as to the initiative to be taken by the neutral in
order to preserve his neutrality to the profit of the belligerent.
Where the ordinary conditions of the country, or particular circumstances which have occurred on the territory of the neutral, constitute
a special danger for the belligerent, who has no direct means of protecting himself from them, the neutral is bound himself to take the^initiative in order that the state of neutrality may be maintained with regard
to the two belligerents.
ble les neutres d'un fardeau de precautions et d'une responsabilite qui depasse l'interei;
qu'ils ont a rester dans la neutralite, on les forcera h prendre une part active a la
guerre; au lieu d'une convenable inaction, on aura une augmentation d'hostilites. II
n'y aura plus de medii entre les combattants; les desastres de la guerre se multiplieront,
et le r61e de mediateurs, que les neutres ont souvent entrepris et conduit a bonne fin,
sera efface a jamais.
Placons-nous done a ce point de vue qui puisse engager les neutres et les belligerants
a se respecter mutuellement. Prenons pour base les deux conditions de neutralite
telles qu'elles sont posees par le docteur L. Gessner, c'est-a-dire que—
Les conditions de la neutralite sont:
1. Qu'on ne prenne absolument aucune part a la guerre et qu'on s'abstienne de tout
ce qui pourrait procurer un avantage a l'une des parties belligerantes.
2. Qu'on ne tolere sur le territoire neutre aucune hostilite immediate d'une partie
contre l'autre.
Quant h la mesure de l'activite dans l'accomplissement des devoirs du neutre, je orois
qu'il serait a propos d'etablir la formule suivante:
Qu'elle doit 6tre en raison directe des dangers reels que le belligerant peut conrir
par le fait ou la tolerance du neutre, et, en raison inverse, des moyens directs que le belligerant peut avoir d'eviter ces dangers.
Cette formule nous conduit a resoudre la question, si souvent debattue dans les documents produits, de l'initiative a prendre par le neutre au profit du belligerant pour
sauvegarder sa neutralite.
La oh les conditions ordinares du pays, ou des circonstances particulieres survenues
sur le territoire du neutre, constituent un danger special pour le belligerant qui ne
peut avoir des moyens directs de s'y soustraire, le neutre est tenu d'employer son
initiative afin que l'etat de neutralite se maintienne a regard des deux belligerants.
* '! The Law of Neutrality at Sea," Berlin, 1865, p. 22.    .OPINIONS   OF  COUNT   SCLOPIS. 61
\
This initiative may be taken either on account of a flagrant case of
some enterprise of one of the belligerents against the other, or on the
application of the belligerent denouncing a fact or a series of facts which
would constitute a violation of neutrality in regard to him,t. <?., which
would improve the position of one belligerent to the detriment of the
other.
It does not appear that the neutral could in such case release himself
from responsibility bj requiring the belligerent to furnish him with'evidence sufficient to institute regular proceedings before the courts. This
would be to reduce the belligerent to the condition of a mere subject of
the government of the country. The law of nations is not contented
with these narrow measures of precaution ; it requires a larger measure
of assistance. This is demanded not only by the comitas inter gentes,
but also by the real necessity which nations are under to lend reciprocal
aid and protection in order to maintain their independence and guarantee their security.
The greater, then, the actual danger to the belligerent on the territory
of the neutral, the more is the latter bound to watch over his neutrality
and to prevent its being violated to the profit of either of the belligerents.
The matter appears under a somewhat different light when the belligerent can, of himself, by the employment of his forces, hold his enemy
in check, even on the neutral territory. This case presents itself in particular when the geographical position of a state is sufficient of itself
to secure the means of promptly repressing auy enterprise prepared on
the neutral territory. Under such circumstances the neutral would no
longer be bound to assume an initiative which would have no object. He
could not, however, from considerations of self-respect, allow his neutrality to be violated, and he would be bound to comply with any just
demand which might be addressed to him, in order to avoid any kind of
connivance with one or other of the belligerents.
If from abstract principles we pass to the consideration of the particular
facts for which the United States hold that Great Britain is responsible,
Cette initiative pent &tre mise en mouvement, soit par un cas flagrant de quelque
. entreprise de l'un des belligerants contre 1'autre, soit sur l'instance du belligerant qui
denonce un fait ou une serie de faits qui violeraient a son egard les regies de la neutralite—c'est-a-dire, qui rendraient meilleure la position d'un belligerant au detriment
de celle de l'autre.
II ne paralt pas que le neutre puisse, dans pareil cas, se decharger de sa responsabilite eu exigeant du belligerant qu'il lni fournisse les preuves suffisantes pour instituer
une procedure regnliere devant les tribuuaux. Ce serait reduire le belligerant a la
condition d'un simple sujet du gouvernement du pays. Le droit des gens ne se contente
pas de ces etroites mesures de precautions: il lui faut plus de largeur d'assistance. Ce
n'est pas seulement la comitas inter gentes qui la reclame, c'est le besoin reel qu'ont les
nations de se pr&ter reciproquement aide et protection pour maintenir leur indepen-
• dance et garantir leur securite.
Plus done il y aura pour le belligerant de dangers reels sur le territoire du neutre,
plus eclni-ci sera teuu de veiller sur sa neutralite, en empechant qu'elle ne soit vioiee
au profit de l'un ou de l'autre des belligerants.
La chose se presente un peu different ment lorsque le belligerant peut, a lui seul, par
l'emploi de ses forces, tenir en echec son ennemi. memo sur le territoire neutre. Ce cas
se presente surtout lorsque la position geograpbique d'un etat suffit d'elle-meme a.
assurer les moyens de reprimer promptement toute entreprise prepare sur le territoire
neutre. Dans ces circonstances le neutre ne serait plus tenu de prendre une initiative
qui serait sans objet. II ne pourra pas cependant toierer, par respect pour hu-meme,
qu'on viole sa neutralite, et il sera tenu de deterer h, toute juste demande qu'on lui
adresserait d'eviter toute espece de connivence avec l'un ou l'autre des belligerants.
Si des principes abstraits nous passons a la consideration des faits particuliers sur
lesquels les Etats-Unis croient que la responsabilite de l'Angleterre est engagee, nous
I62
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
British unfriendliness.
we must commence by discussing the construction of ships, and the circumstances under which such construction took place. Indeed, the fact
of the construction of the vessels, of their armament and equipment,
and of the export of arms, assumes a different aspect according to the
circumstances of the time, the persons, and the Focalities iu which it
occurred. If the government on whose territory the acts take place is
aware of a permanent state of affairs, leading to a decided probability
that such construction, armaments, and exports will be effected with the
object of assisting the designs of a belligerent, the duty of vigilance on
the part of the government becomes more pressing, and exists to a greater
extent.
British unfriendliness.
The British government was fully informed that the confederates had
established in England a branch of their means of attack and
defense against the United States. Commissioners representing the government of Bichmond were domiciled in London, and had put
themselves in communication withtheEuglishgovernment. LordBussell
had received these confederate representatives in an unofficial way. The
first visit took place on the 11th of May, 1861, that is to say, three days
before the Queen's proclamation of neutrality, aud four days before Mr.
Adams arrived in London as the minister of the United States; aud
further, the English government could not but know that great commercial houses were managing the interests of the confederates at Liverpool, a town which from that time was very openly pronounced in favor
of the South. In Parliament itself opinions were before long openly
expressed in favor of the insurgents. The Queen's ministers themselves
did not disguise that, in their opinion, it would be very difficult for the
American Union to re-establish itself as before. Then, strange to say,
the most influential members of the House of Commons were seen to
detach themselves, on this question, from the ministry of which they
had been the powerful supporters. The voice of Mr. Cobden and that
of Mr. Bright were raised in favor of the United States.    The Ameri-
devons d'abord parler de la construction des navires et des circonstances au milieu
desqnelles ces constructions eurent lieu. Le fait, en effet, de la construction des vais-
seaux, de leur armemeut et equipement, de l'exportation des armes de guerre, prend
un aspect different, selon les circonstances des temps, des personnes et des lieux oh il
s'accomplit. Si le gouvernement sur le territoire duquellefait se passe a connaissance
d'un etat de chpses permanent, auquel vienne se rattacher une probabilite marquee
que de semblables constructions, armements et exportations se fassent dans le but de
servir aux projets d'un belligerant, le devoir de surveillance de la part de ce gouvernement devient plus etendu et plus pressant.
Le gouvernement britannique 6tait pleinement informe que les confederes americains du sud avaient etabli en Angleterre comme une succursale de leurs moyens
d'attaque et de defense vis-a-vis des Etats-Unis. Un comite de representants du gouvernement de Richmond avait ete etabli a Londres, et il s'etait mis en rapport avec le
gouvernement anglais. Lord Russell avait recu les deiegues des confederes, mais sans
caractere officiel. La premiere visite avait eu lieu le 11 mai 1861—c'est-a-dire, trois
jours avant la proclamation de neutralite de la reine et quatre jours avant l'arrivee de
M. Adams a Londres en qualite de ministre des Etats-Unis. Le gouvernement anglais
ne pouvait pas ignorer non plus que de fortes maisons de commerce soignaient les in-
terets des confederes a Liverpool, ville tres-prononcee des lors en favour de l'Amerique
du sud. II ne tarda pas a se prononcer en plein Parlement une opinion tout a fait
favorable aux insurgls du sud. Les ministres de sa Majeste la Reine, eux-memes, ne
dissimulerent point que dans leur maniere de voir il etait tres-difficile que l'Union
americaine pftt se retablir telle qu'elle etait auparavant. Alors, chose etrange, on vit
des membres les plus influents de la Chambre des communes se detacher, sur cette
question, du ministere, dont ils avaient ete de puissants auxiliaires. La voix de M.
Cobden et celle de. M. Bright se firent entendre en favour des Etats-Unis.   Les Ameri-OPINIONS   OF   COUNT   SCLOPIS.
63
cans of the North could have had no advocates more devoted to their
cause, and they did not fail to take advantage of their authority. These
great movements of public opinion in contrary directions formed as it
were an atmosphere of agitation which ought to have kept the British
ministry on its guard, in order that it might succeed in maintaining perfectly equal relations with the two belligerent parties.
Let us now turn from these remarks on the facts to the consideration
of the special law of the question. In the first of the rules laid down
in Article VI of the treaty of Washington, mention is made of the due
diligence to prevent the building, equipment, and arming of vessels,
which a government is bound to exercise, when it has reasonable ground
to believe that this building, arming, and equipping are for the purpose
of furnishing warlike aid to one of the belligerents.
The same words occur again in the third rule, while they are wanting in the second. "Why so?" asked Lord Cairns in the debate on the
treaty which took place in the House of Lords on the 12th June of last
year. It seems to me that it might be answered: because, in the case
of the first and third rules there is room for investigations of persons
and circumstances to ascertain the facts denounced, whereas the second
relates to a series of evident facts on which no inquiry need be made as
regards credibility.
" What," continued the noble lord, | is the standard by which you can
measure due diligence % Due diligence, by itself, means nothing. What
is due diligence with one man, with one power, is not due diligence with
another man, with a greater power."
Due diligence, then, is determined, in my opinion, asl have already said,
by the relation of the matter to the obligation imposed by law. But what
is the measure of the sufficient reason ? It will be furnished by the principles of the law of nations, and the character of the circumstances. And
here, not to leave, the question in ambiguity, I will examine some of the
propositions contained in the argument of Her Britannic Majesty's
counsel on the first of the points mentioned by the tribunal in its reso-
cains du nord ne pouvaient avoir d'avocats plus devoues a leur cause, et ils ne man-
querent pas de se prevaloir de leur autorite. Ces grands mouvements de l'opinion
publique dans des sens opposes l'un a l'autre formaient comme une atmosphere d'agita-
tion, qui devait tenir eveilie le miuistere britannique, afin de pouvoir se maintenir
dans des rapports parfaitement egaux avec les deux parties belligerantes.
Passons maintenant de ces remarques sur les faits a des considerations sur ce droit
special. Dans la premiere des regies posees a l'artiele VI du traite de Washington, il
est parie de la due diligence a empecher les constructions, equipements et armeinents
de vaisseaux qu'un gouvernement est tenu de deployer quand il a un " reasonable
ground" de croire que ces constructions, armements et equipements ont pour objet
d'aider, pour l'usage de la guerre, un des belligerants.
Les mimes mots se retrouvent dans la troisieme regie; ils manquent dans la. seconde.
" Pourquoi cela?" demandait Lord Cairns dansla discussion sur le traite susdit, qui ent
lieu dans la Chambre de pairs le 12 juin de l'annee derniere. II me semble qu'on
pourrait repondre: c'est parce que dans les cas de la premiere et de la troisieme regie
il y a lieu a des investigations de personnes et de choses pour certifier les faits in-
crimines, au lieu que la seconde se rapporte a une serie de faits evidents, sur lesquels il
n'y a pas de recherches a faire en matiere de credibilite.
I Quel est done l'etalon," poursuivait a dire le noble lord, " d'apres lequel vous
pouvez mesurer la due diligence f Due diligence, a elle seule, ne signifie rien. Ce qui
est due diligence avec tel homme et tel gouvernement ne l'est plus avec tel autre
homme, tel autre gouvernement plus puissant."
La due diligence se determine done, a mon avis, ainsi que je l'ai deja dit, par le rapport des choses avec l'obligation imposee par le .droit. Mais quelle est la mesure de la
raison suffisantef Ce sont les principes du droit des gens et la qualite des circonstances
qui nous la donneront. Et ici, pour ne pas rester dans le vague, j'examinerai quelques-
unes des propositions contennes dans l'argument du conseil de sa Majeste britannique
sur le premier des points indiques par le tribunal dans son arrete du 24 juillet.   Je ne
J64
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
lution of the 24th July. I will be guided by my own views only, while
rendering full justice to the subtlety of reasoning, and to the wealth of
learning displayed by the illustrious advocate who has drawn up this
document, worthy of being placed in the same rank with the equally
remarkable papers which have emanated from the pen of the counsel of
the American Government.
I read, at page 4 of this argument, that the case of a vessel which
leaves the neutral country unarmed is entirely different from that of an
armed vessel, sold to a belligerent within neutral territory, which leaves
that territory fully capable of offense and defense, under the control of
the belligerent purchaser; that departure of the former vessel is no
operation of war ; that she is'guilty of no violation of territory, of no
hostile act.
It seems to me that, when a vessel has been built and fitted out for
war, there are strong reasons for believing that it has been purchased
for the service of a belligerent, and that it will suddenly go to sea.
There are strong grounds for supposing that, at a short distance from
the territorial waters, arms and munitions will be brought to that vessel, fittings made to measure. It is exactly the case, to use an expression of Sir Boundell Palmer, as reported in his speech in the House of
Commons on the 13th May, 1864, to act upon suspicion, or upon moral belief going beyond suspicion. The fraud is too easily perpetrated not to be
presumed upon its face. All that is necessary to complete it is that
arms and engines of war of every kind should be shipped on board a
vessel strictly mercantile, and that this vessel should meet the other on
the high seas, or in neutral waters different from those of the territory
from which she originally started. It is the story of the Prince Alfred,
the Laurel, the Alar, the Agrippina, and the Bahama, of all these combinations, which cannot, in my opinion, in any way diminish the responsibility incurred by the Alabama, the Florida, the Shenandoah, the
Georgia, &c.
These evasions by fragments, this complication of different forms of
action with one identical object, should not mislead the mind of the
me laisserai guider que par mes propres vues, tout en rendant pleine et entiere justice
a la finesse des observations et a la richesse de la doctrine de l'illustre juriseonsulte
redacteur de cette piece digne d'etre mise sur une merue ligne avec les autres egale-
ment remarquables sorties de la plume des conseils du gouvernement americain.
Je lis, a la page 4 de cet argument, que le cas d'un navire qui quitte le pays neutre
sans armement est tout a fait different du cas d'un navire qui, arnie en guerre, vendu &
un belligerant sur le territoire neutre et en etat d'attaquer et de se defendre, quitte ce
lerritoire sous 1'autorite de l'acbeteur belligerent, que son depart n'est en aucune
facon une operation de guerre; qu'il n'est coupable d'aucune violation du territoire
neutre, ni d'aucun acte hostile.
II me paralt que lorsqu'un vaisseau a ete construit et prepare pour la guerre, qu'il
y a de fortes raisons de croire qu'il est achete pour le compte d'un bellig6raut et qu'il
va soudain prendre la mer. II y a Men des motifs de supposer qu'il pen de distance des
eaux territoriales on apportera a ce vaisseau des armes et des munitions, des vfitements
a sa faille. Cest bien le cas de se servir d'une phrase de Sir Roundell Palmer—"to act
upon suspicion, or upon moral belief going beyond suspicion"—qu'on lit dans son discours a
la Chambre des communes le 13 Mai 1864. La frande est trop facile pour qu'elle ne
doive pas etre presumee. II suffira de charger sur un vaisseau, strictement de commerce,
des armes et des engins de guerre de toute sorte, et que ce vaisseau rejoigne le premier
eu haute mer, ou dans des eaux neutres differeutes de celles du territoire primitif d'oh
il est parti, pour que le tour soit fait. C'est l'histoire du Prince Alfred, du Laurel, de
l'Agrippina, et du Bahama—de toutes ces combinaisons qui ne pourraient, a mon avis,
diminuer en rien la responsabilite qu'auraient encourue l'Alabama, le Florida, le Shenandoah, le Georgia, &c.
Ces evasions par fragments, cette complication de formes d'action differeutes, dansun
int^rSt identique, ne doivent point fourvoyer 1'esprit dujuge.   Un vaisseau tout pre-OPINIONS   OF   COUNT   SCLOPIS.
65
judge. A vessel, thoroughly fitted out for war, leaves the shores upon
which it has been built without receiving its armament; a simple merchant-vessel is charged with the transport of its armament; the place
of meeting is fixed, and there the arming of the vessel is completed.
The trick is done. But the judge cannot allow his reason and conscience
to be led astray by such stratagems. On the contrary, the maneuver
will only demonstrate more clearly the criminality of both vessels.
I return, then, to what was said by Sir Bobert Peel in a memorable
speech delivered in the House of Commons on the 28th April, 1830. | If
the troops were on board one vessel and their arms in another, did that
make any difference!" and I do not hesitate to say that if the vessel
was fitted out for war and ready to receive her armament, and her arms
were on board another vessel, it made no difference.
I confess that I do not quite understand the true meaning of what I
read at page 6: u With respect to the three rules," (those laid down by
Article VI of the treaty of Washington,) "it is important to observe that
no one of them pretends that it is the duty of a neutral government to prevent,
under all circumstances tohalever, the acts against tohich they are directed."
If such is not the duty of a government, the cases in which it is necessary to observe them, and those in which it is not, should have been
specified. The intention of making general the observance of these
rules seftms to me to be explicit. The solemn words, " a neutral government is bound,''' and the final clause of this article, not less solemn, that
the high contracting parties engage not only to observe these rules' as
between themselves, for the future, but also to bring them to the knowledge of other maritime powers, and to invite them to accede to them,
prove this iucontrovertibly.
How, then, can we suppose that there exist circumstances, foreseen
and' admitted by the high contracting parties, in which these rules are
not obligatory, unless such circumstances are expressly mentioned?
Undoubtedly it is necessary that a case for the application of these
rules should be made out regularly, and based on sufficient grounds;-.
pare pour la guerre quitte, sans recevoir son armement, les plages sur lesquelles il a
ete construit; un vaisseau tout simplement de commerce se charge de transporter
l'armenent; le lieu du rendez-vous est fixe, la se complete l'armement en guerre du
vaisseau. Le tour est fait. Mais la raison et la conscience du juge ne peuvent se laisser
prendre a ces ruses. Bien au contraire, ce manege ne servira qu'a mieux faire ressortir
la culpabilite des deux vaisseaux.
J'en reviens done a ce que disait Sir Robert Peel dans un memorable discours pro-
nonce a la Chambre des communes le 28 avrillB30: " Si les troupes etaient sur un
vaisseau et, les armes sur un autre, cela faisait-il une difference?" Et je n'hesite point
a aire, si le vaisseau etait appareilie pour la guerre et pr£t a recevoir l'armement, et
les armes etaient sur un autre navire, cela ne faisait aucune difference.
J'avoue que je ne me rends pas bien compte de la veritable portee de ce que je lis a
la page 6: "Pour ce qui con'cerne ces Irois regies," (celles etablies par l'artiele VI du
traite de Washington,) " il est important de remarquer qu'aucune d'elles ne pretend qu'il soit
du devoir d'un gouvernement neutre d'empicher, dans tous les cas, les actes contre lesquels elles
sont r6dig6es." Si tel n'est pas le devoir d'un gouvernement, on aurait dh specifier les
cas ou il etait necessaire de les observer et ceux oh il ne l'etait pas. L'intention de
generaliser l'observance de ces regies me parait formelle. Les mots solennels^-" a neutral government is bound"—et la clause finale de cet article, non moins solennelle, que
les hautes parties contractantes s'engageut, non-seulement a observer ces rSgles entre
elles dans l'avenir, mais encore ales porter alacounaissancedes autres puissances marr-
times et h les inviter a y acceder, le prouvent a 1'evidence'.
Comment done pourrions-nous supposer qu'il existe des circonstances prevues et
avouees par les hautes parties contractantes ou ces regies n'obligent pas,, sans qu'on
en ait fait mention expresse ?
Certes, il faut que le cas d'application de ces regies soit determine reguliereinentet
5 B66
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
but when this is established, the rules must have full and unrestricted
operation.
These rules, according to the manner in which they are laid down,
constitute an obligation based on the general law of nations, and ir
would be to change their nature, to destroy their effect complete^, to
admit, as is contended in the argument of Her Britannic Majesty's counsel, that the measure of due diligence to be exercised must be drawn
from tbe rules and principles of legislation peculiar to each of the contracting parties; that is to say, that the generality and breadth of the
rule may be limited by the municipal law.
No, assuredly, such could not have been the intention of the high
contracting parties in framing the sixth article. England has declared,
it is true, that she could not assent to the foregoing rules as a statement
of principles of international law which were in force at the time when
the claims mentioned in Article I arose; this is a simple retrospective
question of the sense and interpretation of the law. But from the
moment when England, with the view of strengthening the friendly
relations between the two countries, and of making satisfactory provision for the future, consents that these rules should be binding for the
past also, she must consider them as provisions of the general law of
nations, conventional, if you please, but superior to any provision of
municipal law. It is not, in my opinion, to strain the nature of international law, to require that it should be applied without any admixture
of political interests by the powers who have accepted it. I agree that
we cannot require the execution of what is actually impossible. That
is a case of controlling force; ad. impossibile nemo tenetur. But I refuse
to recognize the political impossibility appealed to in the argument of
Her. Britannic Majesty's counsel. Nothing can be more elastic than
these words; it would be to abandon this vital part of the treaty to the
currents of temporary interests, of the accidents of the moment. It
would be said: Yes, I consented to lay down the rule, but I have not
the means of carrying it out; so much tbe worse for the rule.
avec une raison suffisante; mais, cela pose, les regies doivent operer de plein droit,
et sans aucune restriction.
Ces regies, de la fa^on dont elles sont etablies, constituent une obligation fondee sur
le droit des gens general; et ce serait en changer la nature, en detruire compietement
l'eft'et quo d'admettre, ainsi que le voudrait Vargument du conseil de sa Majeste britannique, que la mesure des dues diligences a employer, il faut la deriver des regies et
des principes de la legislation propre a chacune des parties contractantes—c'est-a-dire
que la generalite et la grandeur de la regie pourront etre soumises a des limitations
par la loi municipale.
Non, pour sur, telle n'a pu etre 1'inteution des hautes parties contractantes In
reuigeant l'artiele VI. L'Angleterre a declare, il est vrai, qu'elle n'entendait point ad-
met tre que les regies precitees eussent le caractree de principes de droit international
en vigueur a l'epoque oh les reclamations enoncees a Particle I du traite prirent nais-
sance; c'est la une simple question retrospective d'intelligeuce et d'interpretation
de droit. Mais du moment que l'Angleterre, en vue de raffermir les rapports d'amitie
entre les deux nations et de pourvoir d'une maniere satisfaisante aux exigences
de l'avenir, consent a ce que ces regies fassent autorite, meme pour le passe, elle
doit les considerer comme des dispositions de droit des gens general, conventionnel si
l'on" veut, mais superieur a toute disposition de droit municipal. Ce n'est pas, a mon
avis, outrer la nature du droit des gens que d'exiger qu'il soit applique sans melange
d'interet politique par les puissances qui l'ont accepte. Je suis d'accord qu'on ne
puisse pas demander qu'on execute des choses naturellement impossibles; c'est le cas de
la force majeure: ad impossibile nemo tenetur. Mais je me refuse a recounaltre l'impossi-
bilite politique invoquee dans Yargument du conseil de sa Majeste britannique. Rien
n'est plus eiastiqne que ces mots; ce serait livrer l'execution de cette partie vitale du
traite aux courauts des inte.rets temporaires, des accidents du moment. On dirait:
Qui, j'ai consent! a poser la regie, mais les moyens d'y satisfaire me manquent; taut
pis pour la rfegle.OPINIONS   OF   COUNT  SCLOPIS.
67
I add, in conclusion, that there is no ground to fear that the application of these rules can go so far as to violate the principles on which
national governments rest. The nature of the engagement does not
reach that point. It is very possible that their application may sometimes embarrass governments in their political conduct; but it will
more often prevent disorders capable of leading to misfortunes which
could not be sufficiently deplored.
The rules of the sixth article of the treaty of Washington are destined to become principles of universal law for the maintenance of neutrality. The very text of the treaty says so, and Mr. Gladstone and
Lord Granville haTve always, and with reason, insisted on this prospective benefit to civilization. In order to realize it, the several governments must take measures to obtain fitting powers for the execution of
the law. As regards the past, there have been great discrepancies on
this point in the legislation of different nations. The United States,
with their district attorneys, their marshals, and organized police officers, were better assisted than England was, with its customs and
excise officers only. I do not doubt that these views will be received,
if the treaty of Washington is to be carried out in earnest, and it would
be a great misfortune if it were not.
I do not think it is absolutely necessary for our purpose to discuss
the observations which have been made respecting different quotations
from the work of Sir Bobert Phillimore, nor to dwell on the comparative study of the legislations of America and England in matters of neutrality. This may be more useful when framing regulations to be made
in pursuance of Article VI of the treaty.
It is to be hoped that this process of rectifying or supplementing the
precautious to be taken in order to insure the execution of the treaty
to its full extent will.not be delayed.
We have witnessed the anxiety of England to modify her neutrality
laws on the breaking out of the war in 1870 between France and German v.
J'ajoute, pour en finir, qu'il n'y a pas a craindre que l'applioation de ces regies
puisse arriver au point de violer les principes sur lesqnels reposent les gouvernements
nationaux. La nature de l'engagement ne va pas jusque la. II est tres-possible que
cette application gene quelquefois les gouvernements dans leur conduite politique, mais
elle empeehera plus souvent des desordres capables de produire des malheurs qu'on ne
saurait assez deplorer.
Les regies de l'artiele VI du traite de Washington sont destinees a devenir des
principes de droit cornmun pour la garantie de la neutralite. Le texte meme le dit, et
M. Gladstone et Lord Granville ont toujours, et avec raison, insiste sur cette prevision
d'un bienfait acquis a la civilisation. Pour que cela se realise, il faudra que les
differents gouvernements prennent des mesures afin d'avoir les moyens convenables
pour executer la loi. Pour le passe, il y avait de grandes varietes en cette matiere
dans la legislation des differents peuples. Les Etats-Unis, avec leurs attorneys de district, leurs marechaux, officiers de police organisee, etaient mieux assistes que 1'Angle-"
terre, avec ses seuls employes de la douane et de l'accise. Je ne doute point que l'on
n'entre dans ces vues, si l'execution du traite de Washington doit etre chose serieuse;
et ce serait un grand malheur s'il ne l'etait pas.
Je pense qu'il n'est point absolument necessaire pour notre etude de discuter les observations qu'on a faites touchant differeutes citations du livre de Sir Robert Phillimore,
ni de nous arreter sur 1'etude des legislations comparees d'Ameriqne et d'Angleterre en
fait de neutralite. Cela pourra mieux servir qunnd on travaillera aux reglements a
faire dependamment de l'artiele VI du traite.
II est a esperer que cette rectification, ou ce supplement de precautions a prendre
pour assurer l'execution du traite dans toute sonietendue, ne se fera point attendre.
Nous avons vu la sollicitude de l'Angleterre a modifier ses lois sur la neutralite a
l'ouverture de la guerre, en 1870, entre la France et 1'Allemaerne.
I68
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Why should we not hope for equal anxiety now to conform to the letter and spirit of the treaty of Washington f
I come to the application of the considerations I have put forward.
It results from this, according to my views, that the English government found itself, during the first years of the war of secession', in the
midst of circumstances which could not but have au influence, if not
directly upon itself, at least upon a part of the population subject to the
British Crown. No government is safe against certain waves of public opinion which it cannot master at its will. I am far from thinking
that the animus of the English government was hostile to the Federal
Government during the war. •
Yet there were grave dangers for the United States in Great Britain
and her colonies which there were no direct means for averting. England, therefore, should have fulfilled her duties as a neutral by the exercise of a diligence equal to the gravity of the danger. I need
only here repeat a passage from a report of the law-officers of
Her Britannic Majesty, given in reply to a request of Lord Bus-
sell, on the 12th December, 1863* Speaking on the subject of the
Georgia, the law-officers observe that the facts resulting from the depositions received furnish additional grounds to those already existing for
strong remonstrance to the confederate government on account of the systematic violation of British neutrality by their agents in British territory.
(British Appendix, vol. i, p. 440.)
It cannot be denied that there were moments when its watchfulness
seemed to fail, and when feebleness in certain branches of the public
service resulted in great detriment to the United States. The consequences of such feebleuess can be no other than a reparation for the
damages suffered. Earl Bussed writes to Lord Lyons, in a letter of the
27th March, 1868, that "he had said to Mr. Adams that the cabinet
were of opinion that the law was sufficient, but that legal evidence could
not always be procured. That the British government had done everything in its power to execute the law; but that he admitted that the
Pourquoi ne pas esperer- qu'on sera empresse aujourd'hni a se conformer a la lettre et
a l'esprit des stipulations de Washington ¥
J'en viens a l'application des considerations que j'ai faites. II resulte a mes yeux
que le gouvernement anglais s'est trouve, pendant les premieres annees de la guerre
de la secession, au milieu de circonstances qui n'ont pu qu'avoir une influence, si ce
n'est directment sur lui, du moins sur uue partie des populations soumises a la couronne
d'Angleterre. Nul gouvernement n'est a l'abri de certaines secousses de l'opinion pu-
blique, qu'il n'est pas libre ,de inaltriser a son gre. Je suis loin de penser que Yanimus
du gouvernement anglais ait ete hostile pendant cette guerre au Gouvernement federal.
Cependant, il .existait de graves dangers en Angieterre et dans ses colonies pour les
Etats-Unis, qui n'avaient aucuri moyen direct de les conjurer. II faillait done que
l'Angleterre mlt, a garder les devoirs de la neutralite, une diligence correspondante a
Ja gravite de ces dangers. II me suffit de rappeler ici un passage d'une consultation
des conseillers legaux de sa Majeste britannique, emise, sur l'invitation de Lord Russell, le 12 decembre 1863. Parlant au sujet du Georgia, ces conseillers observaient
que les faits resultant de depositions reeues "fournissaient des i-aisons a ajouter a celles qui
existaient dejdpour adresser de vives remontrances au gouvernement conf6der6, apropos de la
violation sysiemalique de la neutralite dnglaise, commise par ses agents sur le territoire britannique."   (Appendice britannique, vol. i, p. 440.)
On ne saurait nier toutefois qu'il y eut des moments oh la rigueur de surveillance
parut faiblir. De la des defaillances dans certaines parties du service public, qui ont
tourne au grand desavantage des Etats-Unis^et la consequence de ces defaillances ne
peut etre autre qu'une reparation de dommages soufferts. Le Comte Russell e"crit a
Lord Lyons, dans une lettre du 27 mars 1863, qu'il;'avait dit a M. Adams que le cabinet etait d'opinion que la loi sufflsait, mais qu'on n'avait pas pu toujours apporter des
preuves legales; .que le gouvernement de la Grande-Bretague avait fait tout ce qui
etai^ en sou pouvoir pour executer la loi; mais qu'il reconnaissait que les cas deOPINIONS   OF  COUNT  SCLOPIS.
69
ree a
cases of the Alabama and Oreto were a scandal, and in some deg
reproach, to the Britsh laws."
Subsequently, at the very moment when he made the motion praying
the Queen to refuse to ratify the treaty of Washington, Earl Bussell
candidly admitted that the Queen's proclamation of May 13, 1861, en
joining neutrality in the unfortunate civil war in North'America, had
several times been practically set at naught on British territory by the
acts of parties.
The obstacles which, at the moment when the letter which I have just
quoted was written, fettered the action of the British government, no
longer exist, thanks to the liberal principles imposed by Article VI of
the treaty of Washington; but the consequences of the acts which Earl
Bussell so candidly and so energetically condemned, still exist; and it is
to the reparation of these damages in a just measure, and based always on
sufficient grounds, that the decisions of the tribunal of arbitration should
tend.
I will dilate no further on this point. As to the disposition which
should prevail to make provision for the future, I need only cite the
Biitish foreign-enlistment act, passed on the 9th August, 1870. This
act shows what progress has been made in the means for preserving
neutrality.
The three rules laid down in Article VI of the treaty appeared to the
English ministry less embarrassing for the government than the act I
have just alluded to. " There is not one of these rules," said Lord Granville in the House of Lords on the 12th June, 1871, " which is not completely covered by that act, and it even goes further than they do." The
retrospective character of these rules forms their especial character,
which governs the whole question submitted to the decision of the
arbitrators.
IL—VESSELS WHICH HAVE RECEIVED COMMISSIONS.
If we consult the most esteemed authors on public international law,
1'Alabama et de l'Oreto avaient ete un scandale et en quelque degre un reproche aux lois
anglaises."
Plus tard, au moment rneme oh il faisait la motion de supplier la Reine de refuser la
■ ratification du traite de Washington, le Comte Russell avouait ioyalement que la
proclamation de la Reine du 13 mai 1861, enjoignant la neutralite dans la malheureuse
guerre civile de l'Amerique du Nord, avait ete plusieurs fois pratiquement reduite a
neant sur le territoire anglais par le fait des partis.
Les obstacles qui, au moment oh la lettre que je viens de citer fut ecrite, entravaient
Faction du gouvernement britannique n'existent plus, grace aux principes liberates:
imposes par l'artiele VI du traite de Washington; mais les consequences des faits, que
le Comte Russell reprouvait si Ioyalement et si energiquement, subsistent encore, et
c'est a reparer ces dommages dans une juste mesure, et toujours avec l'appui d'une raisou
suffisante, que doivent teudre les decisions du tribunal d'arbitrage.
Je n'irai pas plus loin sur ce terrain. Quant a l'esprit de prevoyance qui doit pi-eva-
loir a l'avenir, il suffit que je cite le foreign-enlistment act de la Grande-Bretagne, vote
le 9 aout 1870. Cet acte nous moutre quels progres on a fait quant aux moyens de
maintenir la neutralite.
Les trois regies posees a l'artiele VI du traite ont paru au ministere anglais moins
genantes pour le gouvernement que l'acte que je viens de citer. " II n'y a pas une seule
de ces regies," disait Lord Granville a la Chambre des lords le 12 juih 1871, " qui ne'
soit comprise dans cet acte, qui va meme beaucoup au-dela." La retroactivite de ces
regies en forme le caractere special, qui domine toute la matiere soumise au jugement
des arbitres.
II.—VAISSEAUX DEVENUS NAVIRES COMMISSIONNES.
Si nous consultons les auteurs les plus accredites de droit public international, ef par-70
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
and especially two writers of great weight, whose authority will be denied
Effect of r-ommis-   neither by America nor by England, namely, Story and
s,ons- Bhillimore, we find that the privilege, usually accorded to
ships of war, of being considered as a portion of the state whose flag
they carry, and being thus exempt from all other jurisdiction, was in its
origin a privilege only granted by courtesy.* As this privilege is only
derived from the usage of nations, it can be canceled at any moment
without cause for offense being given.
The opinion of Story, delivered in the case of the Exchange, and
quoted by Bhillimore, appearsvto me decisive:
"It may, therefore," he says, "be*jnstly laid down as a general proposition, that
all persons and property within the territorial jurisdiction of a sovereign are amenable
to the jurisdiction of himself or his courts: and that the exceptions to this rule are
such only as, by common usage and public policy, have been allowed, in order to preserve the peace and harmony of nations, and to regulate their intercourse in a manner
best suited to their dignity and rights. It would, indeed, be strange, if a license, implied by law from the general practice of nations for the purposes of peace should be
construed as a license to do wrong to the nation itself, and justify the breach of all
those obligations which good faith and friendship, by the same implication, impose
upon those who seek, an asylum in our ports."t
Taking these general principles, and above all the eternal rules of
good sense and the dictates of good faith, as our point of departure, is
it possible to admit that a vessel, which has been fraudulently built on
the territory of a sovereign, in open contravention of the duties of neutrality which that sovereign is bound to fulfill, and with the object of
privateering on behalf of one of the belligerents, can, by the simple act
of such belligerent, with a view to escape disasters, be transferred
into a commissioned vessel, and thus, with impunity, defy that same
ticulierement deux ecrivains d'un grand merite, dont l'autorite ne sera desavouee, ni
par l'Amerique, ni par l'Angleterre, tels que Story et Phillimore, nous trouvons quo le
privilege, generalement accorde aux batiments de guerre, d'etre consideres comme une
fraction de 1'etat dont ils portent le pavilion, et par la exempts de toute autre juridiction, n'a ete originairement qu'une concession faite par courtoisie. Comme cette concession ne derive que de l'usage des nations, elle peut etre revoquee a quelque epoqne
que ce soit, sans que cela puisse etre consider comme une offense.
L'opinion de Story, enoncee dans le cas de l'Exchange, et rapportee par Phillimore,
me parait decisive:
"On pent," dit-il, "etablir avec justice, comme proposition generale, que toute per-
sonne et toute propriete, dans la juridiction territoriale d'un souverain, sont soumises
a la juridiction de ce souverain ou de ses cours de justice; et qu'il n'y a d'exceptions
a cette regie que celles uniquement qui sont admises par l'usage cornmun et par la
politique publique, dans le but de maintenir la paix et l'harmonie entre les nations,"et
de regler leurs rapports de la fag on la mieux d'accord avec leur dignite et leurs droits.
II s.erait, en verite, fort etrange qu'une autorisation, que le droit a tacitement deduite
de la pratique generale des nations, dans des vues favorables a la paix, pftt etre inter-
pretee comme une autorisation de faire du mal a ces memes nations, et comme justification de l'iufraction de ces devoirs, que la bonne foi et l'amitie, provenant de la meme
source, imposent a ceux qui cherchent un asile daus nos ports."
En partaut de la generalite de ces principes, et surtout des regies de l'cternel bon
sens, et des inspirations de la bonne foi, est-il possible d'admettre qu'un navire, qui a
ete frauduleusemeut coustruit sur le territoire d'un souverain, en pleine contravention
aux devoirs de neutralite que ce souverain est tenu de remplir, et dans le but de se
livrer a la course daus l'iuteret d'un des belligerants, puisse, par le senl fait de ce belligerant, en vue de se soustraire a des chances malheureuses, etre transforme eh vaisseau
commissionne, et braver par la impuuement cette meme souverainete qu'il avait a son
* Phillimore, " Commentaries upon International Law," vol. i, p. 399, et seq. Second
edition, 1871.
t Ibid, p. 401. Lampredi does not admit that a vessel on the high seas can be
considered by other nations to be a part of the territory of the state whose flag she
carries; he recognizes this assumption of territoriality only in respect to the internal
management of the ship aud the civil and political relations of those on board of her. -OPINIONS   OF   COUNT   SCLOPIS.
71
sovereignty against which she had at the outset so gravely offended?
Assuredly not; these changes to the eye, like the shifting of a scene,
these transformations, effected with equal audacity and ease, cannot be
taken seriously. The contravention of which the ship was guilty at the
commencement of her career, with respect to the sovereign of the place
where she was built, is not effaced by the operation of an indecent
stratagem. All the written maxims of reason revolt against such
trickery: dolus nemini patrocinari debet. We must look to the bottom
of the matter, and mete out full justice to the fraud ; plus valet quod
agitur quam quod simulate concipitur. The guilt inherent to the vessel
will not be purged even when she has received a commission, a commander, and a flag from the power who can only profit by the fraud in
flagrant violation of all the rights of neutrality.
The weighty authority of Story, in the case of the Santissima Trinidad, is generally quoted with regard to the question now raised before'
us, (and I have myself quoted him.) But I observe that Story's doctrine, on the respect due to the commission given to a ship by a government, is only a general thesis on which everybody agrees; it does not
directly touch on the question of the original guilt incurred by a vessel
before her commissioning, and which caunot be blotted out without a
disturbance of all the principles which govern the duties of neutrality.
After all, even if precedents could be quoted contrary to the opinion
which I maintain, I should reply that the letter and spirit of the three,
rules laid down in the sixth article of the treaty of Washington do not
allow us to follow the old ruling.
It must be steadily borne in mind that it is a new law, full of equity
and foresight, which we are now to follow.
It is true that, according to generally-accepted ideas, a sovereign who
is no longer willing to grant the privilege of exterritoriality to the commissioned ships of other powers, must previously give notice to that
effect, so that foreign navies, forewarned, may take their precautions in
debut si gravement offensee? Non, en verite: ces changements a vue, comme s'il
s'agissait des decors d'un theatre, ces transformations operees avec autant d'andace
que de facilite, ne peuvent point etre pris au serieux. La contravention dont ce
navire s'etait rendu coupable au commencement de sa carriere, en vers le souverain du
lieu ou il a ete construit, ne s'efface point par l'effet d'une ruse indecent.e. Toutes les
maximes de la raison ecrite s'eievent contre de sembables supercheries : dolus nemini
patrocinari debet. 11 faut regarder le fond de la chose et faire bonne justice de la simulation ; plus valet quod agitur quam quod simulate concipitur. Le vice inherent au vaisseau ne disparaitra point quand meme il aura recu une patente, un commandant et un
pavilion de la puissance qui ne tend qu'a profiter de la fraude, en contradiction ouverte
a tous les droits de neutralite.
On* cite ordinairement, a propos de la question qu'on a soulevee devant nous,
l'imposante autorite de Story (que j'ai moi-meme invoquee) daus le cas de la
Santisima Trinidad. Mais j'observe que la doctrine de Story, sur le respect du a la
commission dont uu gouvernement a revetn un navire, n'est qu'une these generale, sur
laquelle tout le monde est d'accord; elle ne touche pas directement a la question du
vice d'origine contracte par un navire avant qu'il soit commissionne; vice d'origine
qui ne peut s'effacer sans troubler tons les principes qui gouvernent les devoirs de la
neutralite.
Apres tout, quand meme on pourrait citer des precedents contraires a l'opinion que
je soutiens, je. repondrai que la lettre et l'esprit des trois regies posees a l'artiele
VI du traite de Washington ne nous permettent plus de suivre 1'aucienne jurisprudence.
II faut se mettre bien dans l'esprit que c'est un droit nouveau, tout imbu d'equite et
de prevoyance, que nous devons suivre main tenant.
II est vrai que, selon les idees generalement recnes, ivn souverain qui ne veut plus'
accorder le privilege d'exterritorialite aux navires commissionnes des autres puissances,
doit en donuer prealablement avis, afin que les marines etrangeres, averties, preuuent
leurs suretes a cet egard.   Mais cela ne veut pas dire qu'il ne puisse y avoir d'exceptionARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
this respect. But this does not mean that there may not be exceptions
arising from a certain special train of circumstances, and not from the
simple caprice of the sovereign and his government. Now, it is on the
nature of these special circumstances that the first rule, laid down in
Article VI of tbe treaty of Washington, specifically rests. The operation
of this rule would be illusory if it could not be applied to vessels subsequently commissioned. The object in view is to prevent the construc-
tioo, arming, and equipping of a vessel, and to prevent her departure
when there is sufficient ground for believing that she is intended to
carry on war on behalf of one of the belligerents; and when probability
has become certainty, shall not^he rule be applicable to the direct and
palpable consequences which it originally was intended to prevent?
Can this act, in vindication of a right which has at the first been obviously violated, be looked upon as a violation of public good faith and
of the law of nations in regard to one of the belligerents? I can see no
violation of public good faith where there is only a flagrant abuse, a
manifest contravention of the principles of neutral duties sanctioned by
the foregoing rule.
The honorable attorney-general, in the memorable speech which he
made in the House of Commons on the 13th Of May, 1864, in reply to Mr.
Baring, formally declared " that he had not the least doubt that England had the right, if she thought fit, to exclude from her ports any
particular ship, or class of ships, if she considered that they had violated
her neutrality, but that such power is simply discretionary, and should
be exercised with a due regard to all the circumstances of the case."
(United States Documents, vol. v, p. 583.) Why was not, then, this
right exercised at least with respect to the vessels which had flagrantly
violated the duties of neutrality ?
I will not follow the argument of the United States in the distinction
it seeks to draw between public ships of recognized and sovereign nations and the ships belonging to a belligerent power whose sovereignty
The status of belligerents having been accorded to
is not recognized.
derivant d'un certain orclre de faits speeiaux, et non du simple caprice du souverain et
de son gouvernement. Or, c'est sur la nature de ces faits speeiaux que la premiere
regie posee a l'artiele VI du traite de Washington s'appuie precisement. La
disposition de cette regie serait parfaitement illusoire si on ne 1'appliquait pas aux
cas de vaisseaux posterienrement commissionnes. On veut einpecher la construction,
l'armement et I'equipemeut d'un vaisseau, en empScher la sortie quand il y a raison
suffisante de croire que ce vaisseau est destine a faire la gnerre au profit d'un des
belligerants; et quand les probabilites auront fait lieu a la certitude, la regie ne sera
plus applicable dans les consequences directes et palpables qu'elle voulait d'abord
empficher. Cet acte de revendication d'un droit, qui a ete evidemment vioie au
commencement, pourrait-il etre envisage comme une violation de la foi publique, ainsi
que du droit des gens, envers l'un des belligerants ? Je ne saurais voir violation de la
foi publique la ou il n'y a qu'un abus flagrant, une contradiction manifeste aux
principes des devoirs du neutre sanctiounes par la regie precitee.
L'honorable attorney-general, dans le memorable discours qu'il a prononce dans
la seance de la Chambre des communes le 13 mai 1864, en reponse a celui de M.
Baring, a formellement declare "n'y avoir le moiudre doute que l'Angleterre a le droit
d'exclure de-ses ports, si elle le croit convenable, tout vaisseau ou toute classe de
vaisseaux, si elle croit que ces vaisseaux ont vioie la neutralite; mais que ce droit est
tout simplement discretionnaire et doit s'exercer eu egard a toutes les circonstances du
cas." (Documents produits par les Etats-Unis, vol. v, p. 583J Pourqnoi done n'a-t-on
pas au moins use de ce droit a l'egard des vaisseaux qui etaient en contravention
flagrante aux devoirs de la neutralite ?
Je ne suivrai pas le plaidoyer des Etats-Unis dans la distinction qu'il propose
entre les navires publics des nations reconnues et souveraines d'avec les navires
appartenant a une puissance belligerante qui n'est pas une souverainete reconnue.
L'ltat de belligerant ayant ete reconnu des deux cdtes des populations americaines, il
n'est point necessaire d'insister sur cette question; je dirai avec le juge americainOPINIONS   OF   COUNT   SCLOPIS.
73
both parties in America, it is not necessary to dwell on this question.
I will say, with the American Judge Grier, " foreign nations recognize
that there is war by a proclamation of neutrality."*
The fact that a vessel, after having been commissioned^ has. been received as a ship of war in the ports of different powers before her entrance into the ports of the power whose neutrality she had originally
violated, should not, in my opinion, influence the recognition of the
character of such vessel. Where the vessel had no liability to answer
for, it was natural that she should be admitted as a ship of war; but
circumstances entirely change when the vessel enters the territorial
waters of the sovereign* towards whom she is guilty, of the sovereign
whom she has compromised as regards the other belligerent. Here her
guilty character cannot be overlooked; she maybe seized and condemned.
I think that it is for the interest of all maritime nations that they
should hold to the principles which have just been propounded. The
number of vessels fraudulently built ou neutral territory, with the intention of privateering on behalf of belligerents, will decrease in proportion as increased severity is shown towards them, even when they
present themselves under the protection of false pretensions to which
they are not entitled.
The powers which signed the treaty of Washington express, in this
same Article VI, the desire and hope that the three rules which they
have there laid down will be adopted by the other maritime powers.
It must then be inferred that the signing powers considered these rules
as clear, precise, and applicable to the various cases which are therein
contemplated. If, on the contrary, it is to be supposed that the intention of the contracting parties at Washington was to admit explanations and reservations of these same rules in the sense u of not largely
transcending the views of international maritime law and policy which
would be likely to commend themselves to the general interests and intelligence of that portion of mankind," t the advantage of the example
Grier: " Les nations etraugferes reconnaissent qu'il y a guerre par une proclamation de
neutralite."
La circonstance qu'un vaisseau, devenu commissionne, ait- ete recu comme vaisseau
de guerre daus des ports des differentes puissances avant que d'entrer dans des ports'
de la puissance dont il avait d'abord vioie la neutralite, ne me paralt point devoir
influer sur la reconnaissance du caractere de ce navire. La ou ce vaisseau n'avait
aucune comptabilite a regler, c'etait naturel qu'il fht admis comme batirnent de
guerre; mais la chose change totalement des que ce vaisseau entre dans les eaux
territoriales du souverain euvers lequel il s'est rendu coupable, du souverain qu'il a
compromis vis-a-vis de l'autre belligerant. Ici on ne peut lui faire remise de sa
penalite; il peut etre saisi et condamne.
Je pense qu'il est de l'interet de toutes les nations maritimes de s'en tenir aux principes que l'on vient d'enoncer. II y aura d'autant moins de constructions frauduleuses
sur un territorie neutre de navires destines a la course en faveur de belligerants qu'il
y aura plus de severite envers ceux-ci, lors meme qu'ils se presenteraient sous de pre-
tendues garanties, qu'ils ne meritent'pas.
Les puissances signataires du traite du Washington expriment, dans ce mtoe article VI, le desir et l'espoir que les trois regies qu'elles y out etablies soient adoptees
par les autres puissances maritimes. II faut en conclure que les puissances signataires
ont envisage ces regies comme claires, precises, et applicables aux differents cas qui y
sont contempies. S'il fallait supposer, au eontraire, que l'intention des parties contractantes a Washington etait d'admettre des explications et des reserves sur ces mSmes
regies dans le sens "dene pas depasser de beaucoup les idees de loi et politique
maritime internationale qui avaient le plus de chances de se faire agreer des interets
' *In the recent case of the Hiawatha, British prize, captured by the United States at
the commencement of the civil war.
t Argument of Her Britannic Majesty's counsel on the points mentioned in the resolution of the arbritrators of July 20,1872, p. 70.74
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
given would be entirely lost.   The uncertainty of its interpretation
would always endanger the stability of the rule.
III.—SUPPLIES  OF  COAL.
I can only treat the question of the supply and shipment of coal as
connected with the use of a base of  naval operations
directed against one of the belligerents, or as a flagrant
case of contraband of war.
I will not say that the simple fact of having ajlowed a greater amount
of coal than was necessary to enable a vessel to reach the nearest port
of its country constitutes in itself a sufficient grievance to call for an
indemnity. As the Lord Chancellor of England said on the 12th of
June, 1871, in the House of Lords, England and the United States
equally hold the principle that it is no violation of international law to
furnish arms to a belligerent. But if an excessive supply of coal is
connected with other circumstances which show that it was used as a
veritable res hostilis,* then there is an infringement of the second rule
of Article VI of the treaty. It is in this sense also that the same Lord
Chancellor, in the speech before mentioned, explained the intention of
the latter part of the said rule. Thus, when I see, for example, the
Florida and the Shenandoah choose for their field of action one, the
stretch of sea between the Bahama Archipelago and Bermuda, to
cruise there at its ease, and the other, Melbourne and Hobson's Bay,
for the purposes, immediately carried out, of going to the Arctic seas,
there to attack the whaling-vessels, I cannot but regard the supplies
generaux et de cette partie de l'humanite," l'avantage de l'exemple donne serait
entierement perdu. L'interpretation flottante empieterait toujours sur la fermete de
la regie.
il.
APPROVTSIOKNEMENT DE  CHARBON.
Quant a la question de l'approvisionnement et du chargement de charbon, je ne
saurais la traiter que sous le point de vue d'un cas connexe avec l'usage d'une base
d'operations navales dirigees contre l'un des belligerants, ou d'une cas flagrant de
contrebande de guerre.
' Je ne dirai pas que le simple fait d'avoir alloue une quantite do charbon plus forte
que celle necessaire aux vaisseaux pour regagner le port de leur pays le plus voisin
constitue a lui seul un grief suffisant pour donner lieu a une iudemnite.   Ainsi que le
disait le chancelier d'Angleterre
l'2juni 1871, a la Chambre des lords, l'Anerleten
et les Etats-Unis se tiennent egalement attaches au principe pratique qu'il n'y a pas
violation du droit des gens en fouruissant des armes aux belligerants. Mais si cet
excedant de proportion dans l'approvisionnement de charbon vientse joindre a d'autres
circonstances qui marquent qu'on s'en est servi comme d'une veritable res hostilis,
alors il y a infraction a la deuxieme regie de l'artiele VI du traite. C'est dans ce
sens aussi que le meme lord chancelier expliquait dans le discours precite la portee de
la derniere partie de la dite regie. Ainsi, lorsque je vois, par exemple, le Florida et le
Shenandoah choisir pour leur champ d'action, l'un, l'espace de mer qui est entre
l'archipel des lies Bahamas et les Bermudes, pour y croiser a son aise; l'autre, Melbourne
et la baie de Hobson, avec le dessein, execute immediatement apres, de se rendre dans
les mers Arctiques, pour y attaquer les baleiniers, je ne puis m'empceher de considcrcr
*The learned Lampredi, speaking of contraband of war, says: "Two concurrent
circumstances are necessary in order that these articles should assume the character
of contraband:
" 1. They must have actually become the property of the enemy, or, at least, be disposed in manner that they may so become.
" 2. They must have been sent out of the territory subject to the neutral and pacific
sovereign. They then become res hostilis; they assume the character of contraband
goods, &c."   (G. M. Lampredi, " Of the Commerce of Neutral Nations in time of War.")r-
•***
OPINIONS   OF  COUNT  SCLOPIS.
75
of coal in quantities sufficient for such purposes as infringements of the
second rule of the sixth article.
IV
■THE  ALABAMA.
Alabama.
The vessel which has had the unenviable privilege of giving its name
to the mass of claims advanced by the Government of the
United States against the government of Her Britannic
Majesty was the object of anxious care-on the part of the representatives of the United States from the time when she was in course of construction.
The contract for her construction had been concluded between Captain Bullock, a known agent of the confederates, on the one part, and
Messrs. Laird ou the other. She was evidently a vessel of war. She
was of about 900 tons, was 230 feet in length, 32 in breadth, and 20 in
depth; when provisioned and supplied with the coal necessary for a
cruise she drew 15 feet of water. Her engines were of 300 horse-power;
she carried eight guns, six broadside and two on pivots, one forward,
the other abaft the main-mast. On the 15th of May, 1862, the vessel
was launched under the name of the 290, her building number in the
yard. Formal representations were addressed to Lord Bussell by Mr.
Adams on the 23d of June, in which he made an express demand
that the projected expedition should be stopped, or else that it should
be established that the purpose of the vessel was not hostile to the
people of the United States. Mr. Adams based his statements on public report, on special presumptions, and on a letter intercepted by the
Government of the United States.
Lord Bussell referred the matter to the proper department of Her
Britannic Majesty's government. A report was received from the customs officers in which it was said that the builders of the vessel did not
attempt to disguise what was, in fact, apparent, namely, that she was
intended for a ship of war. The British government promised to keep
special watch upon her.   The system adopted by the customs officials
les chargements de charbon en quantite analogue au besoin de ces expeditions comme
des infractions a la deuxieme regie de l'artiele VI.
L'ALABAMA.
Le vaisseau qui a eu le triste privilege de donner son nom a la masse de reclamations
adressees par le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis au gouvernement de sa Majeste britannique, a ete l'objet de vives sollicitudes de la part des representants des Etats-Unis des
le temps oh il etait en construction.
Le coutrat pour cette construction avait ete conclu par le capitaine Bullock, agent
eonnu/les confederes. d'une part, et par MM Laird de l'autre. C'etait evidemment un
vaisseau de guerre. II etait d'environ 900 tonnes, avait.230 pieds de long, 32 de large,
20 de profondeur; quand il etait approvisionne et etait pourvu de charbon necessaire
a une croisiere, son tirant etait de 15 pieds. Sa machine etait de la force de 300 che-
vaux; il etait arme de huit canons, six sur les cdtes et deux a pivot places, l'un a 1'avant,
l'autre a l'arriere du grand mat. Le 15 mai 1862, le vaisseau fut lance sous le nom de
" 290," chiffre de construction au cbantier. Des reclamations formelles furent portees
a Lord.Russell par M. Adams le 23 juin; il y etait expressemeut fait demander d'ar-
reter l'expedition projetee, ou bieu d'etablir que le vaisseau n'avait pas d'inteutions
hos+iles contre le peuple des Etats-Unis. M. Adams se fondait sur la voixpublique, sur
les presomptions speciales, et sur une lettrfe interceptee parle Gouvernement des Etats-
Unis.
Lord Russell remit l'affaire au departement competent du gouvernement de sa
Majeste britaunique. II s'ensuivit un rapport des officiers des douanes, dans lequel il
est dit que les constructeurs du navire n'essayaient pas de dissimuler un fait tres evident, savoir, qu'il etait destine a devenir un vaisseau de guerre. Une surveillance spe-
ciale fut promise de la part du gouvernement britannique.   Le systeme adopte par les76
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
during the whole course of Mr. Adams's complaints was to take no
initiative, and to require always a formal requisition on the part of the
United States, admissible before an English, court of law. An eminent
English Counsel, Sir B. P. Collier, consulted by the American consul
at Liverpool, did not hesitate to declare that the vessel in question
might be seized by the principal officer of customs at that port, and he
advised the said consul to apply to the Secretary of S tate for Foreign
Affairs to ratify the seizure if made, or to direct that it should be made.
Five affidavits were produced, which Mr. Collier, in the first instance,
and the government afterwards, recognized as furnishing conclusive
evidence that the character ai\d destination of the vessel were in direct
contravention of the foreign-enlistment act. If the act is not enforced
on this occasion, added Mr. Collier, it is little better than a dead letter.
The American consul at Liverpool forwarded this opinion to the under
secretary of state for foreign affairs, and to the secretary to the board
of customs. The under secretary of state took no immediate steps upon
this communication, and the secretary to the board of customs had to
await the orders of the lords of the treasury, which did not reach him
until the 28th of July; the same documents were also communicated to
Lord Bussell. On the same day, the 28th, the law-officers of the Crown
gave their opinion that the vessel should be seized; orders to that effect
were consequently given on the 29th by the British government. The
circumstance of the illness of the Queen's advocate has been advanced
to justify the length of time which elapsed between the presentation of
the documents to the minister for foreign affairs and the delivery of
the opinion to the law-officers of the Crown. It is difficult to accept this
excuse when we bear in mind that there were other counsel to replace
this officer, and that any delay was perilous. Under these circumstances, the vessel had ample time to escape. I will not enter into the
details of the precautions taken by the commander of the Alabama
to elude the not over strict vigilance of the customs officers, nor into
the calculations of the distances, longer, or shorter, which had to be
traversed, in order to arrive in time to arrest the vessel on her touching
fonctionnaires de la douane pendant tout ce cours de plaintes de M. Adams etait de ne
prendre aucune initiative et d'exiger toujours une instance formelle de la part des Etats-
Unis recevable par les tribunaux anglais. Un eminent legiste anglais, Sir R. P. Collier,
interroge par le consul am6ricain a Liverpool, n'hesita point a declarer que le vaisseau
en question pouvait etre saisi par le chef des officiers de douanes au susdit port, et il
conseilla au dit consul des'adresser au ministeredes affaires etrangeres, afin qu'il ratifiat
cette saisie si elle etait faite, ou l'ordonnat si elle ne l'etait pas.
Cinq affidavits furent produits, que M. Collier d'abord et ensuite le gouvernement
reconnurent comme preuves concluantes sur la qualite et la destination du vaisseau en
pleine contravention au foreign-enlistment act; si ce statut n'est pas applique, dans cette
circonstance, ajoutait M. Collier, il n'est guere qu'une lettre morte. Le consul americain a"
Liverpool remit cette consultation au sous-secretaire d'etat des affaires etrangeres et
au secretaire du bureau des douanes. Le sous-secretaire d'etat ne donna pas de suite
immediate a cette communication, et le secretaire du bureau des douanes dut attendre
les ordres des lords de la tresorerie, qui ne lui parvinreut que le 28 juillet; les menies
documents furent aussi communiques a Lord Russell. Ce meme jour, 28 juillet, les
conseillers legaux de la couronne ayant formule leur avis de faire arreter le vaisseau,
le 29, des ordres furent donn6s dans ce sens par le gouvernement britannique. Pour
justifier le long deiai qui etait intervenu entre la presentation des documents au ministere des affaires etrangeres et le prononce de l'avis des conseillers Mgaux de la couronne, on invoqua la circonstance de la maladie de l'avocat de la Reine. On a de la
peine a s'arreter sur cette excuse, du moment qu'il se trouvait d'antres hSgistes qui
pouvaient remplacer ce fonctionnaire, et qu'il y avait p6"ril en la demeure. Sur ces
eutrefaites, le vaisseau ent tout le temps de s'echapper. Je ne m'etendrai pas sur les
details des precautions prises par le commandant del'Alabama pour eiuderla vigilance
assez peu severe des officiers des douanes, ni sur les calculs des distances, plus ou
.moins longues, qu'on aurait a franchir pour arriver a temps de faire faire arreter le navireOPINIONS   OF   COUNT   SCLOPIS.
II
at Beaumaris, Moelfra Bay, and Point Lynas. These difficulties in the
way of prompt action at the last moment do not, it must be admitted,
atone for the want of an active supervision which had been promised,
but which, unfortunately, was not exercised.
Allow me here to reproduce a passage from the pleadings of Great
Britain, in which it is said, with reference to the complaints of the United
States on the subject of the escape of the Alabama, " It is asking that
a government, with its various departments, with its modes of action
which are, of necessity, methodical and more or less complex, shall act
at all times with a mechanical precision which is not applicable to the
practical business of life." It seems to me, in the first place, that the
circumstances. in which the British government was placed at this
moment were not exactly the ordinary course of life. Too many interests
were at stake, too many contending fears and hopes were brought into
play at the commencement of the formidable contest between the North
and the South of the American Union, to allow of the matters which
related to these great agitations following the ordinary course of life.
The measures to be taken for the preservation of English neutrality
were, moreover, neither very complicated nor over-arduous. It would
have sufficed that the customs officers should have been more attentive,
more alert, and, perhaps, less prejudiced in favor of a cause which had
become popular at Liverpool, and other British ship-building centers.*
There is ground for some surprise at finding the collector of customs
constituting himself a judge of legal evidence, when what was required
was a prompt recourse to more direct means of guaranteeing the duties
of neutrality. In the Counter Case presented by the government of Her
Britannic Majesty, (page 81,) I read that it is true that, in cases of this
nature, neutral governments ordinarily expect to receive information
from the ministers or consuls of belligerent powers resident within their
territories. I stop at the word ordinarily, and I infer from it that the
British government itself recognizes, and with great reason, that there
touchant a Beaumaris, a Moelfra Bay et k Point Lynas. Ces difficultes d'agir prompte
ment a la derniere heure ne couvrent pas, il faut l'avouer, le manque d'une surveillance
active, telle qu'elle avait ete promise, mais qui malheureusement n'a pas ete exercee.
Qu'il me soit permis de reproduire ici un passage du plaidoyer de la Grande-Bretagne,
oil il est dit a propos des plaintes des Etats-Unis, au sujet de Invasion de l'Alabama :
" C'est demander qu'un gouveruement, avec ses branches variees, ses ressorts dont
Taction est necessairement compliqu6e et plus ou moins methodique, fonctionne eu
tout temps avec une precision m6"canique qui n'est pas applicable au train ordinaire de
la vie." II me paralt d'abord que les circonstances oh se trouvait le gouvernement
britannique, en ce moment, n'etaient point precisement le train ordinaire de la vie.
Trop d'interets etaient en jeu, trop de craintes et d'esperances se contrecarraient au
commencement de la lutte formidable entre le nord et le sud de l'Union americaine,
pour que les affaires qui avaient trait a ces grandes agitations dussent suivre le train
ordinaire de la vie.
Les mesures a prendre pour sauvegarder la neutralite anglaise n'etaient d'ailleurs ni
trop compliqnees ni trop ardues. 11 aurait suffi que les officiers des douanes eussent
ete plus attentifs, plus alertes, et peut-etre moins prevenus en faveur d'une cause qui,
a Liverpool et dans d'autres chantiers anglais, etait devenue populaire.f II y a lieu
d'etre quelque peu surpris, en entendant le collecteur des douanes s'eriger en appreciates de preuves legales, tandis qu'il aurait fallu recourir promptement a des moyens
plus directs de garantir les devoirs de la neutralite. Dansle " Counter-case " presente
par le gouvernement desa Majeste britannique, (page 81,) je lis qu'il est vrai que, dans
des cas de cette nature, les gouvernements neutres s'attendent d'ordinaireh recevoir des
renseignements des ministres ou des consuls qui representent sur leurs territoires les
puissances belligerantes. Je m'arrete sur le mot d'ordinaire (ordinarily) et j'en deduis
que le gouvernement britannique reconnalt lui-meme, avec grande raison, qu'il peut y
* See Speeches and Dispatches of Earl Russell, vol. ii, pages 259, 260.
t Voir | Speeches aud dispatches of Earl Russell," vol. ii, pp. 259 a 260.
#78
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
may be extraordinary cases in which a neutral should take action to
enforce respect for its neutrality, without awaiting information from a
belligerent.
That the case of the ISTo. 290 was not an ordinary case seems to me
evident, since the construction of the vessel had given rise to so much
anxiety.
When the departure of this vessel was ascertained, Lord Bussell, foreseeing that probably it might not be possible to arrest her in the waters
ou the coast of England, where search was being made for her, stated
that he would further give orders to arrest her at Nassau, where it was
probable that she might be found.
When the Alabama quitted Moelfra Bay she had a crew of eighty
men; she kept for some time along the Irish Sea, then rounded the north
coast of that island, and steered for Terceira, one of the Azores, where
she arrived on the 10th August.
The Alabama was joined in the waters of Terceira by two vessels, the
Agrippina and the Bahama, which had also started from English ports,
and which brougbt her a considerable supply of cannon, munitions, and
stores.
The combined action of vessels carrying and receiving munitions and
provisions constitutes a complex act entailing a joint responsibility.
Those who may raise any doubts on this question may be answered in
the words of Sir Bobert Peel, pronounced in the House of Commons on
the 28th April, 1830: " Was it then to be contended that no expedition
was a military expedition except the troops had their arms on board the
same vessels with them ? If they were on board one vessel and their
arms in another, did that make any difference % Was such a pretense
to be tolerated by common sense ?"
e vessel, completely armed, abandoned her arithmetical designation
for the name of the Alabama and hoisted the flag of the confederate government, which however, on occasions, she replaced by the
British flag in order the better to deceive vessels which she wished to
attack.   She thus commenced and pursued her adventurous and devas-
Tb
"290
avoir des cas extraordinaires ou un neutre doit agir sans attendre desrenseignements
d'un belligerant pour faire respecter sa neutralite.
Que le cas du N° 290 ne fut point un cas ordinaire, cela me paralt demontre, puisqne
sa construction avait donne l'eveil a tant de sollicitudes.
Quand le depart de ce vaisseau fut constate, Lord Russell, prevoyant que probable-
men t il ne pourrait plus etre arrete dans les eaux oh on allait le chercher aux cOtes de
l'Angleterre, dit qu'au surplus il dohnerait des ordres pour l'arreter a Nassau, oil il
etait probable qu'on le trouverait.
Quand 1'Alabama quitta la baie de Moelfra, il avait un equipage de quatre-vingt
hommes, il suivit pendant quelque temps la mer d'Irlande, puis tourna la cOtenord de
cette lie et se dirigea sur Terceira, l'une des Acores, oh elle arriva le 10 aout.
L'Alabama fut rejoint dans les eaux de Terceira par deux vaisseaux: 1'Agrippina et
le Bahama, sortis egalement des ports d'Angleterre, qui lui apporterent un renfort considerable de cauons, de munitions etd'approvisionnement.
L'action combinee de vaisseaux portant et recevant des munitions et des apprq-
visionnements constitue un fait complexe emportant une responsabilite solidaire. A
ceux qui souieveraient des doutes a cet egard, on pourrait repondre avec les paroles de
Sir Robert Peel, prononcees dans la seance de la Chambre des communes le 28 avril
1830: "Etait-ce a dire qu'aucune expedition n'etait une expedition militaire a moins
que les troupes n'eussent leurs armes avec elles sur le meme vaisseau? Si les troupes
etaient sur un vaisseau et les armes sur un autre, cela faisait-il une difference? Une
telle pretention etait-elle supportable par le sens cornmun ?"
Le vaisseau arme compietement en guerre quitta son indicateur arithmetiqne "290"
pour prendre le nom_d'Alabama, hissa le pavilion du gouvernement des confederes, qu'a
l'occasion cependant il remplacait par le pavDlon britannique, pour mieux tromper les
vasseaux qu'il voulait attaquer. II entreprit et poursuivit ainsi ses courses aventureu-
ses et devastatrices.   Elles parurent decrites avec des details minutieux et techniquesOPINIONS   OF   COUNT   SCLOPIS.
79
taring cruises. They appeared, described with minute and technical
details, in the journal kept on board by Mr. Fullam, and even under
the form of romance in a work intended to satisfy public curiosiiy, at
that time much excited on the subject. Among the vessels destroyed
by the Alabama was the Federal war-steamer Hatteras.
On arriving at Jamaica, the Alabama found in the port three English
vessels of war. Instead of being arrested in English waters by the
English ships, the crew met with the best reception; she was supplied
with the means of repairing her damages, and seven days afterward the
Alabama steered for the coast of Brazil, and thence to the Cape of Good
Hope.
The conduct of the English authorities, under these circumstances,
was approved by Lord Bussell, who confined himself to expressing a
hope that the vessel would be required to leave as soon as the necessary
repairs were finished.*
On her arrival at Saldana Bay, in the colony of the Cape of Good
Hope, and consequently in the territorial waters of the British empire,
the commander of the Alabama informed the governor that he had put
into this bay with the object of effecting some indispensable repairs.
The United States consul protested, without loss of time, demanding
that the vessel should be seized and sent to England, whence she had
clandestinely escaped, adding that- the repairs making to the vessel,
namely, that of repainting her, could not be considered as of an urgent
nature. The same consul added tbat he had, with his own eyes, seen
the Alabama take a prizein those same waters. The government replied
that this had taken place at a distance from the shore to which British
jurisdiction did not extend.
After her arrival at the Cape, the commander of the Alabama informed the government that he had left outside of British waters one
of his previous prizes, the Tuscaloosa, and that she would shortly ar-
daus le journal tenu a bord par M. Fullam, et,m6me sous des formes romanesques dans
. un ouvrage destine a defrayer la curiosite publique, alors surexcitee. Parmi les destructions de vaisseaux operees par 1'Alabama, il y eut celle du steamer de guerre federal, le Hatteras.
Arrive a la Jamaique, l'Alabama y rencontra daus le port trois vaisseaux de guerre
auglais. Au lieu d'etre arrfite dans ces eaux anglaises par des navires anglais, i'equi-
page y reeut le meilleur accueil: on lui donna les moyens de reparer ses avaries, et sept
jours apres l'Alabama se dirigea sur la cofee du Bresil et de la vers le Cap de Bonhe-
Esperance.
La conduite des autorites anglaises, dans ces circonstances, fut approuvee par Lord
Russell, qui se borna a esperer que ce vaisseau aurait ete requis de partir aussitdt apres
que les reparations indispensables auraient ete terminees.t
Arrive a la baie de Saldanha, dans la colonie du Cap de Bonne-Esperance, et partanfc
dans les eaux territoriales de la souverainete anglaise, le commandant de l'Alabama
informa le gouvernement qu'il 6tait venu a cette baie dans le but de faire quelques
reparations indispensables.
Le consul des Etats-Unis ne tarda pas a protester, en demandant que le vaisseau fut
saisi et envoye en Angleterre, d'ou il s'etait echappe clandestinement, en ajoutant qu'on
ne pouvaitpasconsiderer comme une reparation urgente du navire celle que l'on faisait—
c'est-a-dire, de le repeindre. Le meme consul ajoutait qu'il avait vu de ses propres
, yeux l'Alabama executer des prises dans ces mSmes eaux. II lui fut repondu par le
gouvernement que cela s'etait passe a une distance de la c6te a laquelle la juridiction
anglaise ne pouvait pas s'etendre.
Apres son arrivee a la ville du Cap, le commandant de l'Alabama informa le
gouvernement qu'il avait laisse hors des eaux anglaises une de ses captures prec6dentes,
le Tuscaloosa, et qu'elle arriver-ait bientdt en qualite de tender:   Ce navire arriva, en
* Letter from Mr. Hammond to Sir F. Rogers, February 14,1863.
t Lettre de M. Hammond a Sir F. Rogers, 14 fevrier 1863.80
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
rive in tbe capacity of tender. This vessel in fact arrived, and her
cargo of wool was made over to a merchant of Cape Town to be taken
to Europe and sold there. The cargo was disembarked at a point
named Angra Pequeiia, outside of British jurisdiction.
When the Tuscaloosa appeared in the port, the Britsh rear-admiral,
Sir Baldwin Walker, wrote to the governor to know if this vessel ought
still to be considered as a prize, although she had never been condemned
as such by a competent tribunal. He persisted in his opinion, which
was in direct variance with the tolerance of the governor; the latter
referred to the attorney-general, and he subsequently replied on the
advice of this last officer, but in terms which betrayed a faltering conviction that the vessel might be considered as a vessel of war.
A correspondence ensued between the governor of the Cape and the
colonial minister, the Duke of Newcastle, as to the legality of the captures. That minister disapproved the conduct of the governor and the
application of the principles of law on which the attorney-general had
based his opinion.
While this was taking place the Tuscaloosa had returned to the port,
and having thus placed herself within the limits of British jurisdiction she was seized. The British government, when informed of this
act, disavowed it, and ordered that the vessel should be restored to the
confederate lieutenant who commanded her; in case that officer had
left the Cape, directions were given to wait till the vessel could be
handed over to some person whom the commander of the Alabama or
the government of the Confederate States might nominate for the purpose. The English minister, reversing in some degree his former decision, based the instructions as to the restitution of the vessel on the
peculiar circumstances of the case.*
Her Britannic Majesty's minister declares,in the same dispatch, "that
it becomes unnecessary to discuss whether, on her return to the Gape, the
effet, c6da sa cargaison de laine h, un marchand de Cape Town pour la transporter en
Europe, afin d'y etre vendue. La cargaison fut debarquee sur uu point appeie Angra
Pequerla, en dehors de la juridiction britannique.
Lorsque le Tuscaloosa parut dans .cet endroit, le contre-amiral anglais, Sir Baldwin
Walker, ecrivit an gouverneur pour savoir si ce vaisseau devait etre encore consider
comme une prise, bien qu'il n'eut jamais 6te condamne comme telle par un tribunal
competent. II insista dans son opinion tout a fait opposee a la tolerance du gouverneur;
celui-ci en refera a l'attorney-general, et, repondit ensuite, d'apres l'avis de ce dernier,
mais dans des termes qui trahissaieut une conviction chancelaute, que ce navire
pouvait se considerer comme vaisseau de guerre.
Une correspondance s'ensuivit entre le gouverneur du Cap et le ministre des colonies,
due de Newcastle, sur la legalite des captures. Ce ministre desapprouva la conduite
du gouverneur et 1'applicafion des principes de droit sur lesquels l'attorney-general
s'etait fonde.
Pendant que cela se passait, le Tuscaloosa etait rentre daus le port; et s'etant ainsi
.place dans les limites de la juridiction anglaise, il fut saisi. Le gouvernement
britannique, informe de cet acte, le desavoua, et fit rendre ce vaisseau au lieutenant
confederl, qui le commandait; dans le cas oh cet officier eut quitte le Cap, il ajouta
qu'il fallait attendre pour remettre le vaisseau a la personne que le commandant de
l'Alabama, ou le gouvernement des etats-confederes, aurait designee a cet effet: le
ministre anglais, revenant en quelque sorte sur ses premieres decisions, basalt des
instructions relatives a la restitution du navire sur les circonstances exception'nelles de
l'affaire.
Le ministre de sa Majeste britannique declare dans la mSnae dep&che qu'il n'est plus
utilede discuter sid son retour au Cap le Tuscaloosa conservait toujours le caraetere d'une prise
* Dispatch of the Duke of Newcastle to Sir P. Wodehouse, March 10,1864: " I have
now to explain that this decision was not founded on any general principle respecting
the treatment of prizes captured by the cruisers of either belligerent, but on the peculiar circumstances of the case."OPINIONS  OF  COUNT  SCLOPIS.
81
Tuscaloosa still retained the character of a prize, or whether she had lost
that character and had assumed that of an armed tender to the Alabama,
and whether that new character, if properly established and admitted, would
have entitled her to the same privilege of admission which might be accorded
to her captor, the Alabama."
In my capacity as arbitrator, I cannot avoid a discussion, even though
it should be without use to one of the parties, and I must admit that it
seems to me that the observations originally made with equal candor
and good sense by Bear-Admiral Walker, of the British navy, should
guide the opinion of the tribunal in the decision of the point which the
British government regarded as difficult aud doubtful.
To resume, I am of opinion that the neutrality of Great Britain was
gravely compromised by the vessel named the Alabama. Consequently
Great Britain is responsible for the acts of the said vessel, as well as
for those of her tender the Tuscaloosa.
V.—THE  SHENANDOAH alias SEA KING.
First part.
The first charge which the United States bring against the British
government with regard to this vessel, which was built on
the shores of tbe Clyde, is that she was sold to Bichard
Wright, of Liverpool, a British subject, aud father-in-laW of Mr. Prioleau
of South Carolina; this latter being the head partner of the firm of
Fraser, Trenholm & Co., notorious for its intimate relations with the
confederate government.
The United States maintain that in view of the above relations, which
could not be unknown to the English government, this latter ought to
have watched the transfers of the class of vessels, which from their build
betrayed designs hostile to the United States. Mr. Adams, on the
ground of two depositions of sailors on board this vessel, denounced her
to Lord Bussell as destined for the confederate government.
on s'il avait perdu ce caracthre pour prendre celui d'un bdtiment de servitude arme' pour
l'Alabama, et si cenouveau caractere, dument constate'et admis, lui aurait donne'droit aux
mSmes privileges d''admission qu'on aurait aocordes a son vainqueur, l'Alabama.
Dans ma qualite d'arbitre je ne puis pas ecarter une discussion, quaud meme elle ne
serait point utile a l'une des parties, et je dois avouer que les observations faites d'abord
avec autant de loyaute que de bon sens par le contre-amiral Walker, de la marine
britannique, me paraissent devoir diriger l'opiuion des juges dans la decision de ce
point,-que le gouvernement britannique envisageait comme difficile et douteux.
Eu me resumant, je suis d'avis que le vaissealu nomme l'Alabama a gravement
compromis la neutralite britannique. Consequemment, la responsabilite de la Grande-
Bretagne se trouve engagee tant pour les faits du dit vaisseau que par ceux de son
tender, le Tuscaloosa.
11
LE SHENANDOAH, ALIAS SEA KING.
Premise partie.
Le premier reproche que, les fitats-Uuis adressent au gouvernement anglais a propos
de ce vaisseau construit sur les bords de la Clyde, c'est qu'il a ete vendu a Richard
Wright, de Liverpool, sujet anglais, et beau-pere de M. Prioleau, de la Caroline du Sud;
ce dernier associl principal de la maison Fraser, Trenholm et Cie, connue par ses relations in times avec le gouvernement des confederes.
Les fitats-Unis soutiennent que, vu les relations susdites, qui ne po'uvaient etre igno-
rees par le gouvernement anglais, ce dernier aurait du surveiller les transferts de cette
categorie de vaisseaux, qui, par leur construction accusaient des projets hostiles aux
Etats-Unis. M. Adams, appuye de deux depositions de matelots a bord de ce navire,
denoncait a Lord Russell la destination de ce vaisseau au gouvernement des confederes.
6b
M'l
I82
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
The Sea King took out a clearance for Bombay, and coal and supplies
for a. cruise of twelve months. Hardly had she weighed anchor, when
a telegram sent to Liverpool announced her departure to the confederate
agent at that port. The same evening a screw-steamer, nearly new,
admirably adapted for equipment as a privateer, named the Laurel,
manned bv men thoroughlv devoted to the confederate cause, who had
served on board the Sumter, Alabama, and Geor^
laden with
arms and steered for the bay of Funchal, in the island of Madeira,
where she awaited the Sea King, which arrived two days after her.
In a desert corner of .the bay of Madeira, the arms and ammunition
were transshipped from the Laurel to the Sea King. A man named
Corbett, an Englishman, who had received from Wright a power of attorney to sell the vessel, addressed the crew, announced the sale of the
vessel, which was about to cha,nge her name and take that of Shenandoah, and endeavored to persuade the men of the crew to follow the
vessel in her new career in the confederate service. Of eighty sailors,
twenty-three only consented to remain in the new vessel of war.
The conduct of Corbett appeared to be in such evident contravention
of the foreign-enlistment act, that the British consul at Funchal sent
him home in custody to England. Captain Waddell succeeded him in
command.
Mr. Adams did not fail to inform Lord Bussell of all that bad taken
place with regard to these two vessels; he added that of the officers
transfeired to the Shenandoah, the greater part were British subjects
who had been saved by English intervention at the moment when they
were going on board the Alabama.
The Shenandoah went from Madeira to Melbourne; on the passage,
which lasted ninety days, she destroyed several vessels of the merchant
navy of the United States with their cargoes, and finished by anchoring on the 25th January, 1865, at Sandridge, a small village two miles
from Melbourne.
If we are to believe a letter addressed by Mr. Blanchard, United
Le Shenandoah prit ses papiers de bord pour Bombay, et du charbon et des approvi-
sionnements pour une croisiere de douze mois. A peine le Sea King avait-il leve l'ancre
qu'un teiegramme expedie a Liverpool annoncait son depart a l'agent confedere de ce
port. Daus la m6me soiree un steamer a heiice, presque neuf, admirablemeut approprie
a un armement de course, nomme le Laurel, monte par des hommes tres-devoues au
parti confedere, qui avaient servi a bord du Sumter, de l'Alabama et du Georgia, chargea
des armes et se dirigea vers la baie de Funchal, dans .Pile de Madere, oh il attendit le
Sea King, qui arriva deux jours apres lui.
Dans un coin desert de la baie de Madere il se fit un transbordement d'armes et de
munitions du Laurel sur le Sea King. Un nomme Corbett, un Anglais qui avait recu
de Wright une procuration pour vendre le navire, se presenta a 1'equipage, annonca
la vente faite du vaisseau, qui allain changer de nom et prendre celui de Shenandoah, et
engagea les hommes de 1'equipage & suivre ce vaisseau dans ses nonvelles destinees au
service des confederes. Sur quatre-vingt matelots, vingt-trois seulement consentirent
a. rester sur ce nouveau vaisseau de guerre.
La conduite de Corbett parut si evidemment contraire au foreign-enlistment act que le
consul anglais a Funchal l'envoya prisonnier en Angleterre. Le capitaine Waddell
lui succeda dans le commandement.
M. Adams ne manqua pas d'informer.Lord Russell de tout ce qui s'etait passe a propos
do ces deux vaisseaux; il iui ajouta que parmi les officiers transfers sur le Shenandoah, la plupart etaient des sujets anglais, qui avaient ete sauves par une intervention
anglaise au moment ou ils se rendaient a bord de l'Alabama.
Le Shenandoah.se porta de Madere sur Melbourne; dans le trajet, qui dura quatre-
viugt-dix jours, il detruisit plusieurs vaisseaux de la marine marchande des Etats-Unis,
ainsi que leurs cargaioons, et finit par jeter l'ancre, le 25 Janvier 1865, a Sandridge, un
aetit village a. deux milles de Melbourne.
Si Ton en croit une lettre adressee par M. Blanchard, consul des fitats-Unis a. Mel-OPINIONS   OF  COUNT  SCLOPIS
83
States consul at Melbourne, to Mr. Seward, Secretary of State at Washington, the mail from Europe, which had arrived some days before, had
brought news that the Sea King had left England with the intention of
being transformed into a vessel of war to cruise against the commerce
of the United States.
The United States consul at Melbourne informed the governor, without loss of time, of all the circumstances which he considered as proofs
that the Shenandoah was not a vessel of war of a recognized belligerent,
but rather a privateer bearing all the marks of its guilt.
The British authorities at Melbourne are accused of having been excessively complaisant toward the commander and crew of the Shenandoah ; it is asserted that the governor had unofficially re-assured her
commander before officially granting him what he requested.
Captain Waddell did not hurry himself to state what were the repairs
and supplies which he needed, and the governor, instead of adhering
rigorously to the general instructions with which the British government had furnished him, referred it rather to Waddell to determine the
length of time to be granted him. While the repairs were slowly going
ou, Waddell was making recruits in the town of Melbourne to fill up
the gaps which were left in his crew.
In the American Appendix (vol. v, pp. 660 el seq.) are inserted the
reports of the proceedings of the legislative assembly at Melbourne,
which show that the opinion of the majority was in favor of treating
the commander of the Shenandoah with leniency, and leaving the matter to the decision of the government and the colonial authorities.*
Pressed by the remonstrances and protests of the United States consul, the governor referred the question to the law-officers of the colonial government, who replied that there was no evidence of piracy having been committed by any one on board the vessel, and that she should
be treated as a ship of war.
bourne, k M. Seward, Secretaire d'etat & Washington, la malle d'Europe, arrivee quel.
ques jours auparavant, avait apporte la nouvelle quele Sea King avait quitte l'Angleterre avec l'inteution de se transformer en vaisseau de guerre pour croiser contre le
commerce des Etats-Unis.
Le consul des Etats-Unis dans cette ville ne tarda pas h informer le gouverneur de
toutes les circonstances par lesqueljes il croyait prouve que le Shenandoah n'etait poiut
du tout un vaisseau de guerre d'un belligerant reconnu, mais bien plutdt un corsaire,
ayant toutes les marques de sa culpability.
On accuse les autorites anglaises de Melbourne d'avoir ete excessivemont condescen-
dantes en vers le commandant et 1'equipage du Shenandoah; on pretend que ce gouverneur avait rassure officieusement le commandant avant de lui accorder officiellement
ce qu'il demandait.
Le capitaine Waddell ne se pressa point pour faire connaltre quelles etaient les
reparations et les approvisionnements qu'il lui fallait, et le gouverneur, au lieu de s'en
tenir a la rigeur des instructions- geuerales que le gouvernement anglais lui avait
trausmises, s'en rapporta plutdt a Waddell sur l'espace de temps a lui accorder.
Pendant qu'on procedait lentement aux reparations, Waddell faisait des recrues dans
la ville de Melbourne, pour remplir les vides que laissait son equipage.
Dans l'appendice americain (vol. v, pages 660 et suivantes) on a insere des rapports des
actes de l'asseinbiee legislative de Melbourne, qui marquent que l'opinion de la majorite
inclinait a .manager le commandant du Shenandoah et a s'en remettre a l'avis du gouvernement et des autorites coloniales.t
Presse par les instances et les protestations du consul des Etats-Unis, le gouverneur
defera la question aux conseillers legaux du gouvernement colonial, qui repondirent
qu'il n'y avait aucune preuve de piraterie commise par qui que ce fut au bord du navire,
et que l'on devaittraiter celui-ci comme un batiment de guerre.
* See the speech of Mr. O'Shanassy, p. 663 of the volume referred to.
t Voir le discours de M. O'Shanassy, p. 663 du volume cite.
I'll84
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
The suspicions which had been entertained of the clandestine shipment of some persons on board the Shenandoah continued to increase.
Tbe permission granted to the captain to take in supplies and make repairs was suspended, and the government published a proclamation forbidding British subjects to give aid or assistance to the Shenandoah.
The assertion of the fact of the clandestine shipment of certain men
on board the Shenandoah was borne out, and the commander and officers of that vessel had to give 'explanations as to the assurance they
had given that no shipment of this kind had taken place, and as to the
fact that they had unfortunately not fulfilled this engagement made on
their word of honor.
The American case and the British counter case contain details as to
the facilities which the topographical situation of Hobson's Bay and
Port Philip afforded for the escape of men watched by the'police, whose
insufficient means did not allow of their exercising supervision at every
point, in order to prevent the departure of the persons enlisted. It
may also be doubted whether the legal advisers of the colonial governor and his police officers were over-anxious to second the energetic
efforts of the United States consul.
I will note two circumstances which appear to me to deserve special
attention:
1. The confidential instructions, by which the authorities at Melbourne had, from the first, said that they must be guided, are published
at page 125 of the fifth volume of the Appendix to the British Case,
and the last document contained in them traces exactly the line of
conduct which was finally followed by the government toward Captain
Waddell.
2. The postscript of a letter from Mr. Adamson to Mr. Davis, which
is to be found at page 637 of the documents annexed to the American
counter case, (French translation,) reveals a moral pressure producing
a cynical disavowal.
The Shenandoah, on leaving the port of Melbourne, took with her
400 tons of coal, if the American consul is to be believed, with full
Les soupcons que l'on avait de l'embarquement clandestin de quelques personnes a.
bord du Shenandoah ne firent qu'augmenter. La permission accordee an capitaine de
faire des approvisionnements et des reparations fut suspendue, et le gouvernement
publia une proclamation pour defendre aux sujets britanniques de prftter aide et assistance au Shenandoah.
' L'assertion du fait de l'embarquement clandestin de quelques hommes du Shenandoah fut maintenue, et le commandant et les officiers de ce vaisseau durent donner des
.explications sur la parole qu'ils avaient donnee qu'aucun embarquement de ce genre
n'avait eu lieu, et sur le fait qu'ils n'avaient malheureusement pas repondu a cet engagement de parole d'honneur.
Le "Case" americain et le "Counter-case" anglais contiennent des details sur la
faculte que la situation topographique de Hobson's Bay et Port Philip pretait a Invasion d'hommes surveilies par la ponce, dont les faibles moyens ne permettaieut point
d'exercer une surveillance sur tous les points, afin d'empecher ces sorties de geus em-
bauches. II est aussi permis de douter que les conseillers legaux du gouverneur colonial
et ses officiers de police fussent des mieux disposes a seconder l'empressement des
demarches du consul des Etats-Unis.
Je noterai deux circonstances qui me paraissent meriter une attention speciale:
1. Les instructions confidentielles d'apres lesquelles les autorites de Melbourne
avaient dit d'abord etre obligees de se regler furent publiees a la page 125 du cinquieme
.volume de l'appendice au "Case" anglais, et la derniere piece qui s'y rattache trace
exactment la ligne qui a ete suivie par le gouvernement en dernier lieu- vis-a-vis du
capitaine Waddell.
2. Le post-scriptuni d'une lettre de M. Adamson a M. Davis, qui se lit a la page 6S7 des
pieces annexees au "Counter-case" americain (traduction francaise) reveie une
pression morale produisant un cynique de&aveu.
Le Shenandoah, en quittant les eaux de Melbourne, emportait avec lui 400 tonnes de*m
OPINIONS   OF   COUNT   SCLOPIS.
85
sailing rigging, trusting more to her sailing than to her steaming pow
ers. This excess of supplies was denounced to the governor, and the
United States, reckoning up the several shipments of coal made by the
Shenandoah, infer that she was meditating a fresh cruise on her departure from Melbourne, so that that port became a base of naval operations for the insurgents.
The cruise of the Shenandoah furnishes materials for a special description, and among the reviews of the facts relating to this vessel is
one to which I will here refer—that of Mr. Montague Bernard, who
sa3Ts that so large a number of recruits as we may believe to have been
shipped by her, could not have come on board without Captain Wad-
dell's knowledge. I shall return to this question of the number of recruits, which is evidently exaggerated.
One cannot resist the belief that the tolerance of the authorities at
Melbourne contributed greatly to enable the vessel to pursue her adventurous career in the Arctic seas, whither she repaired by Behring's
Straits.
The number of whaling-vessels which the Shenandoah destroyed in
these waters, at a time when the confederate government had ceased
to exist, raises the amount which the United States lay to her charge,
to a sum little less than that for which the Alabama is held responsible.
It is not proved that the Shenandoah absolutely lost her original
character of a British vessel manned by a British crew. It is affirmed
that this vessel shipped at Melbourne 300 tons of coals, which had
been sent to her from Liverpool. The Government of the United
States adds that the name of the vessel which brought this coal was
the John Fraser, and this occurrence it seeks to adduce as an incriminating circumstance.
The British government, in its counter case, (page 110 of the French
translation,) says that, at the present day, when the distance of time
and place prevents an exact knowledge of all the particular circumstances, it would serve no useful purpose to follow all the details of a
technical discussion founded largely on conjecture.
charbon, si l'on en croit le consul americain, une mature complete, s'en tenant plus h
la voile qu'a la vapeur. Ce luxe d'approvisionnement fut denonce" au gouverneur, et
les Etats-Unis, en supputant les divers chargements de charbon faits par le Shenandoah,
en deduiseut qu'il projettait une nouvelle croisiere en sortant de Melbourne, de sorte
que ce port devenait pour les insurges une base d'operations navales.
La croisiere du Shenandoah fournit la matiere a une description toute particuliere,
et parmi les appreciations des faits qui concoruent ce vaisseau il y en a une que je
rapporte ici, celle de M. Mountague Bernard, qui dit qu'un nombre aussi grand de
recrues qu'on peut croire, qui ait ete embarque h son bord, n'aurait pu s'y rendre sans
que le capitaine Waddell en eut connaissance. Je vais revenir sur ce nombre de
recrues evidemmeut exagere.
On ne peut se refuser a croire que la tolerance des autorites de Melbourne a beaucoup
aide a mettre ce vaisseau en etat de poursuivre sa carriere aventureuse dans les rners-
Arctiqiies, oil il se reudit par le detroit de Behring.
Les" destructions des baleiniers que le Shenandoah opera dans ces eaux, dans un
temps ou le gouvernement des confederes avait cesse d'exister, ferait monter la compta-
"bilite, dont les Etats-Unis le chargent, a un chiffre de peu inferieur a celui dont on
charge la responsabilite de l'Alabama.
II n'est pas prouve que le Shenandoah ait effectivement perdu son caractere primitif
de vaisseau et d'equipage britannique. II est affirme que ce vaisseau embarqua a
Melbourne 300 tonnes de charbon, qui lui avaient ete expediees de Liverpool. Le
Gouvernement des fitats-Unis ajoute que le nom du vaisseau qui apporta ce charbon'
etait le John Fraser, et il pretend en decluire un argument de culpabilite.
Le gouvernement britannique, dans son contre-memoire, (p. 110 de 1'edition francaise,)
dit qu'a cette heure, ou le temps et la distance empechent de reconnaltre avec exactitude tous les details accessoires, il n'y aurait aucune utilite" reelle a suivre tous les
details d'une augmentation technique forgee largement sur des conjectures.
i86
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
The American Government does not relinquish its complaints. I consider that, in order to form a judgment on the last period of the cruise
of the Shenandoah, it is of the greatest importance to dwell on the
sworn depositions of the two masters of whaling-vessels, Ebenezer Bye
and Thomas Hathaway, which are given at the end of the second part
of the selections from the Appendix to the Case of the United States,
(French translation.)
To replace the force of a vessel in a proportion equal to that which it
had lost, is not, strictly speaking, an augmentation of force. We find
this maxim laid down in a judgment of the Supreme Court of the United
States, quoted in the interesting memorandum of Mr. Abbott, (Lord
Tenterden.) It is necessary, therefore, to prove an extraordinary augmentation of force in order to establish a solid presumption of fresh
attempts against the duties of neutrality. It is on these much-disputed facts, which are, in ray belief, capable of further elucidation, that
I beg my honorable colleagues to assist me with their information. If
necessary I will apply to the parties themselves for further explanations.
Second part.
In the session of the day before yesterday, being placed in the delicate position of having to determine, by my casting vote, the decision
in the important and complicated case of the Shenandoah, I applied to
my honorable colleagues for elucidations calculated to determine my
opinions, disturbed by doubts. I may be excused this hesitation, caused
by certain apparent contradictions in the facts of the case, and by the
desire not to allow myself to be led away by a combination of at
ances, which, though supported by plausible reasoning, might, i
theless, be deceitful.
I now beg you, gentlemen, to allow me to state to you my.opinion,
hesitating the day before yesterday, confirmed to-day by the results of
the discussion which I have elicited, and which you have succeeded in
rendering fruitful and decisive by your information.
ppear-
never-
Le gouvernement americain ne se desiste pas de ses plaintes. Je crois" qu'il est
d'une extreme importance, pour former un jugement sur la derniere periode de la
croisiere du Shenandoah, de s'arreter sur les depositions assermentees des deux patrons
des navires baleiniers, Ebenezer Nye et Thomas Hathaway, que l'on trouve vers la fin
de la deuxieme partie du choix des pieces justificatives a. l'appui du memoire des Etats-
Unis.
Le remplacenient de la force d'un vaisseau dans une proportion egale h, celle qu'il
avaif perdue n'est pas, a parler rigonreusement, une augmentation de force. Nous
trouvons cette maxime consignee dans un jugement de la Cour supreme des Etats-Unis,
cite dans l'interessant memorandum de M. Abbott, (Lord Tenterden.) U faut done
etablir une augmentation de force en sus de l'ordinaire, pour qu'il y ait presomption
fondee de nouvelles entreprises coutre les devoirs de neutralite. C'est sur les faits
tres-controverses, et, a ce que je crois, susceptibles d'une plus grande elucidation, que je
prie mes honorables coliegnes de m'aider de leurs lumieres. S'il est necessaire, je de-
manderai encore aux parties elles-memes des edaircissements.
Deuxihne partie.
Dans la seance d'avant-hier, place dans la circonstance tres-deiicate de determiner
par moil vote la majorite pour la decision du cas aussi grave que complique" du Shenandoah, je demandais a mes honorables coliegues des edaircissements propres a fixer mes
idees agitees par le doute. On me pardonnera ces agitations produites par certaines
contradictions apparentes des faits de la cause, et par le desir de ne pas me laisser
entralner par l'ensemble d'apparences qui, bien que rattachees a des motifs plausibles,
pouvaient neanmoins etre trompeuses.
Je vous demande maintenapt, messieurs, la permission de vous exposer mon opinion,
chancelante avant-hier, arretee aujourd'hui par suite de la discussion que j'ai soulevee,
et que vous avez su rendre feconde et decisive par vos lumieres.OPINIONS   OF   COUNT  SCLOPIS.
87
I ought, in the first place, to repeat what I have already said, that,
in my opinion, it is not absolutely proved that the fact of the repairs ot
the Shenandoah at Melbourne constitutes by itself grounds for a charge
of violation of neutrality. It is proved that these repairs were necessary, and it is not shown that the replacement of the force of this vessel,
by means of these repairs, surpassed the measure of its former condition.
It remains to be seen, then, whether the excess in the supply of coal,
and above all the clandestine recruitment of part of the crew, effected
at Melbourne, assume, or not, the character of a base of naval operations, such as is contemplated in the second rule of Article VI.
The Shenandoah, on her departure from England, in the month of
October, 1864, had a crew, according to the American reports, of forty-
seven men.*
At the time when she parted from the Laurel, the Shenandoah had
no more than twenty-three men on board, including officers.t
It appears that in the voyage from Madeira to Melbourne she shipped
many more men, since the governor at Melbourne says that ou her arrival at Hobson's Bay the crew of the vessel amounted to ninety men.f
It appears, also, that a considerable number dispersed themselves after
that arrival, as Captain Waddell declares, since an officer in the confidence of the governor, instructed to make confidential inquiries as to
the state of the vessel, estimates the number of the crew at no more
than forty or fifty, all rough and undisciplined men.§
It is very difficult to ascertain exactly the number of men who were
on board the Shenandoah when she left Melbourne on her way to the
Arctic seas.
According to a report of the Melbourne police,§ the number of men
shipped at Melbourne on board the Shenandoah was said to amount to
sixty or seventy.   According to the affidavit of William A. Temple, the
Je dois d'abord repeter ce que j'ai deja*dit, qu'a. mon avis il n'est pas absolument
prouve que le fait des reparations du Shenandoah a Melbourne constitue, a lui seul, un
argument de violation de neutralite II est prouve que ces reparations etaient neces-
saires, et il n'est pas demontre que le remplaeement de la force de ce vaisseau, par suite
de ces reparations, ait depasse la mesure de son etat precedent.
II faut done voir si l'exuberance de l'approvisionnement de charbon, et surtout le
reerutemerit clandestin d'une partie de 1'equipage oper6 a Melbourne, preunent, ou
non, le earactere de base d'operations navales, telle qu'elle est prevue par la 2me regie
de l'artiele VI.
Le Shenandoah, a son depart d'Angleterre, au mois d'octobre 1864, avait un equipage,
d'apres les rapports americains, de quarante-sept hommes.
Au moment ou il quitta le Laurel, le Shenandoah n'avait plus que vingt-trois hommes
a bord, y compris les officiers.
U paralt que dans le trajet de Madere a Melbourne il embarqua bien d'autres
hommes, puisque le gouverneur de Melbourne dit qu'a son arriv6e dans le Hobson's Bay
1'equipage du vaisseau se montait a quatre-vingt dix-huit hommes. II paralt aussi que
bon nombre" s'en dispersa apres cette arriviee, ansi que le declare le capitaine Waddell,
puisqu'un officier de confiance du gouverneur, charge de prendre des informations con-
fidentielles sur l'etat de l'embarcation, ne porte le nombre de 1'equipage qu'a quarante
ou cinquarte, tous gens grossiers et indisciplines.
II est tres-difficile de savoir au juste le nombre des hommes qui se trouvaient a bord
du Shenandoah quand il partit de Melbourne pour se reudre dans les mers Arctiques.
D'apres un rapport de la police de Melbourne, le nombre d'hommesembarques a Melbourne a bord du Shenandoah s'eifeverait a soixante ousoixante-dix.   t)'apTbsYaffidavit
* American Appendix, vol. v, p. 560.
t Ibid., p. 610.
i Appendix to British Case, vol. i, p. 564.
§ Ibid., p. 557.
I88 ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA. •
crew of the Shenandoah on her return to Liverpool amounted to one
hundred and thirty-three, a number which includes some men who had
died at sea.
In the deposition of Captain Ebenezer Nye, it is said that, when he
came on board the Shenandoah, the want of sailors was much felt, as
there were only forty-five, half the number required. It is said, also,
that Mr. Nye, in conversation with Mr. Hunt, lieutenant of the Shenandoah, learned from him that forty-two men were enlisted at Melbourne;
that Captain Waddell, had refused the governor the right to search the
ship while a number of recruits were on board. From the affidavit of
Temple may be gathered certain details as to the men who came on
board the Shenandoah from several vessels captured in the Arctic seas.
They seem to have been twenty-six in number, which, added to fifty,
the presumed crew of the Shenandoah on leaving Melbourne, and further-
adding the officers, fifty-seven in number, would give a total of one hundred and thirty-three, corresponding to the number given by Temple,
with the deduction of the two men who died at sea.
This witness has, no doubt, been much discredited, but in the letter
from Mr. Hull to Mr. Bateson* will be found a formal denial, in Captain Waddell's name, of several of the assertions of Temple, without
any mention of the list of the crew, which, no doubt, deserved special
attention, and which, notwithstanding, is not disputed. Lord Clarendon himself, in his letter to Mr. Adams, of January 19,1866, while he
examines the bearing of some of the remarks in Temple's list, makes no
observation as to the correctness of the figures.
The law-officers of the Crown themselves, in their opinion of the 28th
of March, 1866, while refusing to attach credence generally to Temple's
statement, do not specially discredit the list. They seem to believe that
none of the persons on board the Shenandoah had been guilty of acts
on which legal proceedings could be founded; and they advise tiaat the
matter should be allowed to drop.
de William A. Temple, 1'equipage du Shenandoah A son retour a Liverpool aurait ete de
cent trente-trois, nombre qui comprend quelques hommes morts en mer.
Dans la deposition du capitaine Ebenezer Nye, il est dit que, lorsqu'il passa a bord
du Shenandoah, le manque de matelots se faisait vivement seutir, puisqu'il n'y en avait
que quarantre-cinq, la moitie du nombre voulu. II y est dit aussi que M- Nye, en
s'entretenant avec M. Hunt, second du Shenandoah, lui avait appris que quarante-deux
hommes furent enr6ies a Melbourne, que le capitaine Waddell avait refuse au gouverneur le droit de visite tandis qu'ww certain nombre de recrues 4taient a bord. De Yaffidavit
de Temple, il resulte certain detail des hommes qui seraient venus a bord du Shenandoah, sortant d.e plusieurs navires captures dans les mers Arctiques. Leur nombre
serait de vingt-six, qui, se joignaut aux ciuquante-trois, equipage presume du Shenandoah quittant Melbourne, et en ajoutant les officiers au nombre de cinquante-sept, dou-
nerait un total de cent trente-trois, correspondant au chiffre indiqne par Temple, sous
la deduction de deux hommes morts en mer.
La personne du temoin a subi, a la verite, de .ttes-grands reproches, mais dans la
lettre de M. Hull h M. Bateson, on trouve nie formellement, au nom du capitaine
Waddell, plusieurs des assertions de Temple, sans qu'on y parle de la liste de 1'equipage,
qui merit-ait, sans doute, une attention speciale, et qui, cependant, n'est point contestee.
Lord Clarendon, lui-meme, dans sa lettre a M. Adams du 19 Janvier 1866, tandis qu'il
examine la portee de quelques indications de la liste de Temple, ne fait aucune observation quant a l'exactitude des chiffres.
Les officiers legaux de la couronne, eux-memes, dans leur avis du 28 mars 1866, tout
en refusant d'ajouter foi generiquement aux affirmations de Temple, n'infirment point
specialement sa liste. Ils paraissent croire qu'aucune des personnes a bord du
Shenandoah ne s'est reudue coupable d'actions pouvant donner lieu a des poursuites
judiciaires, et ils conseillent de laisser tomber l'affaire.
* American Appendix, vol. iii,pp. 501, 502.OPINIONS   OF  COUNT  SCLOPIS.
89
I will summarize the principal documents relative to the violation of
neutrality.
At Melbourne, the authorities believed generally that the neutrality
had been violated by Captain Waddell. The attorney-general of the
colony, in his report of the 14 th of February, 1865,* expressed, as I
think, a very sensible opinion, in declaring that the exemption which
Waddell claimed was inadmissible.
The governor had adopted this opinion while awaiting instructions
from London.t    The legal advisers of the Crown, in their opinion of
the 21st of April of the same year, approved the conduct of the governor at Melbourne.    That high officer had, in fact, finally formed a
correct idea of the whole case, when, writing to the governors of the ,
the colonies of Australia and New Zealand, in a dispatch of the 27th
of February, 1865,J he declared that there was no doubt, from the information he had collected, that the neutrality had been flagrantly violated
by the commander of the Shenandoah.
Finally, almost on the same day on which the law-officers of the Crown
reported that the case of the Shenandoah might be allowed to drop,
the governor at Melbourne, writing to Mr. Cardwell, repeated to him
that he believed the neutrality had been flagrantly violated by Captain
Waddell; and that he had read without surprise, though with deep regret, the list furnished by Mr. Temple, which he looked upon as furnishing evidence in support of his opinion.§
Lastly, in the observations which Sir Boundell Palmer, Her Britannic Majesty's counsel, submitted to the tribunal, on the 21st of August,
I read that there is no doubt that a shipment of men was effected during the night of the 17th of February, at the moment the Shenandoah
was leaving.
In presence of so imposing a mass of declarations emanating from
the British authorities at Melbourne, in view of numerical calculations,
Je resume les documents principaux relatifs a la violation de neutralite.
A Melbourne les autorites crurent generalement que la neutralite avait ete vioiee
par le capitaine Waddell. L'attorney-general de la colonie, dans son avis du 14
fevrier 1865, avait emis un vote fort sense, h mon avis, en declarant que l'exemption
dont Waddell pretendait jouir n'etait point admissible.
Le gouverneur s'etait rallie a cette opinion en attendant les instructions de Londres.
Les conseillers Mgaux de la couronne, par leur avis du 21 avril de la meme-annee,
approuverent la couduite du gouverneur de Melbourne. Ce haut fonctionnaire s'etait
en effet h la fin forme une idee juste de l'ensemble de l'affaire lorsqu'en s'adressant
aux gouverneurs des colonies de l'Australie et de la Nouvelle-Zeiande, dans une
depSche du 27 fevrier 1865, il dedara n'y avoir point de doute, d'apres les renseigne-
ments qu'il avait recueillis, que la neutrality avait e'A notoirement vioiee par le commandant
du Shenandoah.
Enfin, presque au mSme jour oh les conseillers legaux de la couronne opinaient
pour qu'on laissat tomber l'affaire du Sheuandoah, le gouverneur de Melbourne, en
s'adressant a M. Cardwell, lui repetait qu'il croyait que la neutralite avait ete notoirement vioiee par le capitaine Waddell, et qu'il avait lu sans surprise, quoique avec
douleur, la liste fournie par M. Temple, qu'il considerait comme une preuve a l'appui de
son opinion.
Eufiii, dans les observations que Sir Rouudell Palmer, conseil de sa Majeste britannique, soumit au tribunal dans la seance .du 21 aout, ou lit: n'y avoir aucun doute
qu'il s'opera embarquement d'hommes dans la nuit du 17 fevrier au. moment oh
le Shenandoah allait partir.
Eu presence d'une masse si imposante de declarations emanees des autorites
anglaises de Melbourne, en vue de calculs numeriques qui, s'ils n'atteignent pas le
* Appendix to the British Case, vol. i, p. 549,
t Ibid., p. 550.
t British Appendix, vol. i, p. 565.
§ Ibid., p. 722.
I90
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
Florida.
which, if they do not attain the last degree of precisiou, still leave no
. doubt but that Captain Waddell did actually enlist men at Melbourne,
and afterward ship them on board the Shenandoah, for his expedition
against the whalers, I no longer hesitate to recognize the responsibility
of Great Britain toward the Government of the United States.
As to the supply of coal in so large a quantity as that which the vessel
received from Liverpool, in addition to that with which she was already
furnished, it can only be regarded as a preparation for hostile expeditions agaiust the commerce of the United States, and this falls precisely
within the scope of the second rule of Article VI of the treaty.
VI.—THE FLORIDA alias ORETO.
Availing myself of the liberty which each arbitrator has reserved to
himself of giving to the expression of his opinion on the decision of the case, such form as may appear to him most
convenient, I will abstain from following in detail here all the phases of
the career of the vessel Florida. For this, as a whole, I refer to the vo;
luminous documents which have been communicated to us, and which
have furnished matter for three separate statements by the parties. I
am not the less obliged, however, to my honorable colleagues who have
spoken before me, for the statements they have made to us of the series
of events which have led them to form a judgment, not, indeed, as yet
irrevocable, but still strongly defined as the final result of their investigations.
I will confine myself, then, formy part, to informing you of the points of
fact which havehad most influence in fixing my convictions on the subject-
matter of the questions which we have to decide, convictions which may
no doubt be modified in consequence of an interchange of opinions with
you, but which, for the moment, seem to me to be supported both by
facts and principles.
It does not seem to me to be very necessary to dilate much on the first
part of the career of the Florida, since, during that period, this vessel neither made any captures, nor assisted in any way the operations of the
dernier degre de precision, ne laissent cependant aucun doute que le capitaine Waddell a effectivement racoie a Melbourne des hommes et les a eusuite embarques au
bord du Shenandoah, pour son expedition contre les baleiniers, je n'hesite plus a.
reconnaitre que la responsabilite du gouvernement britannique est engagee envers le
Gouvernement des Etats-Unis.
Quant a l'approvisionnement de charbon dans une quantite aussi forte que celle
qu'il re$ut de Liverpool, en augmentation de celui dont il etait deja. fourni, on ne
peut que l'envisager comme un preparatif pour des expeditions hostiles au commerce
des Etats-Unis, et cela tombe precisement sous la deuxieme regie de l'artiele VI du
traite.
LE FLORIDA, ALIAS ORETO.
En me servant de la liberie que chacun des arbitres s'est resefvee de donner a l'ex-
pression de son opinion sur la decision de la cause telle forme qui lui paraltrait plus
convenable, je m'abstiendrai de suivre ici en detail toutes les phases de la carriere par-
courue par le vaisseau le Florida. Je m'en rapporte pour l'ensemble aux volumineux
documents qui nous ont ete communiques, et qui ont par trois fois fourni matiere aux
dires des parties. Je ne suis pourtant pas- moins oblige aux honorables coliegues qui
m'ont precede en prenant la parole des exposes qu'ils nous ont faits de la serie des
©"venements qui les ont conduits a asseoir un jugement, certes pas encore irrevocable,
mais d6"ja toutefois tres-fonde sur les derniers resnltats de leurs investigations.
Je me bornerai done, pour ma part, & vous faire connaltre les points en fait qui ont
eu le plus d'influence a etablir mes convictions sur le fond des questions que nous avons
a jnger, convictions qui pourront bien se modifier par la suite de l'echange de vos idees,
mais qui, pour le moment, me paraissent appuyees en fait et en droit.
II ne me semble pas tout a fait necessaire de s'eteudre beaucoup sur la premiere partie
de la carriere du Florida, puisque durant cet espace de temps ce vaisseau n'a ni fait de
-"——OPINIONS   OF   COUNT  SCLOPIS.
91
confederates. It is sufficient to state that this vessel was built in England, that from the first she was the object of representations addressed
by the United States minister in London to the British government, and
that the latter, with the exception of some inquiries which it instituted
as to the real destination of the vessel, made no great effort to prevent her
departure. It is also proved that if this ship was not actually a vessel of
war, she was, at all events, capable of becoming one at any moment,
and that she was registered as an English vessel, and manned by a crew
almost entirely composed of British subjects.
It is denied that the Florida was equipped for war at the time she
left the waters of Great Britain, but it results from a report of the officers of the Greyhound, a vessel of the royal navy of Her Britannic
Majesty, that on her arrival at Nassau, the Florida had a complete warlike equipment, and that all that was wanting on board of her were munitions of war. It further appears that the captain of the vessel, when
formally and solemnly interrogated in the presence of three of his officers, and of the officers of the Greyhound, whether the vessel was already thus fitted on leaving Liverpool, replied, "Yes, in all respects;
and no alteration or addition had been made whatever."
It is ou her arrival at Nassau that the true character of the vessel
and the consequences of her real destination stand forth.
I must refer to another clear and complete declaration of the same
captain commanding the Greyhound. This document seems to me most
conclusive as to the moral aspect of the case. Captain Hickley does
not hesitate for a moment to ask the governor of Nassau to seize the
vessel.
When an officer of this rank and experience says that, in the present
condition of the Florida, his professional opinion is that, " with her crew,
guns, arms, and ammunition, going out with another vessel alongside
of her, she could be equipped in twenty-four hours for battle," all my
doubts disappear, and I become convinced of the immediate intentions
of the vessel.
captures, ni donne aucun appui aux operations des confederes. II me suffit de constater
que ce vaisseau a ete construit en Augleterre, que des les premiers jours il a ete l'objet
des avertissements adresses par le ministre des Etats-Unis & Londres au gouvernement
britannique, sans que celui-ci, a part quelques renseignements qu'il a demandes sur la
veritable destination du navire, se soit beaucoup occupe d'en empecher la sortie. II est
egalement constate que, si ce vaisseau n'avait point l'actualite d'un batiment de guerre,
il avait du moins la capacite de devenir tel a un moment donne, et qu'il a ete enregistr6
comme un navire anglais et monte par un equipage presque entierement compose de
sujets britanniques.
On conteste l'appareil de guerre du Florida a l'epoque ou il sortit des eaux de la
Grande-Bretagne; mais il resulte d'un rapport des officiers du Greyhound, vaisseau de
la marine royale des a Majeste britannique, qu'a son arrivee a Nassau le Florida avait
un complet appareil de guerre, et que seulement il manquait des munitions de guerre a>
sou bord. II resulte de plus que le capitaine de ce navire, formellement et solennelle-
ment interroge en presence de trois de ses officiers et des officiers du Greyhound, si en
quittant Liverpool le navire etait d6ja dans cet appareil, repondit: "Yes, in all respects;
and no alteration or addition had been made whatever."
C'est a son arrivee a Nassau que le caractere.propre de ce vaisseau et les consequences
de sa veritable destination se dessinent.
II faut que je revienne sur une autre declaration claire et complete du meme capitaine, commandant le Greyhound. Ce document me semble le plus convainquant pour
la moralite de la chose. ■ Le capitaine Hickley n'hesite pas un moment a demander au
gouverneur de Nassau la saisie du navire.
Lorsqu'un officier de ce grade et de cette experience dit que, dans la condition actu-
elle du Florida, son opinion professionnelle est " qu'avec son equipage, ses canons, ses
armes et ses munitions, s'il est accompagne d'un autre vaisseau, it peut etre pr£t a livrer
bataille dans vingt-quatre heures," tons mes doutes disparaissent, et la certitude se fait
en moi des desseins immediats de ce batiment.92
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
The situation of Nassau, which became an asylum of protection for
the Florida, increases in my view the responsibility of England. Lord
Bussell did not hesitate to tell Mr. Adams, in a letter given at page 714
of the first volume of the Appendix to the Case of the United States,
that "Nassau is a position from which, on the one hand, confederate
privateers might have greatly annoyed the commerce of the United
States, and which, on the other hand, might have been a convenient
base of operations for the United States Navy."
Under these circumstances, did it not become the imperative duty of
England to take care that all the duties of the most scrupulous neutrality were fulfilled ?
It is true that the vice-admiralty court of the Bahamas, by its judgment, which is given at page 521 of the fifth volume of the Appendix
to the American Case, acquitted the Florida of every charge; but, while
respectiug the authority of the res judicata, I ask whether it is possible
to deduce from this an argument on which to found a moral conviction
that the English government is released from its responsibility under
the rules laid down in Article YI of the treaty of Washington? I abstain from repeating the considerations into which my honorable colleagues who have preceded me have entered on this subject.
It is not the question of special legal responsibility with which we
have here to deal, but rather that of the responsibility which results
from the principles of international law, and the moral conviction at
which we have arrived in consequence of the acts imputed to the Florida.
This conviction is strengthened by a consideration of the terms of the
conclusiou of the judgment of the vice-admiralty court, where it is said,
" that all the circumstances of the case taken together seem sufficient
to justify strong suspicion that an attempt was being made to infringe
that neutrality so wisely determined upon by Her Majesty's government."
The decision of the vice-admiralty court may then be considered as
conclusive, even if not perfectly correct, as between those who claimed
the vessel and the British government, which claimed its confiscation
La situation de Nassau, qui devint l'asile protecteur du Florida, augmente a. mes
yenx la responsabilite de l'Angleterre. Lord Russell n'hesitait pas a dire a M. A dams,
dans une lettre, citee a la page 714 du premier volume de l'appendice au " Case" des
Etats-Uuis, que "Nassau est une position de laquelle d'un cdte les corsaires confederes
ont pu porter un grand trouble dans le commerce des Etats-Unis, et qui d'un autre
c6te a pu fournir une base d'operation convenable pour les forces maritimes des Etats-
Unis.
Ces circonstances donnees, n'etait-il pas un devoir rigonreux pour l'Angleterre de
veiller a ce que tous les devoirs de la plus scrupuleuse neutralite fussent remplis ?
II est vrai que la cour de la vice-amiraute de Bahama par son jugement, qu'on lit
a la page 521 du cinquieme volume de l'appendice an "Case" americain, a acquitte le
Florida de toute accusation; mais tout en respectant l'antorite de la chose jugee, je
demaude si on peut induire de la un argument solide de conviction morale, qui decharge
le gouyeruement anglais de sa responsabilite d'apres les regies etahhes a l'artiele VI
du traite de Washington. Je m'abstiens de repiSter les developpements que les honorables coliegues qui m'ont precede nous ont fournis a ce sujet.
Ce n'est point de la responsabilite juridique spedale que nous avous a nous occu-
per ici; c'est bien plutot de la responsabilite qui derive des principes du droit des
gens; c'est de la conviction morale que nous avons acquise par la suite des faits imputes
au Florida.
Cette conviction s'accroit en considerant les termes de la conclusion du jugement de
la cour de vice-amiraute, oh il est dit "que l'ensemble des circonstances de la cause
est de nature k justifier de fortes presomptions qu'une tentative d'infraction h la neutralite, si sagement admise eu principe par le gouvernement de sa Majeste, etait en
voie d'execution."
La decision de la cour de vice-amiraute peut done etre consideree comme con-
cluaute, si ce n'est comme parfaitement juste, entre ceux qui redamaient le navire et
le gouvernement britannique, qui en demandait la confiscation d'apres les clauses du
HimOPINIONS   OF   COUNT  SCLOPIS.
93
under the clauses of the foreign-enlistment act; but I do not think it is
sufficient to bar the claim of the United States against Great Britain.
The United States were not parties to the suit; everything relating to
it is for them res inter alios acta.
As to the proceedings of the Florida, knowingly permitted, if not
favored by the British government, as represented by the Government
of the United States, the same British government declares, at page 78
of its Counter Case, "that it has not the means of verifying or disproving the truth of this statement. Assuming it to be true, there can be
no doubt that a violation of the sovereignty and neutral rights of Great
Britain was committed by the commander of the Florida. But the fact
of such a violation having occurred does not argue negligence on the
part of Her Majesty's government."
The conduct of the commander and crew of the Florida, after she was
released, justifies, and more than justifies, all the suspicions that had
been, entertained as to the true character of her voyage.
As to what passed between that vessel and the schooner Brince Alfred
for the purpose of arming the former, the numerous affidavits given in
the sixth volume of the American Appendix offer irrefutable evidence
of the acts imputed to the Florida.
It is thus easily understood why the Florida, while equipped for war
on her arrival at Nassau, had not, as I have mentioned, any munitions
of war on board. It was because she expected them by the Brince Alfred, at the spot agreed on beforehand for the scene of her operations.
Supplies of coal play a considerable part in the charges brought against
the Florida. The American Case says that, during a stay of thirty-six
hours in the port of Nassau, she took in a sufficient quantity for three
months' navigation. I must not, however, omit to observe that the
statement of the quantity of coal is derived only from the affidavit of
John Demeritt, a laborer who had worked at puttiug the coal on board,
and who says that the quantity might be one hundred and eighty tons,
an excessive quantity in the opinion of the United States Government.
foreign-enlistment act, mais je ne pense pas qu'elle suffise pour debouter les Etats-Unis
de leurs pretentions envers le gouvernement anglais. Les Etats-Unis n'etaient pftint
en cause ; tout ce qui tient k ce proces est pour eux res inter alios acta.
Quant aux errements du Florida, toierls sciemment,  si ce n'est favorises par le
gouvernemeut britannique, tels que les representa le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis, le
mfime gouvernement britannique declara, a la page 78 de son "Counter-case," "qu'il
n'a pas les moyens, soit de verifier, soit de contester la verite de ce que l'on avance.
Tout en admettant que cela soit vrai, il ne peut," dit-il," y avoir de doutes qu'une violation de la souveraiuete et des droits de neutralite de la Grande-Bretagne a ete commise.
Mais du fait que cette violation a eu lieu, on ne peut pas arguer qu'il y ait eu de la
negligence de la part du gouvernement de sa Majeste."
La conduite du commandant et de 1'equipage du Florida, apres qu'il fut relache,
justifie, et au-dela, tous les soupgons qu'on avait concus sur le caractere veritable de
son expedition.
Quant a ce qui se passa entre ce vaisseau et la goelette Prince Alfred pour
l'armement du premier, les nombreux affidavits relates au sixieme volume de l'appendice americain peu vent servir de preuve irrecusable des faits imputes au Florida.
On s'explique ainsi facilement pourquoi le Florida, tout en etant en appareil de
guerre a son arrivee a Nassau, n'avait pas, ainsi que je l'ai note, des munitions de
guerre a son bord; c'est qu'il en attendait par le Prince Alfred, a l'endroit convenu
d'vuance pour devenir le theatre de ses operations.
Les chargements de charbon jouent un r61e considerable dans les imputations faites
au Florida. Le " Case" americain dit que, pendant un sejour de trente-six heures dans
le port de Nassau, il en chargea une quantite suffisante pour trois mois de navigation.
Je ne dois point omettre toutefois de faire observer que l'indication de la quantite de
charbon ne resulte que de Yaffidavit de John Demeritt, un ouvrier qui avait travailie
pour le chargement du charbon, et qui dit que la quantite pouvait en etre de 180
tonnes, quantite exuberaute au jugement du Gouvernement des Etats-Unis.94
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
That Government asserts that the governor of Nassau, who allowed
these facilities to the Florida, had only granted to the Federal vessel
Dakota permission to take in a much smaller supply of coal. The English government shows the unfounded character of this charge, declaring that the governor of Nassau had no instructions which forbade him
to grant permission to take more coal, and that it was the commander-
of the Dakota who did not choose to take more.
Shortly afterward the Florida again took on board about one hundred
tons of coal in the port of Barbados. The complaints made on this
point by Bear-Admiral Wilkes only elicited an evasive answer from the
governor of the island.
The United States call upon the British government to prove that it
is not in fault with regard to the facilities granted to the Florida while
that vessel wasin the territorial waters of the English colonies.
Here, then, would be a case for the application of the second rule of
Article VI of the treaty of Washington, taking all the resources which
the Florida obtained at Nassau, Bermuda, and Barbados as equivalent
to the use of a base of naval operations which enabled her to make prize
of fourteen vessels. Her devastations did not end there; several other
vessels of the mercantile navy of the United States became her prey,
until she terminated her career atBahia on the 7th October, 1864.
It seems to be sufficiently proved that the facility with which the
Florida was allowed to supply herself wjth coal, notwithstanding that
the English government had prohibited the formation of depots of this
article in those colonies, was not in conformity with the strict neutrality
which should have been observed in these latitudes, whether in view of
the nature of the localities or of the sympathy which the population of
those same colonies showed for the confederate cause.
To these precise data are added a class of facts more difficult to ascertain, such as too easy compliance on the part of the English government
in allowing the time requested for repairing and refitting to be prolonged at the will of the commander of the vessel, beyond what the real
Ce Gouvernement pretend que le gouverneur de Nassau, qui permettait ces largesses,
au Florida, n'avait accorde au vaisseau federal le Dacotah la permission de charger du
charbon que dans une proportion fort inferieure. Le gouvernement anglais fait
ressortir le peu de solidite de ce chef d'accusation en assurant que le gouverneur de
Nassau n'avait aucune instruction qui lui defendlt d'accorder la faculte de prendre
phis de charbon, et que c'est le commandant du Dacotah qui n'en a pas voulu
davantage.
Peu de temps apres, le Florida chargea encore, dans la rade des Barbades, environ
cent tonnes de charbon. Les plaintes soulevees a cet egard par le contre-amiral
Wilkes u'obtinrent du gouvernement de Pile qu'une repOuse evasive.
Les Etats-Unis demandent que le gouvernement anglais prouve qu'il n'y a pas eu de
sa faute daus les facilites accordees au Florida pendant que ce vaisseau etait dans les
eaux territoriales des colonies anglaises.
II s'agirait done d'appliquer la deuxieme regie de l'artiele VI du traite de Washington en considerant toutes les ressources que le Florida trouvait & Nassau, aux Ber-
mndes et aux Barbades comme l'usage d'une .base d'operatious navales qui lui valurent
quatorze prises de vaisseaux. Les devastations ne se bornerent point la; plusieurs
autres vaisseaux de la marine commercante des Etats-Unis devinrent sa proie, jusqu'&
ce que ce vaisseau acheva sa carriere de croiseur a Bahia, le 7 octobre 1864.
II parait assez prouve que la facilite avec laquelle on laissa le Florida s'approvision-
ner de charbon, malgre qu'il y eut defense de la part du gouvernement anglais d'eta-
blir des d6p6ts de cette matiere dans ces colonies, ne repondait pas ai la stricte neutralite qu'il aurait fallu observer dans ces parages, soit en vue des localites, soit k cause
des sympathies que la .population de ces memes colonies montrait pour la cause des
confederes.
A ces donnees pr6"cises viennent s'ajouter des reclamations d'un genre de faits plus
difficile k constater, tels que le trop de condescendance du gouvernement anglais a
toieror que le temps demaude pour proceder k des reparations et k des radoubs se pro-OPINIONS  OF  COUNT   SCLOPIS.
95
necessity of the case required. It cannot but be acknowledged, however, that the field which the Florida had chosen for her depredations
offered special circumstances to insure her success.
As to the stay of the Florida in the port of Mobile, and the consequences resulting therefrom, I shall confine myself to considering them
as a special proof of the decisive character of the career of the Florida,
and I adopt on this subject the answers to the objections raised by Great
Britain, contained in paragraph 25 of the observations of our honorable colleague, M. Stsempfli. I reserve to myself expressly to treat the
question relative to the effect which may be produced by the transformation of a privateer into a vessel of war of a belligerent, when that subject, which is to be considered generally, comes before us for discussion.
I refrain from attaching to the British government any very serious
blame for the official salute returned by the authorities of Bermuda to,
the salute of the Florida on her entry into that port; this may have
been the personal fault at the moment of an official of subordinate rank,
but I maintain that, in matters of habitual administration, and in what
relates to the execution of special regulations, the responsibility for acts
of all subordinate agents, in questions of controversy between two governments, must attach to those who are charged with the supreme government.
Considering the tenders as corps detached from a corps d"'armee, and
consequently as subject to the same responsibility as the principal vessel, that responsibility must be extended to the cases of the Clarence,
Tacony, and Archer, which served successively as tenders to the Florida.
I will conclude the series of opinions which I submit to my honorable
colleagues by a quotation which appears to me to have decisive weight.
Lord Bussell, in a dispatch to Lord Lyons of the 27th March, 1863, reporting a conversation which he had had with Mr. Adams, expresses
himself in* these terms: f I said that the cabinet was of opinion that
the law was sufficient, but that legal evidence could not always be pro-
longeat au gre du commandant du navire au dela de ce que le veritable besoin aurait
exige. On ne saurait toutefois ne pas reconnaitre que le champ que le Florida avait
choisi pour faire ses ravages reunissait des elements speeiaux pour lui assurer des
succes.
Quant au sejour du Florida dans le port de Mobile et aux consequences qui purent
en deriver, je me bornerai k les considerer comme une preuve spedale du caractere
decisif de la carriere du Florida, et j'adopte k ce sujet les reponses contenues sous le N°
25 des observations de notre honorable coliegue, M. Staempfli, aux objections faites par
la Grande-Bretagne. Je me reserve expressement de traiter la question relative a 1'effet
que peut produire la transformation d'un corsaire en vaisseau de guerre d'un belligerant, lorsque cette matiere, qui doit etre consider sous un point de vue general, en-
trera en discussion parmi nous.
Je m'abstiendrai d'iuculper trop gravement le gouvernement britannique du saint
officiel rendu par les autorites de Bermude au salut du Florida entrant dans le port;
cela peut etre la faute personnelle momentanee d'un employe d'uu ordre iuferieur, mais
je maintiens que dans les affaires d'administration habituelle et dans ce qui tient a
l'execution de reglements speeiaux, la responsabilite des faits de tous les agents subal-
ternes, lorsqu'il s'agit de controverse entre deux etats, doit remonter a ceux qui tien-
nent le gouvernement superieur.
En considerant les tenders comme des corps detaches d'un corps d?armee, et conse-
quemmeut sujets a la meme responsabilite du vaisseau principal, on devra l'etendre
aux cas du Clarence, du Tacony et de 1'Archer, qui out servi successivement d'alieges
au Florida.
Je finirai la serie d'appreciations que je soumets a mes honorables coliegues par une
citation qui me paralt d'un poids decisif. Lord Russell, dans une depecbe a Lord Lyons
du 27 mars 1863, en rapportant une conversation qu'il avait eue avec M. Adams, s'ex-
prime en ces termes: " Je lui ai dit que le cabinet etait d'opinion que la loi suffisait,
mais qu'on n'avait pas pu toujours apporter des preuves legates; que le gouveruement
&96
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
cured, that the British government had done everything in its power to
execute the law; but I admitted that the cases ot the Alabama and.
Oreto were a scandal, and in some degree a reproach to our laws."
We have now, in my opinion, to repair the effects produced by the
causes of that scandal and that reproach, no longer taking as our point
of departure the provisions of a municipal law, but the principles of international law, and the rules laid down in Article YI of the treaty.
Great Britain thereby becomes responsible.
Having acquired a complete knowledge of the points of fact and law,
we shall now proceed to the examination of each head of claims considered separately, and to the comparative analysis of the figures contained
in the revised list of claims presented by the Department of State of
the United States, and those contaiued in the two reports of the committee appointed by the board of trade which have been presented by
the British government.
OBINIONS   OF   YISCOUNT   D'lTAJUBA.
I.—THE SPECIAL QUESTION AS TO THE EFFECT OF THE COMMISSIONS
HELD BY THE CONFEDERATE VESSELS OF WAR WHICH ENTERED
BRITISH PORTS.
Effect of a coi
sion.
Sitting of the 25th of July.
The object of the special question submitted for the decision of the
li3. tribunal of arbitration is, to determine the extent of the
effect which can be attributed to the commission with which
a vessel of war may be provided; whether that effect is the same in the
case of a vessel built in conformity with the laws of neutrality, as in that
of a vessel built in violation of those laws; that is to say, whether the
fact of holding such a commission gives to a vessel built in violation of
de la Grande-Bretagne avait fait tout ce qui etait en son pouvoir pour executor la loi,
mais que je reconnaissais que les cas de l'Alabama et de l'Oreto avaient ete un scandale,
et en quelque degre" un reproche k nos lois."
II s'agit maintenant, k mon avis, de reparer les effets produits par les causes de ce
scandale et de ce reproche en ne partant plus des dispositions d'un droit municipal,
mais des principes du droit des gens, et des regies posees k l'artiele VI du traite. La
responsabilite de la Grande-Bretagne y est engagee.
Bien edifies sur les points de fait et de droit, nous allons proce"der k l'examen de
chaque chef de reclamations considere separement, et a l'analyse comparative de chiffres portes sur la liste revisee des reclamations produite par le Departement d'etat des
Etats-Unis, et de ceux portes sur les deux rapports de la commission nomm.ee par le
conseil de commerce produits par le gouvernement britannique.
La question spe'eiale de savoir quel a 4te Veffet des commissions possede'es par les navires de
guerre confedirfe qui sont entrds dans les ports britanniques. '
Seance du 25 juillet.
La question sp€ciale soumise a la decision du tribunal d'arbitrage a pour but de
determiner l'etendue que l'on peut accorder a l'effet de la commission dont un navire
de guerre se trouve pourvu ; si cet effet est le meme pour un navire construit en observation des lois de la neutralite que pour un navire construit en violation de ces lois-.
e'est-a-dire, si, par le fait de possSder une commission, un navire, construit en violation
des lois d'un etat neutre, a le droit d'exiger de cet etat d'etre traite dans ses ports de laOPINIONS   OF  VISCOUNT  DITAJUBA.
97
the laws of a neutral state the right of requiring of such state that it
should be treated in its ports in the same manner as any other vessel of
war belonging to a belligerent state, and built according to law.
The question, put in this form, answers itself.
In fact, a neutral wishing to preserve his neutrality is bound to abstain
from assisting either of the belligerent parties in their warlike operations;
he is bound faithfully to guard against vessels of war, destined for the
use of one of the belligerents, being built or equipped within his territory;
and, according to the latter part of the first rule of Article YI of the
treaty of Washington, he is bound | also to use due diligenceto prevent
the departure from his jurisdiction of any vessel intended to cruise or
carry on war as above, such vessel having been specially adapted, in
whole or iu part, within such jurisdiction, to warlike use."
Such being the duties of a neutral, he has per contra the right to re-
'quire the belligerents to respect his territory; and it is the duty of the
belligerents not to commit, within the territory of the neutral state, acts
contrary to that neutrality. It i-< only by a scrupulous observance of
this duty that belligerents acq uire the indisputable right of exacting from
the neutral perfect impartially. '
If, then, a vessel, built ou ueutral territory for the use of a belligerent,
fraudulently, and without the knowledge of the neutral, comes again-
withiu the jurisdiction of the sovereign whose neutrality it has violated,
it ought to be seized and detained; for it is impossible to allow to such
vessel the same exterritorial rights as are allowed to other belligerent
vessels of war, built in accordance with law and without any infraction
of neutrality. The commission with which such a vessel is provided is
insufficient to protect her as against the neutral whose neutrality she
has violated.
And how can the belligerent complain of the application of this
principle ? By seizing or detaining the vessel the neutral only prevents
the belligerent from deriving advantage from the fraud committed
within his territory by the same belligerent; while by not proceeding
meme maniere que tout autre navire de guerre appartenent a des etats belligerants
et regulierement construit.
La position de la question en ces termes porte sa r6ponse en elle-meme.
En effet, le neutre qui veut garantir sa neutralite doit s'absteuir d'aider aucune des
parties belligerantes dans lenrs operations de guerre; il est oblige de veiller fideie-
ment a ce que, sur son territoire, on ne construise ni n'arme des navires de guerra destines a l'une des parties belligerantes;. et selon la derniere- partie de la premiere regie
de l'artiele VI du traite de Washington, il est oblige " d'employer egalement les dues
diligences pour empficher le depart hors de sa juridiction de tout navire destine k
croiser ou a faire la guerre, comme il est dit ci-dessus, un tel navire ayant ete adapte
specialement, en tout ou en partie, dans les limites de sa. juridiction, a un emploi
guerrier."
Si tels sont les devoirs d'un neutre, il a par contre le droit d'exiger des belligerants
qu'ils respectent son territoire; et il est du devoir des belligerants de ne point com-
mettre, sur le territoire de l'etat neutre, des actes contraires a cette neutralite. Ce
n'est qu'en observant scrupuleusement ce devoir que les belligerants acquierent le droit
in contestable-d'exiger du neutre une parfaiteimpartialite.
Si done uu navire, construit pour le compte d'un belligerant sur le territoire d'uu
neutre, par fraude et a l'insu du neutre, se presente dans les limites de la juridiction du
souverain dont il a vioie la neutralite", il doit Stre saisi ou detenu, car il n'est pas possible d'accorder a un tel navii-e les memes droits d'exterritorialite que l'on accorde aux
autres navires de guerre belligerants, coustruits regulierement et en dehors de toute
infraction a la neutralite. La commission dont un tel navire est pourvu ne snffit pas
pour le couvrir vis-a-vis du neutre dont il a vioie la neutralite.
Et comment le bellig6rant se plaindrait-il de l'application de ce priucipe ? En saisis-
sant ou detenant le navire, le neutre ne fait qu'empecher le belligerant de tirer profit
de la fraude commise sur son territoire par ce meme belligerant, tandis que, en ne
7 B98
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
against a guilty vessel, the neutral justly exposes itself to having its
.good faith justly called in question by the other belligerent.
This principle of seizure, of detention, or at any rate of preliminary
notice that a vesselr under such circumstances, will not be received in
the ports of the neutral whose neutrality she has violated, is fair and
salutary, inasmuch as it is calculated to prevent complications between
neutrals and belligerents, and to contribute toward freeing neutrals
from responsibility by proving their good faith in the case of a fraud
perpetrated within their territory.
The converse of this principle is repugnant to the moral sense, for it
would be allowing the fraudulent party to derive benefit from his fraud.
The rules established by the empire of Brazil confirm the principle
which we have just laid down, for in its regulations respecting neutrality,
directions are given— t
§ 6. Not to admit, into the ports of the empire a belligerent who has once violated
the neutrality; and,
$7. To compel vessels which may attempt t<> violate the neutrality to leave the
maritime territory of the empire immediately, without supplying them with anything
whatever.
In fine: the commission with which a vessel of war may be provided has not the power to protect her as against the neutral whose
neutrality she has previously violated.
H.—THE FLORIDA.
The undersigned, after a conscientious examination of all the documents submitted to the tribunal of arbitration by the Governments of the United States and of Great Britain, relating
to the confederate cruiser the Florida,
Considering,
That from all the facts relating to the building of the Oreto* in the
port of Liverpool, and to the departure of that vessel, and of the Bahama,
procedant point contre le navire coupable, le neutre s'expose justement k ceque l'autre
belligerant suspecte sa bonne foi.
Ce principe de saisi, de detention ou tout au moins d'avis ^prealable qn'un navire,
dans de telles conditions, ne sera pas recu dans les ports du neutre dont il a vioie la
neutralite, est equitable et salutaire en ce qu'il evite les complications entre les neutres
et les belligerants, et contribue a degager la responsabilite des neutres en prouvant
leur bonne foi vis-a-vis d'une fraude commise sur leur territoire.
Le principe contraire froisse la conscience, car ce serait permettre au fraudeur de
retirer benefice de sa fraude.
Les regies etablies par l'empire du Bresil consacrent le principe que nous venous
d'exposer, car dans ses reglements sur la neutralite il est ordonne :
" § 6. De ne pas admettre dans les ports de l'empire le belligerant qui aura une
fois vioie la neutralite," et
" § 7. De faire sortir immediatement du territoire maritime de l'empire, sans leur
fournir la moindre chose, les navires qui tenteraient de violer la neutralite."
En resume. La commission dont un navire de guerre se trouve ponrvu n'a pas pour
effet de le couvrir vis-a-vis du neutre dont il a precedemment voile la neutralite.
I.—LB FLORIDA.
Le soussigne—apres examen consciencieux de tous les documents soumis au tribunal
d'.arbitrage par les gouvernements des Etats-Unis et de la Grande-Bretagne relatifs
au croiseur coufedere le Florida:
Considerant que de tous les faits relatifs a la construction de l'Oreto*dansle port de
Liverpool,et a la sortie de ce navire, ainsi que du Bahama, charge d'armement pour
* First name of the Florida,
t Premier nom du Florida.OPINIONS   OF   VISCOUNT  DTTAJUBA.
99
freighted with arms for the Oreto, which facts did not induce the British authorities to employ any'measures calculated to prevent the violation of the neutrality of Great Britain, notwithstanding the repeated
warnings and representations of the diplomatic and consular authorities
of the United Statss, it is evident that the government of Her Britannic
Majesty neglected to use due diligence for the fulfillment of its duties as
a neutral;
Considering,
That from all the facts relating to the stay of the Oreto at Nassau, to
her seizure in that port, to her acquittal, to her departure from that
port, to the enlistment of a crew, to her taking in supplies, to her armament at Green Cay, with the assistance of the, English vessel Brince
Alfred, it is evident that there was negligence on the part of the English colonial authorities;
Considering,
That in spite of the evident infractions of the neutrality of Great
Britain committed by the Oreto, this same vessel, then known as a confederate cruiser, under the name of the Florida, was again on several
occasions freely admitted into the ports of the British colonies;
Considering,
That the fact of the entrance of the Florida into the confederate port
of Mobile, and of her stay of four months in that port, cannot determine the responsibility previously incurred by Great Britain;
Is of opinion,
That Great Britain failed to fulfill the duties prescribed in the rules
laid down in Article YI of the treaty of Washington, and that she is
consequently responsible for the acts imputed to the confederate cruiser
Florida, as well as for those imputed to her tenders, the Clarence, the
Tacony, and the Archer.
III.—THE ALABAMA.
The undersigned, after a conscientious examination of all the documents submitted to the tribunal of arbitration by the Governments of
l'Oreto, lesquels faits n'amenerent de la part des autorites britanniques l'emploi d'aucunes
mesures propres a empecher la violation de la neutralite de la Grande-Bretagne,
malgre les avis et les reclamations reiterees des autorites diplomatiques et consulaires
des Etats-Unis, il ressort que le gouvernement de sa Majeste britannique a neglige
d'employer les due diligences pour le maintien des devoirs de sa neutralite;
Considerant que, de tous les faits relatifs au sejour de l'Oreto a.Nassau, asa saisiedans ce
port, a son acquittement, a sa sortie de ce port, a I'enrdlement d'un equipage, a son appro-
visionnement, a son armement avec l'aide du bateau anglais le Prince Alfred a Green
Cay, il ressort qu'il y a eu negligence de la part des autorites colouiales anglaises;
Considerant que, malgre les infractions evidentes a la neutralite de la Grande-Bretagne, commises par l'Oreto, ce meme navire, alors connu comme croisenr confedere
sous le nom de Florida, fut encore a plusieurs reprises librement admis dans les ports
des colonies britanniques;
Considerant que le fait de l'entree du Florida dans le port confedere de Mobile, et
de son sejour daus ce port pendant quatre mois, ne saurait detruire la responsabilite
anterieurement encourue par la Grande-Bretagne—
Est d'avis que la Grande-Bretague a manque aux devoirs prescrits dans les regies
etablies par l'artiele VI du traite de Washington, et que, par consequent, elle est
respousable des faits imputes au crosieur confedere le Florida, ainsi que de ceux imputes k ses navires auxiliaires le Clarence, le Tacony, et 1'Archer.
IL—L'ALABAMA.
Le soussign6—apres examea-conscieneieuxde tous les documents soumis au tribunal100
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
the United States and of Great Britain, relating to the confederate
cruiser, the Alabama,
Alabama. j~* • i       *
Considering,
That from all the facts relating to the building of the 290* in the port
of Liverpool, to her equipment and armament on the coast of Terceira
by the aid of the English vessels Agrippina and Bahama, after the
English vessel Hercules had conveyed a crew on board of her, it is
evident that the government of Great Britain neglected to use due diligence for the fulfillment of its duties as a neutral, siuce, notwithstanding the repeated warning's and representations of the diplomatic
and consular authorities of the United States while the 290 was in
course of construction, no suitable measures were taken, and those
which were at length adopted for the arrest of the vessel were ordered
so late that they could not be executed;
Considering,
That, after the escape of the vessel, the measures taken for pursuing
and arresting her were so incomplete that they led to no result, aud
cannot be considered as sufficient to free Great Britain from responsibility ;
Considering,
That, in spite of the flagrant infractions of the neutrality of Great
Britain committed by the 290, this same vessel, then known as a confederate cruiser under the name of the Alabama, was again admitted
on several occasions into the ports of British colonies, whereas she
ought to have been proceeded against in the first British port in which
she might have been found;
Is of opinion,
That Great Britain failed to fulfill the duties prescribed in the rules
laid down in Article YI of the treaty of Washington, and that she is
consequently responsible for the acts imputed to-the confederate cruiser
Alabama, as well as for those imputed to her tender the Tuscaloosa.
d'arbitrage par les gonvernements des Etats-Unis et de 1st Grande-Bretagne relatifs au
croiseur confedere l'Alabama:
Considerant que, de tous les faits relatifs a la construction du "290," dans le port de
Liverpool, k son equiperaent et armement sur les cdtes de Terceira par les soins des
bateaux anglais 1'Agrippina et le Bahama, apres quele navire anglais leHercule lui eut
amene un equipage, il ressort clairement que le gouvernement de la Grande-Bretagne
a neglige d'emplover les dues ediligences pour le maintien des devoirs de sa neutralite,
puisque, malgre les avis et reclamations reiterees des autorites diplomatiques et con-
sulaires des Etats-Unis pendant le cours de la construction du " 290," on ne prit aucune •
mesure convenable, et que celles finalement prises pour faire arreter le navire furent si
tardivement ordonnees qu'elles ne purent etre executees;
Considerant qu'apres la fuite du navire les mesures prises pour le poursuivre et le
faire arreter furent si incompletes qn'elles n'amenerent aucun resultat, et ne peuvent
. etre oonsiderees comme suffisantes pour degager la responsabilite de la Grande-Bretagne;
Considerant que, malgre les infractions flagrantes a la ueutralite de la Graude-
Bretagne commises par le "290," ce meme navire, alors connu comme croiseur confedere sons le nom ded'Alabama, fut encore admis k plusieurs reprises dans les ports des
colonies britanniques, quand il aurait fallu proceder contre lui dans le premier port
britannique oh il aurait ete rencontre—
Est d'avis que la Grande-Bretagne a manque aux devoirs prescrits dans les regies
etablies par l'artiele VI du traite de Washington, et que, par consequent, elle est res-
ponsable des faits imputes au croiseur confedere l'Alabama, ainsi que ceux imputes a
son navire auxiliaire le Tuscaloosa.
* Number by which the Alabama was originally designated.OPINIONS   OF  VISCOUNT  D'lTAJUBA.
101
Georgia, Sximter,
Nashville, Retribution, Tallahassee.
Chickamauga.
IV.—THE VESSELS (1) THE GEORGIA, (2) THE SUMTER, (3) THE NASHVILLE, (4) THE RETRIBUTION, (5) THE TALLAHASSEE OR OLUSTEE,
(6) THE CHICKAMAUGA.
The undersigned, after a conscientious examination of all the documents submitted to the tribunal of arbitration by the Gov
ernments of the United States aud of Great Britain, relat
ing to the confederate cruisers,
The Georgia,
The Sumter,
The Nashville,
The Betribution,
The Tallahassee or Olustee,
The Chickamauga,
Is of opinion,
That Great Britain did not fail to fulfill the duties prescribed in the
rules laid down in Article YI of the treaty of Washington, aud that
she is not responsible for the acts imputed to these vessels.
Sallie, Jeff. Davis,
Music, Boston, V.
H. Joy.
V.—THE VESSELS SALLIE, JEFFERSON DAVIS, MUSIC, BOSTON, V. H. JOY.
With regard to the vessels,
The Sallie,
The Jefferson Davis,
The Music,
The Boston,
The Y. H. Joy,
The undersigned is of opinion,
That they should be excluded from discussion by the tribunal for
want of evidence.
VI.—THE SHENANDOAH.
The undersigned, after a conscientious examination of all the docu-
III.—LES NAVIRES (1) LE GEORGIA, (2) LE SDMPTER,  (3) LE NASHVILLE,  (4) LE RETRIBUTION,  (5)  LE TALLAHASSEE  OU L'OLUSTEE,   (6)  LE  CHICKAMAUGA.
Le soussigne—apres examen consciencieux de tous les documents sounds au tribunal
d'arbitrage par les gouvernements des Etats-Unis et de la Grande-Bretagne, relatifs
aux croiseurs confederes
Le Georgia,
Le Sumter,
Le Nashville,
Le Retribution,
Le Tallabassee, ou l'Olustee,
Le Chickamauga—
Est d'avis que la Grande-Bretagne n'a pas manque aux devoirs prescrits dans les
regies etablies par l'artiele YI du traite de Washington, et qu'elle n'est pas responsable
des faits imputes k ces navires.
IV.—LES NAVIRES SALLIE,  JEFFERSON DAVIS,  MUSIC,  BOSTON,  V.  H.  JOY.
Le soussigne—quant aux navires
Le Sallie,'
Le Jefferson Davis,
Le Music,
Le Boston,
Le V. H. Joy—
Est d'avis de les eiiminer des deliberations du tribunal, faute de preuves.
V.—LE  SHENANDOAH.
Le soussigue—apr&s examen consciencieux de tous les documents soumis au tribunal102
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
ments submitted to the tribunal of arbitration by the Governments of
the United States and of Great Britain, relating to the confederate cruiser the Shenandoah,
Considering,
That from all the facts relating to the departure from London of the
merchant-vessel Sea King,* to the departure from Liverpool of the
Laurel, to the meeting of these two vessels near the island of Madeira,
to the transfer of the armament and crew from one of these vessels to
the other, and to the transformation of the Sea King into a confederate
cruiser under the name of the-Shenandoah, it is evident that the government of Her Britannic Majesty cannot be accused of having neglected to use due diligence for the fulfillment of its duties as a neutral;
Considering,
That while, on the oue hand, it is evident from all the facts relating
to the stay of the Shenandoah in the port of Melbourne that some few
irregularities occurred, such, in particular, as the augmentation of her
crew, on the other hand there is no proof that these irregularities can
be laid to the charge of the government of Her Britannic Majesty or
imputed to the negligence of the English authorities, but that they
were the consequence of the violation by Commander Waddell of his
word of honor, aud of the exceptional difficulties of surveillance which
the conformation of the port presented;
Considering, moreover,
That the governor of the colony having, after the departure of the
Shenandoah, become aware of the violation of neutrality of which this
vessel had been guilty, resolved thenceforth to refuse hospitality to
Lieutenant Waddell. and the other officers of the Shenandoah, and
wrote in this seuse to the naval and civil authorities of Australia,
requesting them to act in the same way, a fact which contributes toward
releasing the government of Her Britannic Majesty from any responsibility ;
Is of opinion, *
That Great. Britain did not fail to fulfil the duties prescribed in the
d'arbitrage par les gouvernements des Etats-Unis et de la Grande-Bretagne, relatifs au
croiseur confedere le Shenandoah:
Considerant que, de tons les faits relatifs au depart de Londres du navire marchand
le Sea King, au depart de Liverpool du Laurel, a la rencontre de ces deux navires prss
de l'ile de Madere, au transbordeuient de l'armement et de 1'equipage de l'un de ces
navires sur l'autre, et a la transformation du Sea King en croiseur confedere sous le
nom de Shenandoah, il ressort clairement que l'on ne saurait accuser le gouvernement
de sa Majeste britannique d'avoir neglige d'employer les dues diligences pour le maintien
des devoirs de sa neutralite;
Considerant que si, d'un cdte, de tous les faits relatifs au sejour du Shenandoah dans
le port de Melbourne, il ressort qu'il y a eu quelques irregularit.es commises, telles sur-
tout que l'augmeutation de 1'equipage; d'un autre c6te, il n'est pas prouve que ces
irregularites puissent etre mises ;\ la charge du gouvernement de sa Majeste britannique
etimputeesa la negligence des autorites anglaises, mais qu'blles ont ete la consequence
do la violation do la parole d'houueur donnee par le commandant Waddell, efc des difB.-
cultes esceptionnelles de surveillance que presentait la conformation du port;
Considerant, en outre, que le gouverneur de la colouie, ayant appris aprfes le depart
du Shenandoah la violation de ueutralite dout ce navire s'6tait rendu coupable, decida
de refuser doreuavant l'hospitalite au lieutenant Waddell et aux autres officiers du
Shenandoah, et ecrivit dans ce sens aux autorities navales et civiles de l'Australie en
les priant d'agir de meme, ce qui contribue a degager la responsabilite du gouvernement de sa Majeste britannique—
Est d'avis que la Grande-Bretagne n'a pas manque aux devoirs prescrits dans les
First name of the Shenaudoab.OPINIONS   OP  MR.   STSEMPFLI.
103
rules laid down in Article YI of the treaty of Washington, and that she
^.is consequently not responsible for the acts imputed to the confederate
cruiser Shenandoah.
OPeiOrTS  OF  MB.   STJ1MPFLI.
I.—OPINIONS ON THE QUESTIONS OP LAW AS TO WHICH THE TRIBUNAL
OP ARBITRATION, AT ITS SITTING OF JULY 25, 1872, REQUESTED
ELUCIDATIONS FROM THE COUNSEL OF THE HIGH PARTIES PRESENT
AT THE BAR.
M. Stsempfli states that he sees no great advantage in wandering
into long descriptions and theoretical interpretations on the questions
of due diligence, the effect of commissioning, and the supply of coal. He
sets forth orally and succinctly his views? on these heads, reserving to
himself the right of giving more precise reasons for their application in
each particular case, and confines himself for the present to laying
down the following principles only, which will serve him for his general
guidance.
General Brinciples of Law.
(Programme inserted in Protocol X, Article A, No. III.)
In its decisions on points of law, the tribunal should be guided by
the following principles:
1. In the first place, by the three rules laid down in Article YI of the
treaty, which provides that— B»i»nn.etH»ty
take precedence.
In deciding the matters submitted to the arbitrators tbey shall be governed by tbe
following three rules, which are agreed upon by the higb contracting parties, as rules
to be taken as applicable to the case, and by such principles of international law, not
regies etablies par l'artiele VI du traite de Washington, et que, par consequent, elle n'est
pas responsable des faits imputes au croiseur confedere le Shenandoah.
Opinions sur les questions de droit sur lesquelles le tribunal d'arbitrage, dans sa seance du
25 juillet 1872, a demands des Sclaircissemenis aux councils des hautes parlies presentes a
la barre.
M. Staempfli declare qu'il ne trouve pas tres-opportun de se perdre, pour les trois
questions des dues diligences de I'effet de commissions et des approvisionnemenls de charbon,
daus de longues discussions et interpretations theoriques. II developpe oralement et -
sommairement ses vues y relatives, en se reservant de motiver de plus pros leur application daus chaque cas special, et se borne pour le moment k poser les seuls principes
suivants, qui lui serviront de direction generale.
PRINCIPES GE.NERAUX I>E   DROIT.
(Programme insere dans le protocole X, Art. litt. A, No. III.)
Daus ses. considerants jnridiqnes, le tribunal doit se guider par les principes
suivants:
1°. En premier lieu, par les trois regies posees dans l'artiele VI du traite, lequel
porte que—
" Dans la decision des matieres a eux soumises, les arbitres seront guides paries
trois regies snivantes, que les hautes parties contractantes sont con venues de regarder
comme des regies a prendre comme applicables a la cause, et par tels principes du droit104
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
inconsistent therewith, as the arbitrators shall determine to have been applicable to
the case:
RULES.
A neutral government is bound—
First. To use diligence to prevent the fitting out, arming,, or equipping, within its
jurisdiction, of any vessel which it has reasonable ground to believe is intended to
cruise or to carry on war against a power with which it is at peace; and also to use
like diligence to prevent the departure from its jurisdiction of any vessel intended to
cruise or carry ou war as above, such vessel having been specially adapted, in whole
or in part, within such jurisdiction, to warlike use.
Secondly. Not to permit or suffer either belligerent to make use of its ports or waterB
as the base of naval operations agaiust the other, or for the purpose of the renewal or
augmentation of military supplies ot arms, or the recruitment of men.
Thirdly. To exercise due diligence in its own ports and waters, and as to all persons
within its jurisdiction, to prevent any violation of the foregoing obligations and
duties.
According to the treaty, these three rules take precedence of the
principles which might be drawn from historic international law and
from science.
2. Historical international law, or the practice of the law of nations,
as well as science and scientific authorities, may be considered as subsidiary law, in so far as the principles to be applied are generally recognized, and are not liable to controversy, nor at variance with the three
rules quoted above. If one or other of these conditions fail, it is for the
tribunal to supply what is wanting by interpreting and applying the
three rules to the best of its power and in all conscientiousness.
3. The laws of a state touching neutrality  do not constitute an
element of the law of nations in the sense that they cannot, at any time, be altered, modified, or added to without
the co-operation or consent of other states, the law of nations itself being absoluely independent of these municipal laws; yet, so long as there
des gens qui, sans etre en desaccord avec ces vh
comme ay ant ete applicables dans l'espece:
jles, auront ete reconnus par les arbitres
" REGEES.
"Un gouvernement neutre est tenu—
" 1 De faire les dues diligences pour prevenir la mise eu etat, l'armement en guerre
ou l'eqnipement,,(,/lttinfli out, arming, or equipping.) dans sa juridiction, de tout vaisseau
qu'il est raisonnablement fonde a croire destine k croiser ou a faire la guerre contre une
puissance avec laquelle ce gouvernement est en paix ; et de faire aussi meme diligence
pour empecber le depart hors de sa juridiction de tout navire destine a croiser on a
faire la guerre comme il est dit ci-dessus, ce navire ayant et6 specialement adapte, en
tout on en partie, dans les limites de sa dite juridiction, a des usages belligerants.
"2 De ne permettre ni souffrir que l'un des belligerants fasse usage de ses ports ou
de ses-eaux comme d'nne base d'operations navales contre l'autre, ni pour renouveler
ou augmenter ses munitions militaires ou son armement, ou s'y procurer des recrues.
" 3 D'exercer les dues diligences dans ses propres ports et eaux, et a l'egard de toutes
personnes dans les limites de sa juridiction, afln d'empecber toute violation des obligations et devoirs precedents."
D'aprfes le traite, ces trois regies prevalent sur les principes que l'on pourrait
deduire du droit des gens historique et de la science.
2° Le droit des gens historique, ou bien la pratique du droit des gens, ainsi que la
science et les autorites scientifiques, peuvont Stre cousideres comme droit subsidiaire,
en tant que les principes k appliquer sont g6neralement reconnus, et ne sont point sujets
a controverse, ni en desaccord avec les trois regies ci-dessus. Si l'une ou l'autre de
ces conditions vieut a manquer, c'est an tribunal d'y snppleer en interpretant et appli-
quant les trois regies de son mieux et en toute conscience.
3° Les lois sur la neutralite propres ann etat ne constituent pas un clement du droit
des gens daus le sens qn'elles ne peuvent etre, eu tout temps, changees, modiiiees on
couipletces sans la cooperation ou le consentement d'autres etats, le droit des gens lui-
rucnie dtaufc absolument independant de ces lois inuuicipales; cepeudant, tant que dans
■a
JOPINIONS  OF  MR.   STJEMPFLI.
105
exist such laws in a state, and they have not been abrogated, belligerent states have the right to require their loyal observance, as otherwise frauds or errors might be committed, to the detriment of one or
other of the belligerents ; as, for instance, when there is known to exist
(although no attention may be paid to it) a decree forbidding a belligerent vessel of war to remain in a port for more than twenty-four hours,
or to take on board more coal than is necessary for her to reach the
nearest port of her country, or to obtain fresh supplies in the same port
within three months.
This principle, at the same time, implies that the absence of all municipal laws, or the want of sufficient laws on the subject, does not, in any
way, detract from the law of nations, either as regards international
obligations or rights.
Moreover, the following principles are admitted, which are cited here
to avoid a repetition of them in the judgment to be given respecting
each of the vessels.
4. The I due diligence" to be exercised implicitly comprises vigilance
and initiative on the part of the neutral itself, with the object
r>  :, • . -,-"• ■[. -li-^-x I)ue diligence.
ot discovering and preventing any violation of its own neutrality.   A belligerent state is neither bound., nor has it the right, to
exercise surveillance or to perform police duties in a neutral state in
lieu of the local authorities.
5. The fact that a vessel, built in contravention of the laws of neutrality, escapes and gets out to sea, does not free that vessel from the responsibility she has incurred by her violation
of neutrality; she may, therefore, be proceeded against if she returns
within the jurisdiction of the injured state. The fact of her having been
transferred or commissioned in the meanwhile, does not annul the
violation committed, unless the transfer or commissioning, as the case
may be, was a bona-fide transaction.
M. Staempfli, following the programme inserted in Brotocol X, takes
this opportunity of causing his propositions relative to Article A, Nos.
I and II of the said programme, to be also printed:
Effect of commission.
un etat il subsiste des lois pareilles et qu'elles n'ont pas ete abrogees, des etats belligerants out le droit d'en redamer l'observation loyale, puisque sans cela il pourrait se
couimettre des fraudes on des erreurs au detriment de l'un ou de l'autre des belligerants, comme, par example, quand subsiste publiquement, bien qu'on ne l'observe pas,
l'ordonnance qui defend k un navire belligerant de sejourner plus de vingt-quatre
heures dans un port, ou d'embarquer plus de charbon qu'il ne lui en faut pour regagner
le port de son pays le plus rapproche, ou de s'approvisionner de nouveau au meme port
avant que trois mois se soient ecouies.
Ce principe implique en mSme tems que le manque de toutes lois municipales, ou le
manque de lois suffisantes sur la matiere, ne deroge en rien au droit des gens, soit aux
obligations et aux droits internationaux.
En outre, sont admis encore les principes suivants, que l'on cite ici afin d'en eviter la
repetition dans le jugement a. porter sur cbacun des vaisseaux:
4° Les "dues diligences" a exercer comprennent implicitement la propre vigilance
et la propre initiative dans le but de decouvrir et d'empecher toute violation de la
propre neutralite; un etat belligerant n'a ni le devoir ni le droit d'exercer la surveillance, ni de faire la police dans un etat neutre a la place des autorites du pays.
5° Lefait qu'un vaisseau, coustruit contrairement aux lois de la neutralite, s'6chappe
et gagne la mer, ne decharge pas ce vaisseau de la responsabilite qu'il a encourue pour
avoir vioie la neutralite; il peut done etre poursuivi s'il rentre dans la juridiction de
l'etat lese. Que ce navire ait ete cede ou commissionne dans l'intervalle, ce fait ne
detruit pas la violation cocainise, k moins que la cession ou le commissionnement, selon
le cas, u'ait eu lieu bond fide.
M. Staempfli, donnant suite au programme insere an protocole X, fait a'cette occasion imprimer aussi ses propositions relatives k l'artiele litt. A, Nos .1 et II, du dit
programme:
I106
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
(A.) General indications.
I.—Question to be decided.
The question to be decided by the tribunal is laid down in the follow-
Questiontobede- ing words in Article VII of the treaty:
cided.
The said tribunal shall first determine as to each vessel separately whether Great
Britain has, by any act or omission, failed to fulfill any of ,the duties set forth in the
foregoing three rules, or recognized by the principles of international law not inconsistent with such rules, and shall certify such fact as to each of the said vessels.
Moreover, the tribunal is "authorized, if it think proper, to proceed
eventually to award a sum in"gross in payment of all claims.
II.—Definition of facts.
The cases and documents put in by the two powers contain a quantity
of facts which should not be taken into consideration in the
judgment to be pronounced by the tribunal.   Notably :
1. The recognition of the insurgent States as a belligerent power by
the British government.
2. Expressions of sympathy or antipathy during the war, individual
speeches in or out of Parliament or other official assemblies, the attitude
of the press, &c.
3. The permission granted for the trade in arms, and for the departure
from port of ships intended to run the blockade, in so far as there is
nothing in the toleration of either of these acts which is at variance
with the prohibition to arm or equip vessels of war and cruisers.
4. The historical precedents of the violation or unequal execution of
neutrality laws and of judicial decrees, in so far as they relate to principles of the law of nations which are now open to controversy.
Definition of facts.
(A.)—DEDICATIONS GBNERALES.
I.—Question a decider.
La question a decider par le tribunal est precisee de la maniere suivante dans
l'artiele VII du traite:
"Le dit tribunal commencera par determiner, pour chaque navire separement, si la
Grande-Bretagne a manque, par une action ou une omission, k remplir des devoirs
enonces dans les trois precedentes regies, ou reconnues par les principes du droit des
gens qui ne' sont pas en desaccord avec ces regies, et il certifiera ce fait a l'egard de
chacun des navires susdits."
Eu outre, le tribunal est charge eventuellement de proceder, s'il le juge convenable,
k l'adjudication d'une somme en bloc pour toutes les reclamations.
II.—Delimitation des faits.
Les memoires et pieces produits par les deux parties contiennent une foulo de faits
qui n'entrent pas en consideration dans le jugement k rendre par le tribunal. Tels
sont notamment:
1. La reconnaissance par le gouvernement britannique des 6 tats insurges comme
puissance belligerante;
2. Les expressions de sympathie ou d'antipathie durant la guerre, les discoars indi-
viduels an sein ou en dehors des parlements ou antres corps offieiels, l'attitude de la
presse, &c.;
3. La permission du commerce des armes et de la sorties!es ports de navires destines
k traverser le blocus; en tant qu'il n'y a rien dans la permission de l'un ou de l'autre
de ces actes qui soit en desaccord avec la defense d'armer ou d'equiper des vaisseaux
de guerre et des croseurs;
4. Les precedents historiques de violation ou d'inegal maintien des lois de la neutralite et les arrets judiciaires, en tant qu'il n'en decoule point des principes du droit
de gens, non sujets k controverse.
•Mfii
JOPINIONS   OF  MR.   STAMPFLI.
107
The facts to be taken into consideration by the tribunal are only the
acts and omissions of Great Britain with regard to each of the vessels
which form the subject of a complaint on the part of the Uuited States.
Proposal of M. Staempfli under Article A.    " Preliminary decisions" of
the programme inserted in Protocol X.
(B.)—Decision with regard to each op the cruisers.
Preliminary decisions.
It is admissible that the United States should extend their claims to
other vessels besides the four mentioned in the British case,
viz, the Florida, Alabama, Georgia, and Shenandoah. More- ».ZWb^»^^u
over, the British counter case does not insist on the objection opon'
made on this head.
On the other hand, and from the very nature of things, no account
can be taken of the claims for indemnity for losses caused by vessels
not mentioned in the pleadings of the United States, and with regard
to which, consequently, no act or omission in violation of neutrality is
advanced or proved against Great Britain. This has reference to the
cruisers named only in the lists of claims for losses, viz, the Boston,
Jeff. Davis, Sallie, V. H. Joy, and Music.
According to the rules thus laid down, the vessels remaining for discussion are the following:
1. The Sumter.
2. The Nashville.
3. The Florida and her tenders.
4. The Alabama and her tender.
5. The Retribution.
6. The Georgia.
7. The Tallahassee.
8. The Chickamauga.
9. The Shenandoah.
In discussing each of these vessels,, the order followed by the
American case, coinciding with the above list, will be adhered to.
Les faits que le tribunal doit prendre en consideration ne sont que les actions et les
omissions de la Grande-Bretagne a l'egard de chacun des vaisseaux qui forment l'objet
d'une plainte de la part des Etats-Unis.
Proposition de M. Staempfli d l'artiele litt. A,  " decisions prSliminaires," du programme
ins6r6 au protoeole X.
B.—Decision relative a chacun des croiseurs.
Decisions preliminaires.
II est admissible que les Etats-Unis eteudent leurs reclamations a d'autres vaisseaux
que les quatre mentionnes dans le memoire britannique, k savoir, le Florida, l'Alabama,
le Georgia et le Shenandoah. Le contre-memoire britannique ne maintient d'ailleurs
plus l'objection faite a cet egard.
Par contre et des le principe, l'on ne prendra point en consideration les demandes
d'indemnite pour destructions causees par des vaisseaux qui ne sont point mentionnes
dans les memoires des Etats-Unis, et a l'egard desquels, par consequence, l'on n'avance
ni ne prouve aucuu acte ni aucune omission contraires k la neutralite, a la charge de
la Grande-Bretagne. Ceci a trait aux croiseurs qui ne sont indiques que dans les
listes de reclamations pour pertes—c'est-a-dire, le Boston, le Jeff. Davis, le Sallie, le
V. H. Joy, et le Music.
D'aprfes ces directions posees, les navires restant en discussion sont les suivants :
1. Le Sumter. 6. Le Georgia.
2. Le Nashville. 7. Le Tallahassee.
3. Le Florida, avec ses tenders.   8. Le Chickamauga.
4. L'Alabama, avec son tender.   9. Le Shenandoah.
5. Le Retribution.
En traitant de chacun des vaisseaux, l'on adopte l'ordre suivi par le memoire americain coincidant avec celui qui vient d'etre trace.
■ ' "-108
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Proposal of M. Staempfli as to the form of introduction to the judgment.
*The tribunal of arbitration on the Alabama question, constituted by
virtue of the treaty of Washington' of May 8, 1871, having taken
cognizance of that treaty aud of the cases, counter cases, and arguments, as well as of all the appendices and documents in evidence presented by the two governments concerned, has found and determined
what is recorded in the present judgment.
II.—THE FLORIDA.
(A.)—Facts and considerations.
The facts relative to this vessel are so complicated and so various,
that, for the sake of clearness and brevity, they cannot be
stated apart from the considerations.
Florid:
I.—Construction and equipment of the ship at Liverpool, and her departure
from that port.
1. This vessel was first known under the name of the Oreto; she was
a screw gun-boat, of 700 tons burden, with two funnels and three masts;
she was ordered from Fawcett, Preston antl Co., of Liverpool, by Bullock, military agent of the insurgent States, soon after his arrival in
England, in the course of the summer of 1861.
2. Representation of the American minister, Adams, to Lord Bussell,
dated February 18, 1862, founded upon a communication made to him
by Dudley, the American consul at Liverpool, and describing the Oreto
as a u war-steamer," intended to commit hostilities against the United
States, naming also the persons who had taken part in the ordering of
the vessel, declaring that Fraser, Trenholm & Co., of Liverpool, (financial agents of the insurgent States,) had advanced the funds, and that,
if necessary, he would produce further evidence.
Proposition de M. Staempfli sur la formule d'introduction de I'acte du jugement.
Tie tribunal d'arbitrage dans la question de l'Alabama, institue en vertu du traite
de Washington du 8 mai 1871, apres avoir pris connaissance de ce traite et des
memoires, repliques et plaidoyers, ainsi que de tous les appendices et des pieces al'appui,
presentes par les deux gouvernements interests, a trouve" et arr&te ce qui est consigne
dans le present acte du jugement.
Le Florida.
(A.)—Faits et considerants.
Les faits relatifs a ce vaisseau sont tellement compliques et si varies que, par
raison de clarte et de brievete, ils ne peuveut se decrire k part des considerants.
I.—Construction et 6quipement du navire a Liverpool et sa sortie du port.
1. Ce vaisseau fut d'abord connu sousle nom de l'Oreto; c'etait une cannoniere a
heiice, jaugeant 700 tonneaux, munie de deux cheminees et de trois mats ; il fut commando" chez Fawcett, Preston et Cie, a Liverpool, par Bullock, agent militaire des
etats insurges, peu de temps apres son arrivee en Angleterre, dans le courant de l'e"fc6
1861.
2. Reclamation du ministre americain, Adams, a Lord Russell, en date du 18 fevrier
1862, s'appuyant sur une communication a lui faite par Dudley, consul americain a
Liverpool, et designant l'Oreto comme " steamer de guerre," destine a commettre des
hostilites contre les Etats-Uuis, nommant aussi les persounes qui avaient pris part k la
commande du navire, declarant que Fraser, Treuholm et Cie, a Liverpool, (a°"ence
finauciere des etats insurges,) avaient fait les avances de fonds, et que, s'il etait
nccessaire, il fournirait encore des preuves.
■rfir-r-rOPINIONS   OF  MR.   STAMPFLI.
109
3. The commissioners of customs at Liverpool, in their report of the
22d of February, 1862, founded on the reports of their agents, state
that "she is a splendid steamer, suitable for a dispatch-boat; she is
pierced for 4 guns. * * * * It appears that she is intended for the
use of Thomas Brothers, of Palermo. * * * Our collector states that
he has every reason to believe that the vessel is for, the Italian government." They add that they have given special instructions to watch the
vessel.
4. On the 26th February, 1862, Lord Bussell forwards to Mr. Adams
a copy of the report of the commissioners of customs; he does not ask
him for further evidence, although it had been offered to him. -He contents himself with directing the English embassador at Turin to make
inquiries.as to the destination of the vessel.
5. On the 3d of March, 1862, the vessel was registered in the name of
"Henry Thomas, of Liverpool;" the next day she cleared for Palermo
and Jamaica; on the 11th of March, Bullock arrived with 4 officers, and
immediately went on board the vessel.
On the 22d of March, the Oreto left^ Liverpool in ballast, with a crew
of fifty-two men, all English, with the exceptiou of three or four, among
whom there was a single American.
At the same time the steamer Bahama left the same port with guns,'
arms, and munitions* brought by rail from Hartlepool (on the east coast
of England) to Liverpool, where they were put on board.
6. In reply to the inquiries made by the English ambassador, the
Italian minister for foreign affairs declared that he had no knowledge of the Oreto, but that he would make further inquiries, (March 1;)
he, however, supplied no further intelligence, nor did the English ambassador request any further information. According to Dudley's report, the Italian consul at Liverpool had no knowledge of the vessel
being intended for Italy; the English authorities, however, made no inquiries of him, or of the Italian minister in London.
3. Les commissaires des douanes a Liverpool, dans leur rapport du 22 fevrier
1862, se fondant sur les rapports de leurs agents, constatent que " c'est un magnifique
'steamer, qui conviendrait pour un service d'aviso; il est perce pour quatre canons.    .    .
II paralt qu'il est destine a l'usage de Thomas freres, de Palermo Notre
collectenr declare qu'il a toute raison de croire le navire destine au gouvernement
italien." Ils ajoutent qu'ils ont donn6 des instructions sp6ciales pour faire surveiller le
vaisseau.
4. Le 26 fevrier 1862, Lord Russell transmet k M. Adams copie du rapport des
commissaires de la douane; il ne lui demande point d'autres preuves, bien qu'on lui
en eu.t offert. II se contente de charger Pambassadeur d'Augleterre a Turin de
s'informer de la destination du navire.
5. Le 3 mars 1862, le navire fut enregistre au nom de " Henri Thomas, de Liverpool;" le lendemain, il s'acquitta au bureau de la douane pour Palermo et la
Jamaique; le 11 mars Bullock arriva aVec quatre officiers, et se rendit immediatement
k bord du vaisseau.
Le 22 mars, l'Oreto partit de Liverpool sur lest, avec un equipage de cinquante-deux
hommes, tous Anglais, k Pexception de trois ou quatre, parmi lesquels un seul
Americain.
Dans le meme temps,"le vapeur Bahama quittait le meme port avec des canons,
des armes et dee munitions, amenes en chemin de fer de Hartlepool (c6te orientale de
l'Angleterre) a Liverpool, ou ils furent pris a bord.
6. Sur les informations demandees par Pambassadeur d'Angleterre, le ministre
italien des affaires etrangeres declara qu'il n'avait aucune connaissance de l'Oreto,
mais qu'il s'informerait encore, (ler mars;) il ne fournlt toutefois pas d'autre nouvelle,
et l'ambassadeur d'Angleterre ne demanda pas non plus d'autres renseignements.
D'apres le rapport de Dudley, le consul d'ltalie a Liverpool n'avait aucune connaissance
que ce navire fu.t destine a l'ltalie; du reste, les autorites anglaises ne prirent point de
renseignements chez lui ni chez le ministre d'ltalie k Londres.
J110
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
7. The reports of the English officials showed that the Oreto was a
vessel of war.
A state of war had been officially recognized as existing between the
United States and the insurgent States, and the neutrality of Great
Britain had been officially proclaimed.
In spite of this, and in "spite of the complaints of Mr. Adams, the English authorities took no initiative; they did not insist ou its being-
proved what was the true destination of the vessel, nor who was her
real owner, who had ordered her, and who was to pay for her. They
did not insist on the true position of Fraser, Trenholm & Co. being shown
by legal proof, did not demand positive information as to the crew of
the vessel, nor as to the arrival of naval officers from the Confederate
States.
8. The special instructions given for watching the vessel appear not
to have been carried out or to have been without result.
The colonial authorities were not notified after the departure of the
vessel, and generally no steps were taken, notwithstanding the representations of Mr. Adams, which were repeated and accompanied by details furnished by Dudley, under date of the 26th March, 1862.
II.— What tooh place at Nassau up to the time of the acquittal of the Oreto.
*
9. On the 28th April, 1862, the Oreto arrived at Nassau—the Bahama
a few days later.
Bepresentation made on the 9th May by the American consul, Whiting, to the governor; the attorney-general replies, "that positive facts
are required."
The authorities make no inquiries themselves.
On the 4th of May a fresh representation, accompanied by depositions
of witnesses; the same answer.
10. McKillop, captain of Her Majesty's ship Bulldog, reports that
"the Oreto is apparently fitting and preparing for a vessel of war."
7. Les rapports des officiers auglais constataient que l'Oreto etait un vaisseau de
guerre.
L'etat de belligerance entre les Etats-Unis et les etats insurges etait officiellem'ent
reconnu, et la neutralite de la Grande-Bretagne avait ete ofnciellement proelamee.
Malgre cela, et malgre les reclamations de M. Adams, les autorites anglaises ne
prirent point d'initiative; elles n'insisterent point pour que l'on constai at la veritable
destination du navire, quel en etait le veritable proprietaire, qui l'avait commande et
qui devait le payer; elles n'insisterent point sur la'legitimation de la position de
Fraser, Trenholm, et Cie, ne demanderent point d'etre positivemont renseignees sur
1'equipage du navire, ni sur l'arrivee d'officiers de marine des etats-confederes.
8. Les instructions speciales donu6es pour faire surveiller le navire paraisseut ne pas
avoir ete suivies, ou bien etre restees sans resultat.
Les autorites coloniales ne furent point avisees apres le depart du navire; en
general, il ne fut pris aucune mesure, nonobstant les representations reitetees de
M. Adams, accompagnees de details fournis par Dudley, sous la date du 26 mars 1862.
II.—Ce qui sepassa & Nassau jusqu'd I'acquittement de l'Oreto.
t
9. Le 28 avril 1862, l'Oreto arriva a Nassau; lo Bahama, quelques jours plus tard.
Reclamation faite, le 9 mai, par le consul americain, Whiting, au gouverneur;
Fattorney-general ripsnd " qu'il faut des faits positifs."
Les autorites ne font d'elles-memes aucune euquete.
Le 4 mai, nouvelle reclamation, accompagnee de depositions de temoins; m&me
r6ponse.
10. McKillop, capitaine du navire de la marine royale le Bulldog, rapporte que
■" l'Oreto se prepare et se dispose, selon les apparences, en batiment de guerre."OPINIONS   OF  MR.   STAMPFLI.
Ill
In consequence of this report, the vessel is watched by a ship of war.
On the 8th June McKillop again reports, " that he has visited and examined the vessel, that she is fitted for war purposes, that she has fittings at
variance with the character of a merchant-vessel."
On the 9th of June the lading of the vessel begins; among other
things, arms and munitions are placed on board her; on the 10th, however, the cargo is discharged, and the vessel clears out in ballast-for
Havana.
11. Beport of Hickley, commander of the Greyhound, signed by all
the officers and men of his vessel, the 13th June, 1862.
"The Oreto is in every respect fitted out as a man-of-war, on the
principle of dispatch gun-vessels in the English navy."
Nevertheless the attorney-general states that he does not think that
the seizure of the vessel would be justifiable.
12. On the loth June the" crew leave the Oreto, because her destination is not certain.
On the 17th June, in the morning, Commander Hickley seizes the
vessel, but releases her at once, the attorney-general being of opinion
that there is not sufficient evidence.
The same day, however, the seizure is renewed, with the sanction of
the governor.
13. Thereupon a judicial inquiry is commenced, from which it appears
that the vessel is consigned by Fraser, Trenholm & Co., (financial
agents of the insurgent States in England,) to Adderley & Co., (commercial agency of the insurgents,) at Nassau.
On the 2d of August, 1862, the Oreto was acquitted; still, however,
"as there existed grave suspicions" without costs or indemnity being
granted. "What took place," says the judgment, "before the arrival
of the Oreto at Nassau, can only be admitted by way of elucidation or
explanation," a theory which the British case itself admits to be erroneous.
14. The course of action of the authorities at Nassau, the proceedings
A la suite de ce rapport, on fait surveiller ce navire par un vaisseau de guerre.
Le 8 jum, McKillop rapporte de uouveau "qu'il a fait la visite et I'examen du vaisseau,
qu'il est dispose pour des usages de guerre, qu'il y a des installations qui ne repondent pas
au caractere d'un vaisseau marchand."
Le 9 juiu, on commence a charger le navire; on y embarque entr'autres des armes et
des munitions; cependant, le 10, ou decbarge la cargaison et le navire s'acquitte sur
lest pour la Havane.
11. Rapport de Hickley, commandant du Greyhound, signe par tous les officiers et
employes de son vaisseau le 13 juiu 1862:
"L'Oreto est, sous tous les rapports, arme en batiment de guerre, d'apres le systeme
des canonuieres-avisos de la marine anglaise."
Pourtant l'attorney-general declare qu'il ne croit1 pas que l'on puisse justifier la saisie
du vaisseau.
12. Le 15 juin, 1'equipage quitte l'Oreto, parce que la destination du navire n'est pas
certaine.
Le 17 juin, au matin, le commandant Hickley saislt le vaisseau, mais le relache aus-
sitdt, l'attorney-general etant d'avis qu'il n'y avait pas de preuves suffisantes.
Toutefois, le mfeme jour, on renouvellela saisie avec la sanction du gouverneur.
13. La-dessus, commencement d'enquete judiciare, de laquelle il resulte que le vaisseau est consighe par Fraser, Trenholm et Cie (agents financiers des insurges en An-
gleterre) a Adderly et Cie (agence cpinmerciale des insurges) a Nassau.
Le 2 aout 1862, l'Oreto fut acquitte; mais toutefois, " comme il existait de serieux
soupcons," sans adjudication de depeus ni d'indemuite. " Ce qui se passa," dit le
jugement, " avant l'arrivee de l'Oreto a Nassau ne peut etre admis qu'a titre d'edair-
cissCments ou d'explications"—tbeorie que le memoire britannique qualifie lui-meme
d'erronee.
14. La maniere d'agir des autorites de Nassau, la procedure et le jugement dans112
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
and the judgment in this matter, exhibit in particular the following
defaults aud acts of negligence.
No initiative Was taken to procure evidence;
No account was taken of the reports of the officers of the fleet;
No account was taken of the previous history of the Oreto;
The evidence heard was imperfect; Maffit, commander of the Oreto,
was not heard at all; as witnesses on behalf of the Crown, persons belonging to the vessel under trial only were heard; as witness for the
defense, a partner in the interested house of Adderley & Co., and, so far
as appears in the minutes, noue of these depositions were sworn to.
15. The fact of the omission to transmit instructions in time to the
colonial authorities also operated disadvantageously, in regard to what
took place at Nassau.
The authorities at Nassau were not, from the first, informed of the
previous history of the Oreto, nor of the views of the government.
The judicial acquittal of the Oreto at Nassau took place without waiting for the approval of her seizure, and for the instructions which had
been sent from London, and which were still on their way.
16. The objection that the judicial decision at Nassau relieves Great
Britain of all responsibility cannot be maintained. As regards the internal (or municipal) law, the judgment is valid; but as far as inter
national law is concerned, it does not alter the position of-Great Britain.
III.—What took place subsequently at the BaJtamas immediately after the
acquittal.—Armament and equipment.
17. Enlistment of forty men of the crew at Nassau, (according to
the British case itself, the Oreto cleared on the ,7th of August, with
fifty-two men, for St. John's, New Brunswick.)
She is provided with guns, munitions, &c, with the aid of the English
i
cette affaire temoignent particulierement des actes de negligence et des defauts suivants:
Nulle iuitiative en vue de se procurer des preuves;
Nul comp'te tenu des rapports des officiers de la flotte;
Nul compte tenu des precedents de l'Oreto ;
Incomplete audition de temoins: Maffit, commandant de l'Oreto, ne fut point en-
tendu ; comme temoins dans l'interet de la couronne, on n'entendit que des personnes
appartenant au navire inculpe; comme temoin k decharge, un associe de la maisbn in-
tlressee de Adderley et Cle; et aiitant qu'il appert dans les actes, toutes ces depositions
furent non asser men tees.
15. Le fait que, de Londres, l'on omit de communiquer a temps des instructions
aux autorites coloniales, eut un effet egalement desavantageux sur ce qui se passa a
Nassau:
Les autorites de Nassau n'etaient pas, des l'abord, instruites des precedents de
l'Oreto ni de la maniere de voir du ministere ;
L'acquittement judiciaire de l'Oreto a Nassau se fit sans que l'on eut attendu la confirmation de la saisie et les instructions que l'on envoyait de Londres et qui se trou-
vaient encore en chemin.
16. L'objection que l'arret judiciaire de Nassau degage la Grande-Bretagne de toute
responsabilite n'est pas soutenable: vis-a-vis des lois interieures, (municipales,) le
jugement est valable ; mais a l'egard du droit des gens, il ne change pas la position de
la Grande-Bretagne.
III.—Ce qui se passa ulterieurement aux ties Bahamas, immediastement apres l'acquittement.—
Armament, 4quipement.
17. Enrdlement de quarante hommes d'equlpage a Nassau, (d*apresle memoire britannique lui-mfime, l'Oreto s'acquitta en douane le 7 aoftt avec cinquante-deux hommes,
pour St. Johns, New Brunswick).
II se pourvoit de canons, de munitions, &c, avec Paide du vaisseau anglais le PrinceOPINIONS  OF  MR.   STAMPFLI.
113
vessel Prince Alfred, which shipped at the wharf of Adderley & Co.
the cargo brought by the Bahama, while the Oreto, meantime, took in
coal and provisions at the island of Providence. From this latter place
she towed the Prince Alfred to Green Cay, where the transshipment of
the armament took place.
This having been done, she left for the coast of Cuba, under the name
of the Florida, and thence running the blockade to Mobile, which she
reached on the 4th of September, 1862.
18. The enlistment of the crew and the armament of the Florida at
the Bahamas are to be attributed to the neglect of the British authorities, and the following objections cannot be considered as valid :
That the Oreto had just been acquitted; for the enlistment and armament constituted new acts, and it was the more incumbent upon the
the authorities to exercise the strictest vigilance, inasmuch as, leaving
all other circumstances out of consideration, the judicial sentence itself
declared the vessel to be under grave suspicion.
That Green Cay was distant and little frequented. This objection
has the less importance, inasmuch as all that was done at Green Cay
had its point of departure at Nassau, and could easily have been perceived from the latter place.
There were no proceedings taken against the Prince Alfred as an accessory, in spite of the denunciation and representation of the American
consul, to whom it was thought sufficient to reply that he must "produce
evidence."
IV.—Cruise of the Florida, and her repeated shipments of coal in British
ports.
19. Having left Mobile, the Florida returned, on the 26th of January,
1863, to Nassau Bay. She there shipped coal for three months, taking
180 tons, according to the American statement; according to the British
statement, she had only room for 130 tons ; but the depositions of wit-
Alfred, qui embarqua au quai de Adderley et Cie la cagaison amenee par le Bahama,
pendant que, dans Pintervalle, l'Oreto s'approvisionnait de charbon et de vivres k Pile
de la Providence; de ce dernier endroit ilremorqua le Prince Alfred jusqu'a Green Cay,
oh eut lieu le transbordement de l'armement.
Cela fait, il part pour les cdtes de Cuba, sous le nom de "le Florida," et de la, en tra-
versant le blocus, pour Mobile, ou il arriva le 4 septembre 1862.
18. L'enr61ement de 1'equipage et l'armement du Florida aux Bahamas sont impu-
tables a la negligence des autorites britanniques, et l'onne peut considerer comme
fondees les objection suivantes:
Que l'Oreto venait d'etre acquitte; (car l'enrfilement et l'armenent constituaient de
nouveaux faits, et les autorites.avaient d'autant plus le devoir d'exercer une rigoureuse
attention, que, abstraction faite de toutes les autres circonstances, 1'arret judiciaire
declarait lui-meme le navire serieusement suspect;)■
Que Green Cay etait eioigne et peu frequente; (cette objection est d'autant moins■
importante que tout ce qui se fit a Green Cay partit de Nassau, et pouvait fort bien.
s'apercevoir clepuis ce dernier endroit.)
II n'y eut point d'enquete soulevee contre le Prince Alfred comme complice, malgre
la denonciation et la reclamation du consul americain, auquel on se contenta de repon-
dre qu'il devait '' deposer des preuves."
IV.—Croisi&re du Florida et ses approrisionnements  r6it6r6s de charbon dans des ports
britanniques.
19. Parti de Mobile, le Florida revient, le 26 Janvier 1863, dans la bale de Nassau;
il y fait du charbon pour trois mois, en prend 180 tonneaux, d'apres 1'expose americain:
il n'aurait eu place que pour 130 tonneaux, d'apres l'expose anglais j mais des deposi-
8 B1U
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
nesses state that there was coal placed on the deck and everywhere on
board.
According to the report of English experts, she required 46 tons to
return to Wilmingtou, the nearest port of the insurgents.
At the end of thirty-six hours' stay, (the British case says twenty-six
hours) she sails off again on a cruise, and destroys a certain number of
American vessels.
20. On the 24th February, 1863, she enters the British port of Barba-
does, and there ships 100 tons of coal.
21. On the 16th July she reaches St. George, the port of Bermuda,
stays there nine days, takes in a complete supply of coal, and sets off
again for Brest; during this voyage more vessels are destroyed.
22. On the 13th April, 1864, she again touches at Bermuda, but only,
it was said, for the purpose of landing a sick officer; she only remained
there a few hours, but reappear
eu on
me 18th July, 1864, and requested
to be admitted to effect some repairs and to ship some coal; she obtained
permission for five days, but staid nine; fraudulent shipment of coal
to the amount of 150 tons; she cruised for several days in sight of the
island ; the officers on the naval station saw all this, but took no steps.
She destroyed more American ships.
23. On the 7th of October, 1864, she closed her career in the port of
Bahia.
24. The repeated supplies of coal which we have just mentioned are,
in the first place, an infraction of municipal law and of the British regulations ; especially—
Of the circular of the 31st of January, 1862, which, at the time these
^events took place, had been for a long time published in all the colonies,
and of the explanatory instructions bearing date the 16th July, 1863,
addressed to the governors of the West Indian colonies, and known at
least during a portion of the same time.
They are, in particular, contrary to the second rule of the treaty
tionS'de temoins constatent qu'il y avait du charbon depose sur le pont et partout a
■bord.
Au dire des experts anglais, il lui en aurait fallu 46 tonneaux pour retourner a Wil-
i-mington, port insurge le plus proche.
Au bout de trente-six heures de sejour, (l'expose anglais dit vingt-six heures,) il
repart pour croiser, et detruit un certain nombre de vaisseaux americains.
20. Le 24 fevrier 1863, il entre au port britannique de Barbade et y embarque 100
Ttonneaux de charbon.
21. Le 16 juillet, il arrive k St.-Georges, port des Bermudes, y sejonrue neuf jours, y
fait un complet approvisionnement de charbon, et repart pour Brest; pendant ce voyage,
nouvelles destructions de vaisseaux.
22. Le 13 avril 1864, il touche de nouveaux k Bermude, mais uniquement, disait-il,
■ dans le but de mettre a. terre un offlcier malade ; il n'y resta que quelques heures, mais
y reparut le 18 juin 1864, demanda d'etre admis pour faire des reparations etembar-
• quer du charbon ; il obtint permission pour cinq jours, mais en resta neuf; embarque-
ment frauduleux de charbon, jusqu'a 150 tonneaux; il croisa plusieurs jours en vue
de l'ile; les officiers aux stations maritimes voyaient tout, mais ne prirent aucune
. mesure.
II detruisit encore des navires americains.
23. Le 7octobre 1864, il termina sa carriere dans leport de Bahia.
24. Lesapprovisionnements reiteres de charbon, que nous venous de mentiouner,
sont, en premier lieu, une infraction aux lois municipales et aux reglements de la Grande-
Bretagne, notamment:
A la circulaire du 31 Janvier 1862, qui, a l'epoque oh ces faits se passerent, etait
depnis longtemps proclamee dans toutes les colonies, et aux instructions explicatives
adressees, sous la-date du 16 juillet 1863, aux gonverneurs des colonies des Iudes Occi-
• dentales et connues au moins pendant une partie de la meme periode;
Ils sont surtout -en desaccord avec la 2e regie du traite, d'apres laquelle un etatOPINIONS   OF  ME.   STAEMPFLI.
11.
according to which a neutral state may not allow its ports to serve as a
base of operations for carrying on war or cruising.
25. The- objections made by Great Britain, that the cruises of the
Florida and the depredations committed by that vessel took place only
after she had run the blockade, and that there had been negligenee on
the part of the American officers charged with the maintenance of the
blockade, are not such as to release Great Britain from the responsibility
of her own negligence; this last was the primary and sole cause not only
of her running the blockade, but also of all the hostilities committed by
the Florida against the United States; and the assumed negligence of
the officers who maintained the blockade is, moreover, not proved any
more than the further assertion that the armament and equipment of
the Florida took place in the port of Mobile.
26. The further objection, made on the same side, that equal facilities
of supply were accorded to vessels of the United States, among others
to the San Jacinto, is equally immaterial and, besides, according to the
American case, it is not founded on fact, at least as far as the San Jacinto
is concerned.
V.—Armament and equipment of tenders.
27. In the course of her cruise, the Florida supplied officers and crews
to the following tenders:
On the 6th May, 1863, the Clarence was captured off the Brazilian
coast, and was supplied with guns and with a crew. She destroyed
several vessels.
On the 10th June, the Clarence captured the Tacony; the Clarence
was destroyed, and the Tacony transformed into a tender; the latter
also destroyed several vessels.
On the 25th June, the Tacony captured the Archer, which Avas transformed into a tender, and the Tacony was burnt. The Archer destroyed
the Caleb Cushing, a United States coast-guard vessel.
neutre ne doit pas sonffrir que ses ports serpent de base d'operations pour faire la guerre
ou croiser en mer.
25. Les objections faites par la Grande-Bretagne, que les courses du Florida et les
destructions commises par ce navire eurent lieu seulement apres qu'il eut franchi le
blocus, et qu'il y eut negligence de la part des officiers americains charges de garder
le blocus, ne sont pas de nature a pouvoir decharger la Grande-Bretagne de la
responsabilite pour ces propres negligences, celles-ci etant la premiere et seule cause,
non-seulement de la traversee du blocus, mais encore de toutes les hostilites commises
par le Florida contre les Etats-Unis; et la pretendue negligence des officiers charges
de garder le blocus n'est d'ailleurs pas constatee, pas plus que l'assertion ulterienre que
l'armement et l'equipement du Florida se soit fait dans le port de Mobile.
26. L'objection ulterieure, faite de la meme part, que l'on accorda les memes facilites
(l'approvisionnement aux vaisseaux des Etats-Unis, entr'autres au San Jacinto, est
egalement sans importance; et en outre, d'apres l'expose americain, elle n'est pas fondde
sur des faits, du moins pour ce qui concerne le San Jacinto.
V.—Armement et 6quipement de navires auxiliaires, (tenders.)
27. Durant le cours de sa croisiere, le Florida fournit des officiers et des equipages
aux vaisseaux auxiliaires suivants:
"Le 6 mai 1863, le Clarence fut capture sur les c6tes du Bresil et fut muni de canons
et d'un equipage; il detruisit plusieurs vaisseaux;
"Le 10 juin, le Clarence captura le Tacony; le Clarence fut detruit et le Tacony
transforme en tender; ce dernier detruisit egalement plusieurs vaisseaux;
"Le 25 juin, le Tacony captura 1'Archer, qui fut transforme en tender, et le
Tacony fut brftie. L'Archer detruisit le Caleb Cushing, vaisseau garde-cdtes des
Etats-Unis."
;mm
116
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
With regard to the question of responsibility, it is needless to say
that tenders are subject to the same rules as the principal vessel.
(B.)—Summary.
(a.) In regard to the construction, fitting out, and equipment of the
Oreto at Liverpool, and to her departure from that port, in regard also
to the departure of the Bahama, laden with arms for the Oreto, which
took place shortly afterward, the British authorities failed to use "due
diligence"in the fulfillment of the duties of neutrality, particularly also in
that they neither communicated with nor sent instructions to the colonial authorities with respect to these vessels.
(b.) It is the same with regard to the events which took place at Nassau; there was negligence especially in the absence of all initiative to
ascertain the truth, in the defective nature of the judicial proceedings,
and, the Oreto having been acquitted, in the absence of all control, and
of all watch over her proceedings, which alone rendered it possible for this
vessel to be armed and equipped in British waters; and, furthermore,
there was again negligence in that, after communications and instruction had been received, no-proceedings were taken, when the opportunity offered, against the guilty vessel, on the charge of acts in violation of the neutrality of Great Britain.
(c.) It is the same also with regard to the fact that, on several occasions, the vessel known theuceforth by the name of the Florida was
permitted to supply herself with coal in such quantities that, each time,
she was enabled to undertake a fresh cruise.
III.—THE ALABAMA.
(A.)—Facts.
1.— What tooTc place up to the time when this vessel escaped from Liverpool.
1. She was ordered at Liverpool, the plans were accepted, and the
Relativement a la question de responsabilite il va sans dire que les vaisseaux auxiliaires sont sujets aux memes regies que le vaisseau principal.
(B.)—RfesusuS.
a) Lors de la construction, de la preparation et de l'equipement de l'Oreto a Liver"
pool, et lors de sa sortie du port, de meme que lors de la sortie qui eut lieu peu de
temps apres du Bahama, charge des armes de l'Oreto, les autorites britanniques ont
neglige d'employer les " dues diligences " dans le maintien des devoirs de la neutralite,
notamment aussi en ce qu'elles n'ont fait aucune communication ni envoye destructions aux autorites coloniales relativement a ces vaisseaux.
b) II en est de meme pour ce qui concerne les.faits arrives a Nassau; il y eut-surtout
negligence: dans l'absence de toute initiative pour etablir la verite, dans la maniere
defectueuse de proceder en justice, et, l'acquittement de l'Oreto ayant eu lieu, dans
l'absence de tout contr&le et de toute surveillance de la conduite de l'Oreto, (ce qui
seul fournit a ce vaisseau la possibilite de s'armer et de s'equiper dans les eaux britanniques,) etalors mdme il y eut encore negligence en ce que, apres avoir recu des communications et des instructions, on ne proceda pas, le cas echeant, contre le vaisseau
coupable, sous 1'imputation d'actes de violation de la neutralite de la Grande-Bretagne.
c) II en est de meme encore pour ce qui concerne le fait d'avoir toiere a plusieurs
reprises que le vaisseau, connu des lors sous le nom de "le Florida," s'approvisionuat
de charbon en quantite telle que, chaque fois, il pouvait entreprendre de nouvelles
courses.
L'ALABAMA.
(A.)—Faits.
I.—Ce qui se jpassa jusqu'au moment ou ce vaisseau s'e'chappa de Liverpool.
1. II fut commande a Liverpool, les plans en furent acceptes et le marche fut signe
hMIMI.OPINIONS   OF  MR.   STJ3MPFLI.
117
. Laird;
e des tin a-
contract signed by Bullock, the 9th October, 1861; her engines were of
300 horse-power; she was pierced for six 32-pounder broad
side guns; she was further provided with two pivot-guns,
the one a rifled 100-pounder, the other an 8-inch smooth-bore gun.
On the 15th May she was launched under the name of the | 290."
2. On the 23d June, 1862, Mr. Adams's first representation to Lord Bus-
sell, stating that she was a vessel of war, and that her departure must
be stopped; it was declared that this vessel was not intended for
operations against the United States.
3. June 25, this remonstrance is transmitted by Lord Bussell to the
secretary to the treasury ;
To the law-officers of the Crown ;
The secretary to the treasury forwards it to the commissioners of
customs;
These latter to the collector.
4. The law-officers of the Crown report to Lord Bussell, June 30, as
follows: " If the facts alleged by Mr. Adams are in accordance with
truth, it is a manifest violation of the foreign-enlistment act, * * * but
evidence is necessary. They further advise Lord Bussell to inform Mr.
Adams that the government will investigate the case."
5. The collector reports to the commissioners of customs, and the
latter, relying on his statement, report in their turn to the treasury,
on the 1st July, that—
She is intended for warlike purposes ;
Several powder-canisters are on board, but no guns :
She is built for a foreign government, a fact which is not denied by Messi
but they do not appear disposed to reply to any questions respecting the futur
tion of the vessel after she leaves Liverpool.
The agents have no other reliable source of information.
The consul should communicate all the documents iu his possession.
The officials at Liverpool trill keep a strict watch on the vessel.
6. July 4, 1862, Lord Bussell transmits these reports to Mr. Adams,
and informs him,, among other things—
par Bullock le 9 octobre 1861;   machines de la force de 300 chevaux, perce de six
canons, de 32, sur les cdtes; arme en outre de deux canons k pivot, dont l'un raye de 100
livres et l'autre lisse de 8 pouces.
Le 15 mai, il fut mis a l'eau sous le nom de "290."
2. Le 23 juin 18Q2, premiere reclamation d'Adams a Lord Russell, disant que c'etait un
vaisseau de guerre, qu'il fall ait en arreter 1'expedition; on constata que ce batiment
n'etait pas destine a operer contre les Etats-Unis.
3. Le 25 juin, cette reclamation est transmise par Lord Russell au secretaire de la
tresorerie;
Aux jurisconsultes de la couronne;
Le secretaire de la tresorerie la transmet aux commissaires de douanes ;
Ceux-ci au collecteur.
4. Les jurisconsultes de la couroune font rapport a Lord Russell le 30 juin, disant:
I Si les faits presentes par M. Adams s'accordent avec la verite, c'est une violation
manifeste du foreign-enlistment act, . . . mais il faut des preuves. lis conseillent
d'ailleurs a Lord Russell de communiquer a M. Adams que Is gouvernement va s'enquerir
de l'affaire."
5. Le collecteur fait rapport aux commissaires des douanes, et ceux-ci, s'appuyant
sur sa declaration, rapportent a leur tour, le ler juillet, k la tresorerie:
" Est destine a des usages de guerre;
"Plusieurs boltes a poudre embarquees, mais pas de canons.
"Pour un gouvernement etranger, ce qui n'est pas nie par MM. Laird; mais ils ne
paraissent pas disposes k repondre a aucune question relative a la destination future
&u vaisseau, lorsqu'il aura quitte le port de Liverpool.
"Les agents n'ont point d'autre source de renseignements certains.
" Le consul devrait communiquer tous les documents qu'il possede.
"Les offlciers de Liverpool exerceront tine stride surveillance sur le vaisseau."
6. Le 4 juillet 1862, Lord Russell transmet ces rapports a M. Adams, et entr'autres
les points suivants:
I118
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
'•That the government will inquire into the matter;" that Consul
Dudley " ought to communicate the documents to the collector; that
the officials at Liverpool xoill watch the vessel attentively."
7. Between Mr. Adams's representation and Lord Russell's reply,
fifteen days elapsed before the result was arrived at that " the evidence
is insufficient."
8. Second effort of the American ag&nts.
9. July 9, 1862, Consul Dudley to the collector; communication of
documents.
9—10. The collector is not satisfied with them; " he ashs for legal
evidence."
July 10,1862, the inspector informs the collector that he finds the
vessel in the same condition as on the occasion of his first visit.
On the 11th the solicitor writes to the commissioners of customs that
the evidence rests on hearsay; that it is inadmissible; that there is
nothing which amounts to proof sufficient to justify a seizure.
On the 15th the commissioners inform the collector that there is not
sufficient evidence to warrant a seizure.
10. On the 21st the consul to the collector, with witnesses and sworn
depositions, demands the seizure of the vessel.
"The collector to the commissioners; requests instructions by tele-'
graph, as the vessel appears to be ready for sea, and may leave at any
moment.
"The commissioners to the solicitor, for opinion."
On the 22d, the assistant solicitor and the solicitor to the commissioners :
" We are of opinion that there is not sufficient evidence.
" The commissioners to the collector :
" Not sufficient evidence, but the consul may take proceedings at his own
risk and peril.'"
The same to the treasury; communicate documents. Shall the law-
officers of the Crown be consulted ?
. Hamilton (commissioner to the treasury) to Layard, under-secretary
"Que le gouvernement va s'enquerir de l'affaire;" que le consul Dudley "devrait
communiquer au collecteur les documents; que les fonctionnaires de Liverpool surveille-
ront attentivement le vaisseau."
7. Entre la reclamation de M. Adams et la reponse de Lord Russell il se passa quinze
jours pour arriver au resultat que " les preuves ne sont pas suffisantes."
8. Deuxieme essai des agents americains.
9. Le 9 juillet 1862, le consul Dudley au collecteur: Communication des documents.
9.—10. Le collecteur neles trouve pas suffisants; "il demands des preuves legates."
Le 10 juillet 1862, l'inspecteur au collecteur: a trouve le vaisseau dans le mSine etat
que lors de sa premiere visite.
Le 11, le solliciteur aux commissaires des douanes: repose sur des oui-dire; qn'elle
est inadmissible; Hen qui monte a, des preuves suffisantes pour justifier une saisie.
Le 15, commissaires au collecteur: pas suffisantes pour justifier la saisie.
10. Le 21, consul au collecteur, avec temoins et depositions assormeutees: demande
la saisie.
" Collecteur aux commissaires: demaude des instructions par telegraphe, attend// que
le nitrire paralt pret a prendre la mer et peut partir a tout moment.
" Les commissaires au solicitor pour preavis."
Le 22, l'assistant du solliciteur et le sollicitenr aux commissaires:
"Somuies d'avis qu'il n'y a pas de preuves suffisantes.
"Les commissaires au collecteur:
"Pas de preuves suffisantes, mais le consul peut se charger des poursuites d ses risques et
penis."
Les roemes a la tresorerie: Communication des pieces. S'il y aurait lieu a consulter
les jurisconsultes de la couronne T
Hamilton (comiuissaire a la tresorerie) a Layard, sous-secretaire du foreign office:OPINIONS   OF  MR.   STAEMPFLI.
119
of state for foreign affairs: "As the case may be considered pressing, I
write to you "unofficially to save time; it is said that the vessel is very
nearly ready for sea."
11. Adams to Lord Russell: Communication from the customs, and
Dudley's evidence.
July 23, documents received at the foreign office.
Foreign office to the law-officers of the Crown: "To report their
opinion to Lord Russell as soon as possible."
Dudley to the board of customs :
Communicates two fresh depositions, with an opinion of Mr. B. P. Collier,
that there is a flagrant violation of the foreign-enlistment act.
The board of customs to the assistant solicitor for opinion.
The assistant solicitor to the board: the documents do not materially
strengthen the case, but, in consideration of the high position of Mr. Collier,
the lords commissioners of the treasury might have recourse to the law-
officers of the Crown for their opinion.
Layard communicates all these additional documents also, on the same
day, to the law-officers, requesting them to report their opinion to Lord
Russell at the earliest possible moment.
12. On the morning of the 29th the law-officers write to Lord Russell:
Order the arrest of the vessel until the accused shall have proved her destination to be innocent. The order for her seizure was immediately sent to
Liverpool.
Dudley informs the board of customs on the 28th that the vessel is
to sail on the 29th.
13. The vessel sails during the night of the 28tli-29th of July, 1862.
14. From the 9th to the 29th, twenty-one days elapsed, and the result
of this delay was, that the vessel escaped.
II.—Measures taken to pursue the Alabama.
15. Two days after the escape of the vessel had become known, the
commissioners of customs, on the 31st July, 1862, gave the first order to
"Comme le cas peut etre jug6 pressant, je vous ecris officieusement pour economiser du
temps; on dit que le navire est, peu s'en faut, prSt dprendre la mer."
11. Adams a Lord Russell: Communication des douanes et preuves de Dudley.
Le 23, reception des pieces au foreign office.
Foreign office aux jurisconsultes de la couronne: "Commuuiquez votre opinion a
Lord Russell aussitot que vous le pourrez."
Dudley au conseil des douanes:
Communication de deux nouvelles depositions avec consultation de M. B. P. Collier,
qu'il y a violation flagrante du foreign-enlistment act.
Le conseil des douanes a l'assistant solicitor pour preavis.
L'assistant solicitor au conseil: n'apportent pas un renforl essentiel, mais vu la haute position de M. Collier, les lords'de la tresoreriepourraientrecourir aux lumieres des jurisconsultes de la couronue.
Layard communique aussi toutes ces piece's additionnelles ce jour meme aux jurisconsultes, avec recommandation de communiquer leur avis dans leplus bref delai a Lord
Russell.
12. Le 29, matin, les jurisconsultes au Comte Russell: recommandez la saisie du vaisseau jusqu'd ce que les accuse's aient prouve' sa destination innocente ; ordre de saisie partit im-
me'diatement de Liverpool.
Dudley au conseil des douanes, du 28 : avertit que le vaisseau doit partir le 29.
13. Le vaisseau sort dans la nuit du 28 au 29 juillet 1862.
14. Du 9 au 29, il s'ecoula vingt-et-un jours, et le resultat de ce delai fut la fuile du
vaisseau.
II.— Hesures prises pour poursuivre l'Alabama.
15. Deux jours apres que la fuite du vaisseau fut connue, les commissaires des douanes
donnerent le premier ordre de le poursuivre, le 31 juillet 1864, d'abord aux collecteurs
-
I120
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
pursue her, to the collectors at Liverpool and Cork in the first place,
desiring them, to seize her if she should touch at either of those ports.
On the 1st August the same order was sent to the collectors at Beaumaris and Holyhead.
On the 2d August this order was also sent to the governor of the Bahamas, for the port of Nassau; no communications or instructions were
sent to any other British ports or colonies; no ships were dispatched in
pursuit into neighboring British waters.
On the night of the 30th-31st, two days after her escape from Liverpool, the vessel was still in British waters, off Moelfra and Anglesey.
The pursuit of the 290 in these waters took place too late.
III.—The Hercules brings her a crew.
16. The tug Hercules, which brought back to Liverpool the Messrs.
Laird and their ladies, who had accompanied the 290, took on board at
the latter port a certain number of sailors intended for the 290. The
collector being informed of this fact
30, 1862, caused the Hercules to be searched
The officer charged with the execution of this order reported, " that
there were on board a certain number of men who admitted that they
formed part of the crew, and were about to join the gun-boat."
In spite of this, the collector did not arrest the Hercules.
Although he had been ordered to seize the 290, he did not even cause
the Hercules to be followed.
He wrote about Iter to London by post instead of telegraphing.
He did not receive from London any instructions with regard to the
enlistment; he was only desired to find out if there were powder and
guns on board.
The captain of the Hercules himself acknowledged, on the 1st of
August, that he had " taken off from twenty-five to thirty men who, as
he believed, were about to form part of the crew of the 290."
V a letter from Dudley, dated July
de Liverpool et de Cork, leur intimant de saisir le navire, s'il venait k aborder k l'un de
ces ports.
"Le ler aofit, le meme ordre fut donne aux collecteurs de Beaumaris et de Holyhead.
Le 2 aout, cet ordre fut aussi envoye au gouverneur des lies Bahamas, pour le port de
Nassau; il n'y eut point de communications faites, ni d'instructions envoyees k d'autrc-s
ports et colonies britanniques; il n'y eut point de vaisseaux envoyes a la poursuite
dans les eaux britanniques voisines.
Dans la nuit du 30 au 31, deux jours apres sa fuite de Liverpool, le vaisseau etait encore dans les eaux britanniques de Moelfra et d'Anglesey. La poursuite du "290 " dans
ces eaux eut lieu trop tard.
III.—L'Hercule amine un iquipage.
16. Le remorqueur l'Hercule, qui ramena a Liverpool MM. Laird, constructenrs de
navires, et leurs dames, qui avaient accompagne le " 290," embarqua dans ce dernier
port un certain nombre de matelots destines au " 290." Le collecteur, instruit de ce
fait par une lettre de Dudley du 30 juillet 1862, fit examiner le navire l'Hercule.
L'officier charge de l'execution de cet ordrerapporta "qu'il y avait a bord un certain
nombre de personnes qui admirent qu'elles faisaient partie de 1'equipage et qu'elles-
allaient rejoindre la canonniere."
Malgre cela, le collecteur n'arreta point l'Hercule.
Lui, qui avait l'ordre de saisir le "290," ne fit pas meme suivre l'Hercule.
II en ecrivit k Londres par la poste, au lieu de teiegraphier.
II ne recut non plus de Londres aucun ordre relatif a l'enrdlement; on le chargea
seulement de s'informer s'il y avait a bord de la poudre et des canons.
Le patron de l'Hercule reconnut rui-mSine, le ler aout, "avoir einmene vingt-cinq a
trente hommes, qui, a ce qu'il croyait, devaient faire partie de 1'equipage du " 290.'"
liii'nT^-OPINIONS   OF  MR.   STiEMPFLI.
121
The 290 left Moelfra Bay with a crew of about eighty men, and arrived
on the 10th of August off the coast of Terceira.
IV.—The Agrippina and Bahama bring arms and coal.
17. The Agrippina, Captain Quinn, arrived at Terceira, from London,
on the 18th of August, 1862, having on board coal, guns, and ammunition for the 290.
The Bahama, the same vessel which was to have taken her armament
to the Florida, next arrived from Liverpool on the 20th of the same
month, with Semmes and other officers of the Sumter on board for the
290, and also guns and ammunition, which had been regularly cleared
at the custom-house at Liverpool.
The transshipment of coal, guns, and ammunition to the 290 took place
from the 20th to the 23d.
On Suuday, August 24,1862, the 290 hoisted the insurgent flag, and
took the name of the Alabama.
Bullock and others returned on board of the Bahama.
Y.—Cruise and eventual fate of the Alabama.
18. She left Terceira for the West Indies. At Martinique the Agrippina supplied her afresh with coal. In the Gulf of Mexico she destroyed
some vessels of the United States merchant navy and the war-steamer
Hatteras.
On the 18th January, 1863, she arrived at Jamaica, landed her prisoners, made repairs, and shipped stores. Three British men-of-war
were in port, but no order appears ever to have arrived from London for
the arrest of the vessel.
She left Jamaica on the 25th January for the coast of Brazil; at
Bahia she fell in with the Georgia.   Thence she sailed for the Cape of
Le " 290" quitta la baie de Moelfra avec un equipage d'environ quatre-vingts hommes,
et arriva le 10 aout sur les cdtes de Terceira.
IV.—L'Agrippina et le Bahama amenent des armes et du charbon.
L'Agrippine, capitaine Quinn, arriva, le 18 aoht 1862, de Londres k Terceira, ayant
k bord du charbon, des canons et des munitions pour le " 290."
Le Bahama, le meme vaisseau qui devait avoir mene l'armement au Florida, vint
ensuite de Liverpool, le 20 du meme mois, ayant k bord Semmes et d'autres officiers
du Sumter pour le "290," ainsi que des canons et des munitions, qui avaient ete
regulierement acquittes en douane a Liverpool.
Le transbordement du charbon, des canons et des munitions sur le " 290 " eut lieu du
20 au 23.
Dimanche, le 24 aotlt 1862, le " 290 " arbora le pavilion des insurges et prit le nom de
l'Alabama.
Bullock et d'autres revinrent a bord du Bahama.
V.—Croisiere et sort final de l'Alabama.
18. H partit de Terceira pour les Indes Occideutales. A la Martinique, l'Agrippine
lui fournit de nouveau du charbon. Dans le Golfe du Mexique, il detruisit des vaisseaux de la marine marchande des Etats-Unis et le vapeur de guerre le Hatteras.
Le 18 Janvier 1863, il arriva a la Jamaique, y deposa ses prisonniers, fit ses reparations et embarqna des provisions. Trois vaisseaux de guerre britanniques etaient
presents; mais il ne paralt pas qu'il soit jamais venu de Londres l'ordre cFarreter le
navire.
II quitta la Jamaique le 25 Janvier pour se rendre sur les c6tes"du Bresil; a Bahia
il recontra le Georgia. De la il lit voile pour le Cap de Bonne Esperance, et le 23 juillet122
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
Good Hope, and on the 23d of July entered the harbor of Table Bay.
The circumstance which arose on the voyage in connection with the
Tuscaloosa will be mentioned further on, under No. VI.
She left Table Bay for the East Indies, and, on the 23d December,
1863, she anchored at Singapore, where she coaled.    On the 20th March,
1864, she returned to Capetown, where she also coaled. She left this
port on the 25th March, and anchored at Cherbourg ou the 11th June,
1861.
It was on leaving this port, on the 19th June, that she was sunk by
the United States man-of-war Kearsarge.
Part of the officers and crety were saved by the English yacht Deer-
hound, which happened to be in the neighborhood.
YI. — The tender Tuscaloosa.
19. While on her way from the coast of Brazil to the Cape of Good
Hope, the Alabama captured the Conrad, a United States merchant-
vessel, of Philadelphia, bound from Buenos Ayres to New York with a
cargo of wool.
This vessel was brought to Capetown under the name of the Tuscaloosa, it being announced that she was commissioned as a cruiser.
This mere declaration was accepted, and, on the departure of the
principal vessel for the Indian Ocean, Semmes dispatched the Tuscaloosa to cruise off the coast of Brazil.
On her return to Capetown, the vessel was seized by the governor, and
detained till the end of the war.
(B.)—CONSEDERATIONS.
AVith regard to the Alabama, Great Britain did not fulfill the obligations incumbent on her by virtue of the three rules of the treaty of
Washington.
il entra au port de Table Bay. Le cas qui se presenta en voyage avec le Tuscaloosa
sera decrit plus loin, sous le N° VI.
De cet endroit il partit pour les Indes Orientales, et le 23 decembre 1863, il jeta l'ancre a Singapore, on il fit du charbon. Le 20 mars 1864, il reviut a la Ville du Cap,
(Cape Town,) ou il se repourvut egalement de charbon. Quitta ce port le 25 mars, et
jeta l'ancre a Cherbourg le 11 juin 1864.
Cefut d sa sortie de ceport, le 19 juin, qu'il fut coule a fond par le vaisseau de guerre des
JStais- Unis le Eearsarge.
Une partie des officiers et de 1'equipage furent sanves par le yacht anglais le Deer-
hound, qui se trouvait dans ces parages.
VI.—Le tender Tuscaloosa.
19. En route depuis les c6tes du Bresil au Cap de Bonne Esperance, l'Alabama captura
le Conrad, navire de commerce des Etats-Unis, de Philadelphie, se rendaut de Buenos
Ayres a New York avec une cargaison de laine.
On amena ce navire a la Ville du Cap (Cape Town,) sous le nom de Tuscaloosa, et en
ahnongant qu'il etait commissioune comme croiseur.   ■
Cette simple declaration fut acceptee, et au depart du vaisseau principal pour l'coean
Indien, Semmes envoya le Tuscaloosa croiser sur les c6tes du Bresil.
A son retour a la Ville du Cap, le vaisseau fut saisi par le gouverneur et retenu jus-
qu'a la fin de la guerre.
(B.)—Considerants.
Pour ce qui concerne l'Alabama, la Grande-Bretagne n'a pas rempli les obligations
qui lui incombaient eu vertu des trois regies du traite de Washingtou.OPINIONS   OF  MR.   STAEMPFLI. 123
I.— With regard to tlie building and escape of the vessel.
(a.) It is beyond doubt that the Alabama was fitted out in British
ports as a vessel of war of the insurgent States.
(6.) The exampleof the Oreto luade it the duty of the British authorities "to be on their guard against acts of this kind.
(c.) They nevertheless did not in any way take the initiative, on the
representations of Dudley and Adams, with a view of inquiring into the
true state of affairs, although they had given an assurance that the
authorities should take the matter up. '
(d.) After sufficient evidence had been furnished, the examination of
it was so procrastinated, and the measures taken to arrest the vessel
were so defective, that she was enabled to escape just before the order
for her seizure was given.
II.— With regard to the measures taken for her pursuit.
(a.) The orders to jiursue and arrest the vessel were not given until
forty-eight hours afterward, and were only sent to a few ports close at
hand.
(b.) No instructions were sent to the other ports of Great Britain or
to those beyond the seas, except to that of Nassau.
(c.) No vessels, even, were sent in pursuit into the neighboring English waters.
III.— With regard to judicidl proceedings on account of the enlistment of a
crew, and of the armament of the vessel.
ift.) There were no more proceedings instituted against those persons
who had enlisted the crew of the Alabama, or those who had conveyed
her armament on board, than against those who had ordered or those
who had built her.
I.—it Ve'gard de la construction et de lafuite du vaisseau.
a) 11 est horsde doute que l'Alabama a ete pr6pare comme vaisseau de guerre des
etats insurges daus des ports britanniques.
b) Les precedents de l'Oreto faisaient un devoir aux autorites britanniques d'etre
sur leurs gardes vis-a-vis de faits de ce genre.
c) A la suite des.denunciations de Dudley et d'Adams, elles ne prirent pourtant pas
la moindre initiative en vue de s'enquerir du veritable etat des choses, malgre qu'elles
eussent donne l'assnrance que les autorities prendraient la chose eu mains.
d) Apres que l'on eut fourni des preuves suffisantes, l'examen de celles-ci fut telle-
ment retarde et les mesures prises pour faire arreter le vaisseau furent si defectueuses.
que le navire put s'echapper immediatement avant que l'on eat donne l'ordre de le
saisir.
II.—A l'egard des mesures prises pour le faire poursuivre.
a) Les ordres de poursuivre et d'arrSter le vaisseau apres sa fuite ne furent donnes
que quarante-huit heures plus tard, et ne furent adresses qu'a quelques ports rapproches.
. b) II ne fut donne aucune instruction aux autres ports de la Grande Bretagne ni a
ceux d'outre-mer, excepte a cenx de Nassau.
c) II u'y eut pas meme de vaisseaux envoyes a la poursuite dans les eaux anglaises
du voisiuage.
III.—A Ve'gard de poursuites judiciaires a cause de Venrolement d'un e'quipage etde l'armement.
a) II n'y eut pas plus d'enquSte instituee contre ceux qui avaient enr6ie 1'equipage
de l'Alabama et ceux qui lui avaient amene son armement, que contre ceux qui l'avaient
commande et ceux qui l'avaient construit.124
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
(&.) The disciplinary penalties inflicted on some seamen of the Alabama on their return to England cannot be looked upon as a serious
prosecution.
IY.— With regard to the free admission to British ports subsequently
alloived to this vessel.
(a.) The fact that the vessel was armed within English jurisdiction,
and in contravention of neutrality, was established by the order for her
seizure issued by the British, authorities.
(6.) The same is true with regard to the illegal and fraudulent departure of the vessel from the port of Liverpool.
(c.) The cognizance and complicity of the insurgent government,
which had commissioned the vessel, as also of the agents of that government at Liverpool, and of the officers who commanded her, had likewise been established.
(d.) Not only, therefore, had the British authorities the right, but it
was also their duty, to seize this vessel, in whatever British port she
might be found.
(e.) The British government even admitted this* right and this duty^
so far as the port of Nassau is concerned.
V.—The following objections are not valid:
(a.) That the arming and equipping of the vessel did not take place
within British jurisdiction, but only in waters lying beyond that jurisdiction.
By the first rule, and according to the natural interpretation of the
obligations of the law of nations, even a partial equipment for warlike
purposes is not allowable. This is, moreover, admitted by the English
law-officers of the Crown in their report of July 29, 1862. It is further
established that even the armament and the original equipment of the
Alabama were prepared within British jurisdiction, and shipped from
b) On ne considere point comme enquSte serieuse les peines disciplinaires pronon-
cees contre quelques matelots de l'Alabama, revenus en Angleterre.
IV.—A VSgard d$ la libre admission dans des ports bHtanniques subse'quem.nient accorde'e d oe
navire.
a) L'armement du vaisseau dans la juridiction de l'Angleterre, et contrairement k la I
neutralite ,etait constate par l'arret de saisie rendu par les autorites britanniques.
b) II en etait de meme de la sortie iliegale et frauduleuse du navire du port de
Liverpool.
c) L'on avait aussi constate la connaissance et la complicite du gouvernement des
insurges, qui avait commissionne le vaisseau, et respectivement des agents de ce gouvernement a Liverpool et des officiers qui commandaient le navire.
a) Les autorites britanniques avaient done, non-seulement le droit, mais encore le
devoir, de saisir ce vaisseau, dans quelque port britannique qu'on le reucontrat.
e) Le gouvernement britannique a meme reconnu ce droit et ce devoir pour ce, qui
concerne le port de Nassau.
V.—Les objections suivantes ne sont pas fondees.
a) Que l'armement et l'equipement du vaisseau n'ont pas eu lieu dans la juridiction britannique, mais seulement dans des eaux situees en dehors de cette juridiction.
D'apres la regie 1, et selon une interpretation naturelle des obligations.du droit des
gens, une preparation, meme partielle, a des buts de guerre n'est pas admissible; c'est
ce que, du reste, les jurisconsultes de la couronne en Angleterre ont reconnu eux-
■ memes dans leur preavis du 29 juillet 1862; en outre, il est constate que mtoe
l'armement et le premier equipement de l'Alabama furent prepares dans la juridiction britannique et partirent de ports britanniques; une division des circonstances
^MftafaOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ST.EMPFLI.
125
British ports. A division of the circumstances attending an offense
does not, in itself, do away with the offense, more especially when the
same cognizance and criminal purpose attach to all the persons concerned.
(&.) That the vessel having been commissioned for the insurgent
States, her seizure within British jurisdiction was not allowable. This
objection is refuted by the fourth general rule of law laid down at the
beginning of this draught.
(c.) That Great Britain cannot be held responsible for the negligence
of which subordinate officials may have been guilty in the pursuit of
the vessel, for indiscretions which may have been committed by some
unknown subordinate with regard to her impending seizure, &c. Taken
by itself, an act of imprudence or negligence on the part of subordinate
authorities or officials does not, it is true, necessarily entaiL responsibility for the extreme consequences of such act; but when a series of
acts of neglect are in question, each of the acts in that case becomes
of importance.
(d.) That the United States were themselves guilty of negligence—
In having furnished incomplete and tardy evidence through their
agents.
This objection is refuted by the fifth general rule of law laid down
above.
By the inaction of the vessel-of-war Tuscarora,in the waters of Liverpool.
Even if this fact were established, it would be no excuse for acts of
negligence on the part of the British authorities.
IV.—THE SHENANDOAH.
(A.)—FACTS.
I.—What took place from the time of her departure to that of her armament
and equipment in the waters of Madeira.
1. This vessel was originally the Sea King, a merchant-vessel belong-
du deiit n'invalident pas ce delit en lui-meme, surtout lorsqu'on recontre, chez toutes
les personnes interessees, la meme connaissance et la meme intention criminelle.
b) Que le vaisseau ayant ete commissionne pour les etats insurgeSj une saisie de
ce vaisseau dans la juridiction anglaise n'etait plus admissible; cette objection est
refutee par la regie generale de droit No. 4, posee au commencement de ce projet.
c) Que la Grande Bretagne ne peut etre responsable pour des negligences qui ont
pu se presenter de la part d'employes subalternes dans la poursuite du vaisseau, pour
l'indiscretion qui a pu se commettre par un subalterne inconuu, concernant la saisie
imminente, &c; pris isoiement, un acte djimprudence ou de negligence de la part
d'autorites et d'employes subalternes n'entralne pas necessairement, il est vrai, la
responsabilite pour les consequences extremes de cet acte; mais lorsqu'il s'agit d'une
serie de negligences, chacun des faits prend alors de l'importance.
d) Que les Etats-Unis se sont eux-memes rendus coupables de negligence—
En fburnissant defectueusement et trop tard des preuves par le moyen de leurs
agents. Cette objection est refutee par la regie generale de droit, No. 5, posee plus
haut—
Par la conduite peu active du vaisseau de guerre le Tuscarora dans les eaux de Liverpool. Quand meme il serait etabli, ce fait ne serait pas une excuse pour les actes de
negligence des autorites britanniques.
LE   SHENANDOAH.
(A.)—Faits.
I.—Ce qui se passa depuis son depart jusqu'd son armement et e'quipement dans les eaux de
Madere.
1. Ce navire etait originairement le Sea King, vaisseau marchand appartenant a une126
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
ing to a firm in Bombay; she was employed in the East India trade,
and was built at Glasgow, in 1863. She was a long, rakish
vessel of 1,700 tons, with engines of 220 horse-power, (Bob-
ertson & Co., who sold her, say only 150 horse-power, and not 220,) making ten knots an hour; she had made three hundred and twenty miles in
twenty-four hours; and was built by celebrated ship-builders on the
Clyde.
2. She left in November, 1863, for New Zealand and for the China seas,
and returned to London with a cargo of tea. Before her voyage to
New Zealand, Dudley saw her at Glasgow, aud pointed her out to his
superiors as a steamer likely to be intended for a privateer.
3. On the 20th September, 1864, she was sold in London to Bichard'
Wright, of Liverpool, a British subject, and father-in-law to Prioleau,
head partner of Fraser, Trenholm & Co. The sale was registered the
same day.
1. On "the 7th October, 1864, Wright gave a power of attorney to a
man named Corbett, a British subject, (who was implicated in matters
connected with vessels running the blockade,) enabling him to sell the
vessel whenever he could within six months, at a minimum price of
£45,000 sterling.
5. On the 8th October, 1864, she cleared for Bombay; left London
with a crew of forty-seven men, having first taken in coal and provisions for twelve months. She had on board two 18-pounder guns on
carriages, (12-pounders, according to the British Counter Case, p. 103.).
The same night the southern agent at Liverpool was informed of her
departure, by telegraph.
6. On the 8th October, 1864, the very same night, the Laurel, screw-
steamer, nearly new, and of first-class make, left Liverpool with about
twenty citizens of the Southern States on board, and some cases marked
'I machinery," which contained guns and gun-carriages, such as are used
on board ships of war. The Laurel and the Sea King had arranged
to meet in the bay of Funchal, in the island of Madeira.
maison de Bombay; il etait employe dans le commerce des Indes Orientales et avait
ete construit ft- Glasgow, en 1863. C'etait un vaisseau long, a mature inclinee, d'une
capacite de 1,790 tonneaux, avec machines auxiliaires de 220 chevaux, (Robertson et
Cie, vendems, disent settlement 150 chevaux, et non 220,) faisaut dix noeuds a l'heure;
il avait fait 320 milles en vitigt-quatre heures; il avait ete construit par de ceiebres
constructeurs des bords de la Clyde.
2. Il partit, en novembre 1853, pour la Nouvele-Zeiande et pour lesmers de la Chine
et revint a Londres avec une cargaison de the. Avant son voyage a la Nouvelle-Ze-
lande, Dudley le vlt a Glasgow et le siguala a ses superieurs comme uu steamer pro-
bablement destine a faire la course.
3. Le 20 septembre 1864, il fut vendtt ;\*Londres, a Richard Wright de Liverpool,
sujet anglais et beau-pere de Prioleau, ce dernier le principal associe de Fraser, Trenholm et Cie.   La vente fut euregistree le m6me jour.
mini eu \-/   .    x-iU) venue luo euie^isuiee ie meme jour.
4. Le 7 octobre 1864, Wright donna procuration a un nomme Corbett, sujet anglais,;
implique dans des faits relatifs k des vaisseaux qui forcaieut le blocus,) de vendrele
navire quand il le pourrait, dans le delai de six mois au prix minimum de 45,000 livres
sterling.
5. Le 8 octobre 1864, il s'acquitta en douane pour Bombay, partit de Londres avec:
q.uarante-sept hommes d'equipage, apres avoir auparavaut   embarque du charbon et
des provisions pour douze mois.   II avait a bord deux canons montes, de 18 livres, (de 1" ■
livres, d'apres le contre-memoire britannique, p. 103.)   Le meme soir, le depart en fut
annouc6 par teiegraphe k 1'argent du sud a. Liverpool.
6. Le 8 octobre 1864, le meme soir encore, le Laurel, vapeur a h6lice, presque neuf
et superieurement construit, partit de Liverpool, emportant une vingtaine de citoyens
des etats du sud et des caisses, designees comme " machines," lesquelles coittenaient
.loo    /.Q.nrtnc    At-. nAQ    tl.TTmfca.    +:a1.Q   Mill'   nunv   AnrnVJnr.^.0    ^    T\r*¥./l     rlao   irniDnnnnv   An   ..... ........ T  ..
des canons et dt
Laurel et
Madere.
Le sea
. aflfats, tels que ceux employes a bord des vaisseaux de guerre.
King s'etaient donne rendez-vous dans la baie de Funchal, lie de
 MOPINIONS   OF   MR.   STAEMPFLI.
127
7. On the 19th of October the Sea King arri ved off Fun dial; the Laurel
had preceded her by two days. The two ships met and effected the
transshipment of the cannon, &c., (six large guns, two small, carriages,
munitions, powder, muskets, &c.;) for this, thirty-six hours sufficed.
Corbett then came forward, announced the sale of the Sea King,- and
tried to induce the crew to remain. Out of eighty sailors, however,
only twenty-three remained. The officers and men retained in the Sea
King numbered in all forty-two, and hardly formed half her proper
complement, which forced her to use her engines.
She took the name of the Shenandoah, and continued on her way
under the insurgent flag.
II.—Steps taken by the English consul at Teneriffe, and their result.
8; On the 12th of November, 1864, Lord Bussell received from the
English consul, at Teneriffe, a detailed report, dated October 30, of
what had taken place in the waters of Madeira.
The consul also sent Corbett, captain of the Sea King, as a prisoner
to England. Among other things the report ot the English consul
says the Laurel arrived at Teneriffe on the 2ist October for the purpose
.of coaling; the master, Ramsay,.came before the consul and expressed
a desire to laud forty-three passengers who wished to return to England
by the first opportunity; they were from the British steamer Sea King,
of London, which had been wrecked near the Desertas Islands.
On the 23d October the Laurel proceeded on her voyage. The master
of the Sea King, however, did not come forward to make the usual
declarations and to ask for assistanee; the inquiries made by the consul
proved that the Sea King had not been wrecked at all, but that she had
been already sold in London, and was to be handed over on the high
seas.
The consul took the depositions on oath of four sailors who had been
landed. In these depositions it was stated that the Laurel had left
Liverpool bound for Nassau; that she had taken on board twenty-six
7. Le 19 octobre, le Sea King arriva deyant Funchal; le Laurel l'y avait precede de
deux jours. Les deux vaisseaux se rejoigneut et effectuent le transbordement des
canons et des accessoires, (six grandes pieces, deux petites, affQts, munitions, poudre,
fusils, &c.;) il suffit pour cela de trente-six heures. Corbett alors se'presenta, anuou^a
la vente du Sea King et chercha a engager 1'equipage a rester. De quatre-vingts
matelots, il n'en resta cependant que vingt-trois. Les officiers et les hommes que lo
Sea King retint comptaient en tout qttarante-deux, et ne formaient guere que la tnoitie
de ce qu'il lui fallait, ce qui l'obligea a se servir de ses machines.
II prit le nom de Shenandoah, et continua sa route sous le pavilion des insurges.
II.—Demarches du consul anglais d TSneriffe, et leurs suites.
8. Le 12' novembre 1864, Lord Russell recut du consul anglais a T6neriffe un
rapport detailie, date du 30 octobre, sur ce qui s'etait passe dans les eaux de Madere.
Le consul envoyait egalement Corbett, capitaine du ' Sea King, prisonnier en
Angleterre. Le rapport du consul anglais dit entr'autres: Le Laurel arriva le 21
octobre au port de Teneriffe pour faire du charbon; le patron Ramsey se presenta
au cousulat et exprima le desir de debarquer quaraute-trois passagers qui desiraient
retourner en Angleterre par la premiere occasion; ils venaient du steamer britannique
le Sea King, de Londres, qui avait fait naufrage aupres des lies Desertas.
. Le 23 octobre, le Laurel se remit en voyage. Cependant le patron du Sea King ne se
presentait pas pour faire prendre les declarations d'usage et demander assistance; les
informations que fit prendre le consul etablirent que le Sea King n'avait pas fait
naufrage du tout, mais qu'il avait deja. ete vendu k Londres et devait etre livre" en
pleine mer.
Le consul entendit les depositions faites sous serment de quatre matelots que l'on
avait debarques. Ces depositions constataient que le Laurel etait parti de Liverpool
avec la destination de Nassau; qu'il emportait vingt-six officiers et soixante-deux128
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
officers and sixty-two sailors in addition to her proper crew, sixty-five
shells, five tons of cannon-powder, and various other munitions; that
at Madeira she had taken in 300 tons of coal; that the transshipment to
the Sea King had been effected at a point off the Desertas during calm
weather; that the sailors were armed with cutlasses and revolvers;
that the officer in command had taken possession of the Sea King in
the name of the insurgent States.
9. On the 1st November, 1864, the law-officers of the Crown gave
their opinion on the report of the consul at Teneriffe and on the sending
of Corbett as a prisoner to England. Among other things they say,
" We are not of opinion that;a vessel outside of British waters is subject to British jurisdiction with regard to what takes place on board
her."   (British Case, p. 153.)
10. Further inquiries in London; examination of sailors who had returned.
11. December 1, 1854. Second report of the law-officers; in this
second report the same law-officers declare that " on more deliberate
consideration, if the Sea King ought to be deemed to have been still a
British ship when Captain Corbett endeavored to induce the men on
board her to accept the confederate service, the question whether her
deck was not then ' a place belonging 'or subject to Her Majesty,' is a
serious question which ought also to be raised by the indictment. In
our former report we stated that we did not think a British merchant-
ship at sea was included within Her Britannic Majesty's dominions, in
the sense of the act; but, in the second clause, there are also the other
and larger words above noticed, to which we did not then advert, and
which might perhaps receive a more extensive construction." (British
Case, p. 155.)
12. On the 8th December, 1864, Lord Bussell communicates to Lord
Lyons the report of the consul at Teneriffe. He adds that, on the return
of the sailors, an inquiry will be instituted, and that, by the advice of
the law-officers of the Crown, a prosecution had already been directed
against Corbett.
marins outre son propre equipage, soixante-ciriq obus, cinq tonnes de poudre a canon,
et diverses autres munitions; qu'il embarqua a Madere 300 tonnes de charbon ', que'le
transbordement k bord du Sea Kiug s'etait fait sur un point des Desertas par une mer
calme; que les marins furent armes de sabres et de revolvers.
L'officier commandant prit possession du Sea King au nom des etats insurges.
9. Le ler novembre 1864, les jurisconsultes de la couronne britannique donnerent
leur preavis sur le rapport du consul de Teneriffe et sur l'envoi de Corbett comme
prisonnier en Angleterre; ils y disent entr'autres: "Nous ne sommes pas d'avis qu'un
vaisseau hors des eaux britanniques est soumis a la jurisdiction britanuique pour ce
qui se passe sur son tillac."   (Memoire anglais, p. 153.)
10. Enquete compiementaire a Londres; audition de marins retournes.
11. Le l-r decembre 1864, deuxieme rapport des jurisconsultes. Dans ce denxieme
rapport les memes jurisconsultes declarent que " apres une plus mure deliberation, si
le Sea King doit etre consider comme ayant toujours conserve la nationalite
britannique au moment oh. le capitaine' Corbett a essaye de decider les hommes a son
bord a accepter le service confedere, on peut se demander si le pout de ce navire
n'etait pas alors un lieu dans la sujltion ou au pouvoir de sa Majeste: et c'est une
question serieuse que l'accusation devra egalement soule\ er. Dans notre precedent
rapport, nous avons formule l'opinion qu'un vaisseau de commerce britannique ne
rentrait pas dans les domaines de sa Majeste britannique, selon le sens de Facte;
mais la deuxieme clause renferme d'autre part des termes plus larges que nous venons
de signaler, que nous n'avions point alors en vue, et qui seraient peut-etre suscoptibles
de recevoir une interpretation plus etendue."   (Memoire britannique, p. 155.)
12. Le 8 decembre 1864, Lord Russell communique a Lord Lyons le rapport du
consul de Ten6riffe, et il ajoute qu'au retour des matelots l'on entamera une enquete;
que sur le preavis des jurisconsultes de la couronne Penqu&te etait d£ja entamee
conire Corbett.OPINIONS  OF  MR.   STAEMPFLI.
129
13. Result of this last proceeding; acquittal of Corbett by the jur
III.—Conduct of the Shenandoah at Melbourne.
14. On the 25th January, 1865, the Shenandoah arrived at Port
Philip, in the colony of Victoria, and anchored in Hobson's Bay.
Toward the middle of November, 1864, the mail left Europe and
reached Melbourne about the middle of January, bringing the news respecting the Sea King and her transformation into the Shenandoah.
15. On the 25th January, 1865, the American consul protested against
the admission of this vessel and demanded her seizure of the governor.
The law-officers were consulted; the governor answered, on the 30th,
by a refusal.
It was decided on the same day by the council that the captain of the
Shenandoah should not be asked for the commission of his government.
16. February 10. The American consul to the governor; protest
against enlistments.
February 13. The law-officers find the evidence sufficient.
February 13. The governor determines to await the report of the
police authorities before taking action.
February 14. The chief commissioner of police reports: u Waddell refuses to allow his ship to be searched, saying that he will oppose force by
force."
February 14. Decision of council to request Waddell to reconsider his
resolution of forcible opposition. Suspension of permission to make repairs.   Beply of Captain Waddell.   The order of suspension is revoked.
The law-officers of the Crown, subsequently consulted as to the refusal of Captain Waddell, stated to Lord Bussell in their report of the
21st of April, 1865, that u the right of forcibly executing a warrant on
a belligerent vessel did not exist, but that an order to leave the port at
once would be the consequence."
17. Subsequent steps of the American consul With respect to the enlistments.
13. Resultat de cette derniere enquete: acquirement de Corbett par le jury.
III.—Ce que fit le Shenandoah d Melbourne.
14. Le 25 Janvier 1865, le Shenandoah arriva k Port Philippe, colonic Victoria, et
jeta l'ancre dans la baie de Hobson.
Vers la mi-novembre 1864, le courrier partit d'Europe et arriva vers la mi-janvier a
Melbourne, apportant les nouvelles concernant le Sea King et sa transformation en
Shenandoah.
15. Le 25 Janvier 1865, le consul americain protesta contre l'admission de ce navire
et en demanda la saisie au gouverneur. Les conseillers hSgaux furent entendus; le
gouverneur repondit, le 30, par un refus.
Le conseil decide.le meme jour qu'il ne sera pas demande au capitaine du
Shenandoah la commission de son gouvernement.
16. Fevrier 10, le consul americain au gouverneur: reclamation contre des
enrdlements.
Fevrier 13, les conseillers legaux trouvent les preuves suffisantes.
Fevrier 13, le gouverneur decide d'entendre le bureau de police avant de donner
suite.
Fevrier 14, le commissaire en chef de la police rapporte: Waddell refuse de laisser
faire des recherch.es sur son vaisseau, disant qu'il opposerait la force d la force.
Fevrier 14, decision du conseil de faire prier Waddell de revenir sur sa resolution de
s'opposer par la force. Suspension de la permission de faire les reparations. Reponse
du capitaine Waddell.   L'ordre de suspension est revoque.
Les jurisconsultes de la couronne, consultes plus tard quant au refus du capitaine
Waddell, declarerent a Lord RusseU, dans leur preavis du 21 avril 1865, que " le droit
d'executer un mandat sur un vaisseau des belligerants par la force n'existait pas, mais
que la sommation de quitter le port tout de suite en resulterait."
17. Demarches ulterieures du consul americain concernant les enr61ements.
9b130
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
On the 17th Februarv, the consul first goes to the office of the chief
commissioner of police, whom he does not find in; then goes to the
houses of parliament to find the attorney-general, who requires a
written deposition made on oath. Thence he repairs to the office of the
detective police, and there receives answer that no action can be taken
without a warrant. The magistrate declares himself unable to take
upon himself to issue a warrant on the deposition of a single witness,
and refers him to Mr. Call at Williamstown, who might have evidence in
his possession from the water police.
It was about 7 o'clock in the evening.    Seeing how little inclined the
authorities were to act, the consul determined himself to take the deposi-;
tion.   A copy of it was brought, on the same night, to the attorney-
general, but he was no longer at the houses of parliament.
18. The Shenandoah left on the morning of the 18th of February.
19. It was stated, and the governor of Melbourne himself states in a
circular, dated February 27, 1865, that a considerable number of sailors,
intended to re-enforce her crew, had been taken on board the Shenandoah before she left the port on the 18th of February.   (British Case, p. 168.)
20. Nor is it denied that she took on board 300 tons of coal, which,
added to the 100 she had already on board, made 400 tons. (See supplementary quotation in consideration No. Ill, letter d, post.)
The committee of officers appointed to report as to the repairs of the
vessel only stated that the Shenandoah was not fit to proceed to sea as
a steamship.
IV.—Cruise and final fate of the Shenandoah.
21. On leaving Melbourne, the Shenandoah went to the Pacific, and
thence through Behring's Straits to the Arctic Ocean, where she destroyed the American whalers which she met. It is asserted that
she burned fifteen vessels after Captain Waddell knew of the termination of the insurrection. She remained registered as an English vessel
until the 17th of October, 1865.
Le 17 fevrier, le consul se rend d'abord au bureau du chef de la police, qu'il ne
trouve pas chez lui; puis va trouver l'attorney-general au Parlement; celui-ci
demande une deposition ecrite faite sous serment. De la, il se rend au bureau de la
police secrete: on lui repond que l'on ne peut agir sans mandat. Lejuge d'instructiou
dedarane pouvoir prendre sur lui de donner un mandat d'arret sur les depositions
d'un seul temoin, et le renvoie chez M. Call, a Williamstown, lequel pourrait avoir des
temoignages de la police du port.
II etait environ 7 heures du soir; voyant le peu d'empressement des fonctionnaires,
le consul se decida a recevoir lui-meme la deposition. Copie en fut apportee le mfime
soir, a 9 heures, a l'attorney-general, mais il ne se trouvait plus a la chambre.
18. Le Shenandoah partit le 18 fevrier, dans la matinee.
19. II fut constate, et le gouverneur de Melbourne le constate lui-meme dans une
circulaire du 27 fevrier 1865, qu'un nombre considerable de marins destine's d renforcer
Ve'quipage avaient e'te recus a bord du Shenandoah avant qu'il ne quittat le port, le 18
fevrier.    (Memoire britannique, p. 168.)
20. II n'est pas conteste non plus qu'il prlt 300 tonnes de charbon, ce qui, ajoute aux
100 qui setrouvaient d6ja a son bord, faisai 1400 tonnes. (Voyez citation complementaire
dans le considerant N° III, litt. d, ci-apres.)
Les experts officiels deiegues pour les reparations du navire constaterent seulement
que le Shenandoah n'etait pas capable de prendre la mer comme navire a vapeur.
TV.—Croisiere et sort final du Shenandoah.
21. Au sortir de Melbourne, le Shenandoah se rendit dans l'ocean Pacifique et de
la, par le detroit de Behring, dans l'ocean Arctique, oil il detruisit les baleiniers
americains qu'il y rencontra. On pretend qu'il y brula encore quinze vaisseaux apres
que le capitaine Waddell eut eu connaissance de la fin de l'insurrection. II resta
enregi8tr.e comme vaisseau anglais jusqu'au 17 octobre 1865.OPINIONS   OF  MR.   ST2EMPFLI.
131
On the 6th November, 1865, Waddell brought the vessel back to
Liverpool, where she was handed over to the United States. Waddell
declared that he learned of the surrender of Lee on the 28th June, but
that he still knew nothing of the insurgent government having come to
an end, of which he did not become aware until the 2d of August.
(B.)—Considerations.
I.—Conduct of the British authorities up to the moment of the departure of
the Sea King and Laurel on the 8th October, 1864.
(a.) The previous acts of the Florida, Alabama, and Georgia should,
have rendered the British authorities more active, with a view to preventing the repetition of similar acts.
(b.) And yet nothing was done either to secure an increase of vigilance, or with the view of originating more effective measures of discovery and pursuit, or of supplementing the municipal law where necessary.
(c.) The transfer of the Sea King to the name of Wright of Liverpool,
who was closely connected with one of the principal partners of the
firm of Fraser, Trenholm & Co., (September 20,1864,) coupled with the
embarkation of cases containing cannon and arms on board the Laurel,
would have furnished sufficient grounds for intervention, had there been
any disposition to take the initiative.
(d.) The objection, often repeated, that English law and English legal
proceedings do not admit of such an initiative being taken, cannot be
sustaiued, according to the three rules and the general rule of law
quoted above.
(e.) Nevertheless, one might hesitate to consider these first facts, by
themselves, as sufficient to establish a violation of neutrality on the part
of Great Britain, without at the same time examining the subsequent,
career of the Shenandoah.
Le 6 novembre 1865, Waddell ramena le vaisseau a Liverpool, oh il fut remis aux
Etats-Unis. Waddell dedara avoir appris la capitulation de Lee le 28 juin, mais
n'avoir encore rien su de la cessation du gouvernement des insurges, qu'il n'apprit que
le 2 aoftt.
(B.)—CONSlDlDRANTS.
I.— Conduite des autoritds  britanniques jusqu'au moment de la sortie du Sea King el du
Laurel, le 8 octobre 1864.
a) Les actes precedents du Florida, de l'Alabama et du Georgia devaient susciter
plus de vigueur de la part des autorites britanniques, afin d'empecher la repetition
d'actes de la meme nature ;
b) Et x>ourtant il ne se fit rien, ni pour renforcer la vigilance, ni en vue de prendre
une nieilleure initiative dans le but de decouvrir et de poursuivre, ni pour completer les
lois municipales oh. il pouvait etre necessaire qu'elles le fussent.
c) La transcription du Sea King au nom de Wright de Liverpool, qui etait en relation intime avec un associe principal de la maison Fraser, Trenholm et Cie, (le 20 sep-
tembre 1864,) jointe au chargeraent de caisses contenant des canons et des armes a
bord du Laurel, aurait fourni assez de motifs d'intervenir, s'il y avait eu de l'initiative.
d) L'objection souvent repetee que les lois anglaises et la procedure anglaise ne
permetteut pas une pareille initiative n'est pas soutenable, d'apres les trois regies et la
regie generale de droit citee plus haut.
e) Cependant. l'on pourrait hesiter a voir dans ces premiers actes seuls des motif's
suffisants de violation de neutralite de la part de la Grande-Bretagne, si l'on n'examinait
en meme temps la suite des aveutures du Shenandoah.132
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
II.—Conduct of the British authorities from the departure of the* Sea King
and the Laurel to the events which took place at Melbourne.
(a.) The communications seat on the 12th of November, 1864, by the
British consul at Teneriffe to Lord Bussell, and the depositions made ou
oath on the 14th of November, 1864, by two sailors returned from Madeira, contained convincing proof that the Sea King and the Laurel-
had been furnished, in English ports, with everything necessary, in the
way of armament, stores, and equipment, to enable' the Sea King to be
transformed, on the high seas or in any waters within the jurisdiction
of a state, into a ship of war or into a privateer against the United
States.
(b.) The British authorities recognized in this, it is true, a violation
of their neutrality; but their only attempt to remedy it was defective
in two points:
(aa.) In England, judicial proceedings were directed to be taken
against Corbett only, tbe former master of the Sea King, and that, again,
on the score of recruitment only; no proceedings were directed against
the master of the Laurel, or those who freighted that vessel, or against
Wright, the owner, at least in name, of the Sea King. It is unnecessary to say that Corbett's acquittal does not modify the question of
international law.
(bb.) The British authorities took measures against the perpetrators
only, and not against the results of the violation of the law. In particular, they omitted to inform all the colonial authorities of the empire
of the illegality which attached to the ship, thenceforward known as tha
Shenandoah, and to provide them with instructions to seize the vessel
if an opportunity should occur.
III.—Conduct of the British authorities at Melbourne.
(a.) It is certain that the authorities of this colony received from
London neither communications nor instructions concerning the Shen-
II.—Conduite des autorite's britanniques depuis la sortie du Sea King et du Laurel jusqu'aux
faits arrives a Melbourne.
a) Les communications envoyees le 12 novembre 1864, par le consul britannique;;
de Teneriffe a Lord Russell, et les depositions faites sous serment le 14 uovembre 1864,
par deux matelots revenus de Madere, constataient d'une maniere convaincante que le
Sea King et le Laurel avaient ete prepares dans des ports anglais avec tout ce qui etait
necessaire, en fait d'armement, d'appareil et d'equipement, pour fournir au Sea Kiug
les moyens de se transformer, en pleine mer ou dans des eaux queleouques sous juridic-4
tion d'etat, en vaisseau de guerre ou en corsaire contre les Etats-Unis.
b) Les autorites britanniques reconnurent eu cela, il est vrai, une violation de|
leur neutralite, mais elles ne chercherent a y remedier que d'une maniere defectueusel
a. un double point de vue.
a a) En Angleterre il n'y eut de poursuite judiciaire ordonnee que contre Corbett^
ancien patron du Sea King, et encore ne le fut-elle que sous le chef d'enrdlement; l'on
omit de diriger des poursuites contre le patron du Laurel et les affreteurs de ce navire, |
ainsi que contre Wright, proprietaire, au moins de nom, du Sea King.   II va sans dire"
que l'acquittement de Corbett ne modifie point la question du droit des gens.
b b) Les autorites britanniques ne dirigerent leurs mesures que contre les persou-
nes, et nullement contre les resultats de la violation de la loi. Elles omirent notam-
ment d'informer toutes les autorites coloniales de l'empire de l'illegalite attachee au
navire, connu des lors sous le nom de Shenandoah, et de leur fournir des instructions'
eu vue de saisir le vaisseau, le cas echeant.
HI.—Conduits des autorites britanniques a Melbourne.
a) II est constate que les autorites de cette colonie ne recurent de la metropole ni
communications ni instructions concernant le Shenandoah ; bien que, depuis l'epoqueOPINIONS  OF  MR.   STAEMPFLI.
1 9 9
loo
•andoah; although, from the time when the authorities in London knew
of the criminal character of the vessel, (iu the middle of November,
1864,) to the moment of her entrance into Melbourne, (January 25,1865,)
there had elapsed sufficient time for the transmission of such instructions. The observation made in the British pleadings, that allowance
must be made for the inexperience of the authorities at Melbourne, is
without force from this fact.
(b.) The authorities at Melbourne showed themselves, in several
respects, negligent in the maintenance of their sovereignty as a neutral
country in the case of the Shenandoah:
(aa.) They waived the production of the commission which the captain held from the insurgent States.    (British Case, p. 161.)
(bb.) They suffered a refusal of their right to search the vessel for
the purpose of discovering British subjects, illegally enlisted, on board
of her; and they submitted to the threat used by the captain, that he
would oppose force by force, without immediately taking serious measures against him.
The report of the law-officers of the Crown, which holds that, against
a refusal of this kind, there was no course open but to compel the vessel to leave the port, is not correct, according to international law, for
use might be made of a similar refusal to carry out and conceal with
impunity violations of neutrality in neutral ports.
(cc.) The only measure taken iu consequence of this refusal consisted
in the suspension of the permission to repair which had been granted,'
a measure which, however, was withdrawn on the mere representations
of Waddell.
(del.) The manner in which the amount of repairs necessary for the
vessel was ascertained, and in which their execution was watched, was
but imperfect.    (Eeport of Captain Payne; British .Case, p. 169.)
(c.) It is ascertained that the crew of the vessel was augmented before
her departure from Melbourne by a considerable number of sailors, in
spite of the constant remonstrances and complaints of the American
ou les autorites de Londres connurent le caractere criminel du vaisseau (mi-novembre
1864) jusqu'au moment de l'entree du vaisseau a. Melbourne, (25 Janvier 1865,) il y eut
eu suffisamment de temps pour transmettre ces instructions. L'observation presentee
par les memoires anglais, qu'il faut pardonner quelque chose a l'inexperience des
autorites de Melbourne, est par le fait meme sans portee.
b) Les autorites de Melbourne se montrerent, a plusieurs egards, negligentes dans
le ntaiutien de leur souverainete comme pays neutre, vis-a-vis du Shenandoah.
a a) Elles renoncfernt k se faire exhiber la commission que la capitaine tenait des.
etats insurges, (memoire britannique, p. 161.)
b b) Elles se laisserent refuser le droit de faire des perquisitions a bord du navire
eu vue d'y decouvrir des sujets anglais iliegalement enr6ies, et elles accepterent la
menace faite par le capitaine, de repousser la force par la force, sans prendre imrue-
diatement des mesures serieuses contre lui.
. Le preavis des jurisconsultes de la couronne, portant que, contre une renitence de
ce genre, il n'y avait pas d'autre moyen a employer que celui de forcer le navire a.
quitter le port, n'est pas juste, d'apres le droit des gens; parce que l'on pourrait se
servir d'une pareille renitence comme d'un moyen de completer et de cacher impuue-
ment des violations de la neutralite dans des ports neutres.
c c) La seule mesure que Ton prlt contre cette renitence consista a suspendre la-
permission qui avait ete accordee de faire des reparations, mesure qui du reste fut
retiree sur les simples representations de Waddell.
d d) La constatation des reparations reellement necessaires au vaisseau et la
surveillance de leur execution ne se firent que d'une maniere defectuense. (Rapport-
du capitaine Payne; memoire britannique, p. 169.)
c) II est constate que 1'equipage du vaisseau fut renforce, avant son depart de-
Melbourne,  d'un nombre considerable de marins,  malgre les denonciations et les-
I134
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
consul. (Circular of the governor of Melbourne of the 27th February,
1865; British Case, p. 163.)
(d.) It appears also to be proved that the vessel was allowed to take
on board 300 tons of coal, which, added to the 100 tons she already
had, made 400. (So says the American Consul Blanchard to the governor; American Appendix, vol. vi, p. 698, and American Case, p. 347.)
In " The Cruise of the Shenandoah," by Hunt, it is moreover said that
there were 300 tons taken in, which, with the 100 tons she already had
on board, gave a sufficient supply for the cruise which was contemplated.    (American Appendix, vol. vi, p. 698.)
According to the report of the official experts, (British Case, p. 162,)
the Shenandoah was not fit to go to sea as a steamship; from which it
may be inferred that, as a sailing vessel, she was fit to go to sea. (Compare the report on the repairs of the Florida at Bermuda; British
Counter Case, p. 127.)
The supply of coal was not, therefore, a necessary condition of the
neutral asylum, and, in supplying her with so large a quantity of coal,
the capacity of the ship for making war was increased, just as much as
by the recruitment of her crew which took place.
(C.)—Judgment.
In the acts which have just been enumerated there exists a violation
on the part of Great Britain of the obligations of neutrality laid down
by the three rules; consequently Great Britain is responsible for the
American ships which were destroyed by the vessel in question.
V.—THE   SUMTER.
(A.)—Facts.
1. The Sumter was a cruiser of the insurgent States, equipped in their
ports; she left the mouth of the Mississippi and commenced
cruising on the 30th of June, 1861.
reclamations non-interrompues du consul americain.    (Circulaire du gouverneur de
Melbourne du 27 fevrier 1865; memoire britannique, p. 163.)
d) 11 paralt aussi etabli qu'il fut permis au vaisseau d'embarquer 300 tonnes de
charbon, ce qui, ajoute aux 100 tonnes qu'il avait encore, en faisait 400. (C'est ce que
dit le consul americain Blanchard au gouverueur; appeudiee americain, tome vi,
p. 698; et memoire americain, p. 347.) ''La Croisiere du Shenandoah," par Hunt, (lit
par contre qu'il y eut 300 tonnes embarquees, ce qui, ajoute aux 100 qui s'y trouvaient
encore, faisait une provision suffisante pour la croisiere que l'on avait l'intention
d'entreprendre. (Appendice americain, tome vi, p. 698.) Selou le rapport des
experts officiels, (memoire britaunique, p. 162,) le Shenandoah, en tant que vaisseau
a vapeur, n'etait pas capable de mettre en mer, d'ou l'on peut conolure que, comme
voilier, il pouvait tenir la mer. (Comparer le preavis sur les reparations pour le Florida
a Bermude.    (Contre-memoire britannique, p. 127.)
L'approvisionnement de charbon n'etait done pas une obligation de 1'asile neutre; et
en lui fournissant une si forte quantite de charbon, on renforgait la capacite du vais-
seau-a faire la guerre tout aussi bien qu'en augmentant son equipage, comme on l'avait
fait.
(C.)—Jugement.
Dans les faits qui viennent d'etre enumeres, il existe une violation, de la part de la
'Grande-Bretagne, des obligations de neutralite determinees par les trois regies. Eu consequence, la Grande-Bretagne est responsable pour les navires americains qui out ete
•detruits par le vaisseau en question.
LE  SUMTER.
(A.)—Faits.
1. Le Sumter etait un croiseur des etats insurges, equipe dans leurs ports; il sortit
■des passes du Mississippi et commenca ses courses le 30 juin 1861.OPINIONS   OF  MR.   STAEMPFLI.
135
2. After having made six prizes, she first entered the Spanish port of
Cienfuegos, (Cuba,) where she took in coal. On the 15th of July, 1861,
she arrived at the Dutch port of Saint Anne, in the island of Curacoa,
. 1 i       •   -I • 1 'v-v i n      ~r -> '
aght days.   On the 30th of July she
laving1 made in all eleven
re-
there took in coal, and staid
reached the British port of Trinidad, alter 1
prizes since her departure from the waters of the Mississippi; she
mained six days in this port, and there shipped a complete supply of
coal.   After having left Trinidad, the Sumter touched, among other
places, at/the port of Paramaribo, (Dutch Guiana,) where she took in a
supply of coal, from the 9th to the 31st of August; at Port Boyal, in
Martinique, where she took in coal and remained fourteen days, from
the 10th to the 23d of November; at Cadiz, where she staid fifteen
days; she put iu, on the 18th of January, 1862, at Gibraltar, after
having made six fresh prizes since her departure from Trinidad.
3. The Sumter remained at the port of Gibraltar until December,
1863, when she was disarmed and sold by public auction.
The officers, among whom was Captain Semmes, who subsequently
commanded the Alabama, abandoned the vessel and went to England.
4. From February, 1862, there had been United States ships of war
stationed in the waters of Algeciras, to watch the Sumter.
• 5. The representatives of the United States at Gibraltar and London
protested against the sale of the Sumter as fictitious and inadmissible,
according to international law.
6. On the 9th of February, 1863, the Sumter escaped from Gibraltar
and arrived at Liverpool; she remained there till the 3d of July, was
from thence employed as a transport-ship, and left that port under the
name of the Gibraltar, carrying a cargo of heavy artillery. What be-
came of her afterward is not exactly known. It only appears, from the
evidence, that United States ships still watched her for several months
after she left Liverpool. (The Connecticut, from the 3d of August to
September, 1863; United States Appendix, vol. iv, p. 120, table.)
2. Apres avoir fait six prises, il entra d'abord au port espagnol de Cienfuegos, (Cuba,)
oh il embarqua du charbon; le 15 juillet 1861, il arriva au port hollandais de Ste.-Anne,
dans l'lle de Curacao, y embarqua du charbon et y sejourna hnit jours ; le 30 juillet,
il atteignit le port britannique de la Trinite, apres avoir fait en tout onze prises depuis
sa sortie des eaux du Mississippi; il resta six jours dans ce port et y fit un complet ap-
provisionnement de charbon; apres avoir quitte la Trinite, le Sumter toucha encore,
entr'autres, aux ports de Paramaribo, (Guyane hollandaise,) oh il s'approvisionna de
charbon, du 9 au 31 aout; de Port Royal a la Martinique, oh. il embarqua du charbon
et resta quatorze jours, du 10 an 23 novembre; de Cadiz, oh il sejourna quinze jours ;
il entra, le 18 Janvier 1862, a Gibraltar, apres avoir fait six nouvelles prises depuis son
depart de la Trinite.
3. Le Sumter resta au port de Gibraltar jusqu'en decembre 1863, epoque a laquelle
il fut desarme et vendu aux encheres publiques.
Les officiers, parmi lesqnels se trottvait le capitaine Semmes, plus tard commandant
de l'Alabama, abandonnerent le vaisseau et se rendirent en Angleterre.
4. Des le mois de fevrier 1862, il y avait eu des navires de guerre des Etats-Unis
stationnes dans les eaux d'Algesras pour guetter le Sumter.
5. Les representants des Etats-Unis a Gibraltar et a Londres protesterent contre la
vente du Sumter, comme fictive et inadmissible d'apres le droit des gens.
6. Le 9 fevrier 1863, le Sumter s'echappa de Gibraltar et arriva a Liverpool; il y
resta jusqu'au 3 juillet, fut de la. employe comme vaisseau de transport et quitta ce
port sous le nom de "le Gibraltar," emportant une cargaison d'artillerie de gros calibre.
On ne sait pas au juste ce qu'il devint dans la suite. II ressort seulement des pieces
que des vaisseaux de guerre des Etats-Unis le guetterent encore plusieurs mois apres
sa sortie de Liverpool. (Le Connecticut, du 3 aoht jusqu'en septembre 1863: appendice
americain, tome iv, page 120, tableau.)136
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
(B.)—Considerations.
I.—Respecting what took place up to the moment of the vessel's entry into
Gibraltar.
(a.) With the exception of her stay, and the supply of coal which the
Sumter took in at Trinidad, none of the acts in question took place
within British jurisdiction; consequently, Great Britain is responsible
for nothing which occurred before the arrival of the Sumter at Trinidad.
(b.) The permission given to the Sumter to remain and to take in coal
at Trinidad, does not in itself constitute a sufficient basis for accusing
the British authorities of having failed in the observance of their duties
as neutrals; because this fact cannot be considered by itself, since
the Sumter, both before and after that time, was admitted into the ports
of many other states, where it staid and took in coal, and it is proved
that the last supply she obtained to cross the Atlantic did not take
place in a British port; so that it cannot be held that the port of Trinidad served as a base of operations for the Sumter.
II.—Respecting the permission to stay, and the sale of the Sumter at Gibraltar.
(a.) The stay of the Sumter, as an armed ship of war of the Confederate States, at the port of Gibraltar, from the month of January to the
month of December, 1862, was less the result of her being iu distress
than a refuge from the danger arising from the ships of the enemy.
(b.) The granting of such shelter is contrary to the second rule of the
treaty, according to which a neutral port must not serve as a base of
operations to belligerents, and, consequently, must not serve them either
as a refuge from the enemy, while giving them, at the same time, the
opportunity of leaving it at will.
(c.) The objection which is made that the Sumter entered Gibraltar
(B.)—Considerants.
I.—Concernant ce qui se passa jusqu'au moment de Ventre'e du vaisseau a Gibraltar.
a) A l'exception du sejour et de l'approvisionnement que fit le Sumter a la Trinije,
aucun des faits en question n'eut lieu dans la juridiction britannique; par consequent,
la Grande-Bretagne n'est responsable pour rien de ce qui se passa avant l'arrivee du
Sumter k la Trinite.
b) La permission donnee au Sumter de sejourner et de faire du charbon k la
Trinite ne constitue pas a elle seule une base suffisante pour que l'on puisse accuser
les autorites britanniques d'avoir manque a leurs devoirs de neutralite; car ce fait
ne peut etre consider isoiement, puisque, avant et apres, le Sumter avait ete admis
dans les ports de plusieurs autres etats, oh il sejourna et fit du charbon, et qu'il est
constate que le dernier approvisionnement qu'il fit pour traverser l'ocean Atlantique
n'eut pas lieu dans un port britannique: de sorte que l'on ne saurait pretendre que le
port de la Trinite ait servi de base d'operations au Sumter.
II.—Concernant la permission de sejour et de vente du Sumter d Gibraltar.
, a) Le sejour du Sumter comme vaisseau de guerre arme des etats-confederes au
port de Gibraltar, depuis le mois de Janvier au mois de decembre 1862, fut moins la
suite d'un etat de detresse qu'un asile contre le danger provenant de vaisseaux
ennemis.
b) Une pareille concession d'asile est en desaccord avec la 2e regie du traite,
d'apres laquelle un port neutre ne doit pas servir de base d'operations aux belligerants ;
par consequent, ne doit pas non plus leur servir de lieu de refuge contre l'ennemi, tout-
en leur laissant la possibilite d'en ressortir a volonte.
c) L'objection qui est faite que le Sumter etait entre a Gibraltar avant la publica-OPINIONS   OF  MR.   STAEMPFLI.
1.
5 I
before the publication of the official circular of the 31st of January,
1862, which limits the stay of belligerent vessels in neutral ports, is
immaterial; for,
(d.) Even without the publication of that circular, the granting of
shelter which took place would have been contrary to the duties laid
down in the second.rule, and to the principles of a real and effective
neutrality.
(e.) Moreover, to interpret the circular of the 31st January, 1862, in the
sense that it related only to the ships of belligerents which should in the
future enter British ports, and not to those which were already in them,
is in opposition, if not with the letter, at least with the sense and spirit
in which the circular was published.
(/.) The disarmament and sale of the Sumter after she had been eleven
months in the port of Gibraltar were the continuation and conclusion
of the course pursued up to that time, and which consisted in saving the
ship, her armament and her crew, from the enemy; and these acts were as
little in conformity with the maintenance of a real and effective neutrality
as the whole of the proceedings from the beginning, and the less so
because they were accompanied by the following circumstances in
aggravation:
(g.) The sale of the ship was only fictitious, as appears from the
documents;
The proceeds of the sale of the arms, &c, were paid over to the treasury
of the insurgents;
The officers of the vessel and the rest of her crew remained at liberty,
and a certain number of them re-entered shortly afterwards the service
of the insurgent States.
(h.) According to the principles of neutrality observed on land, men
who seek refuge from the enemy are disarmed, and the munitions thev
bring with them are seized and not restored till the end of the war; the
authorities of Gibraltar ought to have acted in like manner, or else they
ought to have compelled the vessel with her armament and crew to leave
the port within a stated time, providing her. with a safe conduct as far
as the limits of British jurisdiction.
tion de la circulaire ministerielle du 31 Janvier 1862, laquelle limite la duree du sejour
des vaisseaux belligerants dans les ports neutres, est sans portee; car,
d) Meme sans la publication de cette circulaire, la concession d'asile qui eut lieu
eut ete en desaccord avec les devoirs decoulant de la regie 2 et des principes d'une
neutralite reelle a effectuer.
e) En outre, interpreter la circulaire du 31 Janvier 1862 dans le sens qu'elle ne
devait concerner que les navires des belligerants qui entreraieut a l'avenir dans les
ports britanniques, et non ceux qui s'y trouvaient dejii. alors, c'est se mettre en desaccord, sinon avec la lettre, du moins avec le sens et l'esprit dans lesquels cette circulaire
fut publiee.
/) Le desarmement et la vente du Sumter au bout de onze mois de sejour dans le
port de Gibraltar furent la continuation et la conclusion du procede suivi jusqu'alors,
et qui consistait k sauver de l'ennemi le vaisseau, son armement et son equipage ; et
ces actes aussi furent aussi peu couformes au maintien d'une neutralite reelle et effective que tout le procede, des le commencement, et cela d'autant moins qu'ils etaient
accompagnes des circonstances aggravautes suivantes.
«7) La vente du vaisseau ne fut que fictive, ainsi qu'il appert d'apres les actes:
Le produit de la vente des armes, &c, fut verse dans la caisse des insurges;
Les officiers du vaisseau et le reste de 1'equipage resterent en etat de liberie, et un
certain nombre d'entr'eux rentrerent, peu de temps apres, au service des etats insurges.
7i) D'apres les principes de neutralite observes sur terre, les hommes qui cherchent
un refuge contre l'ennemi sont desarmes et internes, le materiel qu'ils emportent est
saisi et n'est restitue qu'a la fin de la guerre: les autorites de Gibraltar auraient du.
agir d'une maniere analogue, ou bien elles auraient dft forcer le navire, avec son armement et son equipage, a quitter le port, dans un delai fixe, sauf a le pourvoir d'un sauf-
conduit jusqu'aux limites de la juridiction britannique.
I138
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
JUDGMENT.
1. Great Britain has not failed iu her duties, as laid down in the three
rules, in respect to the Sumter, up to the entrance of that vessel into
Gibraltar, and is not, therefore, responsible for the ships destroyed by
the Sumter.
2. On the other hand, Great Britain has violated the second rule in
affording a protracted shelter to the Sumter, and in permitting the disarmament and pretended sale of that vessel in the port of Gibraltar, and
is, therefore, responsible for the sum for which the Sumter, her armament and equipment were sold, for the expense of watching her by the
ships of the United States before the waters of Gibraltar, during the
whole period of the stay of the Sumter in that port, and for the expense
of her pursuit after her departure from that port.
VI.—THE RETRIBUTION.
(A.)—Facts.
1. Tiiis vessel was originally a United States screw steamship, the
Uncle Ben, and was built at Buffalo iu 1856.
Shortly before the attack on Fort Sumter she had been
sent to the south eoast of the United States. Stress of weather obliged
her to put iuto the Cape Fear Biver. There the insurgents took possession of her, and turned her into a schooner. She went to sea again under
the name of the Betribution, and cruised in the neighborhood of the
Bahamas.
2. In the month of December, 1862, she captured the American
schooner Hanover, and took her prize to Fortune Island or Long Cay,
(one of the Bahamas.)
The captain of the Betribution, one Locke, alias Parker, went before
the authorities of the port with the papers of the Hanover, represented
himself as the master of that vessel, under the name of Washington Case,
and stated that he had been shipwrecked on one of the neighboring
islands, and that he was in distress; that he had been bound from Boston
(C.)—Jugement.
1. La Grande-Bretagne n'a pas manque a ses devoirs, decoulant des trois regies, en
ce qui concerne le Sumter jusqu'& l'entree de ce vaisseau a Gibraltar, et elle n'est, par
consequent, pas responsible pour les destructions de navires effectuees par le Sumter.
2. Par contre, la Grande-Bretagne a vioie la regie 2 en accordant un asile prolonge
au Sumter et en tolerant le desarmement et la pretendue vente de ce vaisseau dans le
port de Gibraltar, et elle est, par consequent, responsable pour le prix de vente du
Sumter, de son armement et de son equipement, pour les frais de surveillance par les
navires des Etats-Unis devant les eaux de Gibraltar, pendaut toute la duree du sejour
que fit le Sumter daus ce port, et pour les frais de sa poursuite apres son depart de ce
port.
LE RETRIBUTION.
(A.)—Faits.
1. Ce vaisseau etait dans l'origine la vapeur a heiice l'Uncle Ben, des Etats-Unis, et
avait ete construit a Buffalo, en 1856.
Peu de temps avant l'attaque du fort Sumter, il avait ete envoye sur les c6tes meri-
dionales des Etats-Unis. Le mauvais temps l'obligea a entrer dans le fieuve du Cape
Fear. La, les insurges s'en emparerent et le transformerent en schooner. II reprit la
mer sous le nom de Retribution et croisa dans le voisinage des Bahamas.
2. Au mois de decembre 1862, il captura le schooner americain le Hanover, et amena
sa prise a File Fortune ou Long Cay, (Fune des Bahamas.)
Le capitaine de la Retribution, nomme Locke, alias Parker, se presenta avec les
papiers du navire le Hanover aux autorites du port, se fit passer pour le patron de ce
navire sous le nom de Washington Case, et rapporta qu'il avait fait naufrage k Fune des
lies voisines et qu'il etait en detresse; qu'il avait et€ destine de Boston k la HavaneOPINIONS   OF  MR.   STAEMPFLI.
139
to Havana, with liberty to seek another market; that his instructions
authorized him to dispose of his cargo, and to make use of the proceeds
to take in a cargo of salt, and to run the blockade with it.
The ship's papers were examined and found to be in conformity with
his declarations; they were indeed made out in the name of the master, Washington Case, and it was under this name that Locke was admitted into the port with the Hanover, and that the ship's cargo was
exchanged for one of salt.
3. Later, on account of remonstrances made by au American agent,
Locke was prosecuted at Nassau, on account of this act. The first time
he was released on bail, and succeeded in escaping trial by taking flight
and forfeiting his bail, (October, 1863.) The second time, having made
the same voyage again, he was acquitted by the court for want of evidence to prove his identity, (February, 1865.)
4. Previous to these judicial proceedings the Betribution had also captured, in the neighborhood of Castle Island, the American brig Emily
Fisher, carrying a cargo of sugar. The master of this latter vessel,
named Staples, relates what happened in the following mauner:
The prize having been made, the captor made an arrangement with
some wreckers aud. then stranded the vessel, after which the wreckers
took possession of her; and she was then brought back to Long Cay,
accompanied by the Betribution.
The master of the Emily Fisher was not allowed to take possession
of his ship again until he had paid 50 per cent, of the price of the
cargo, and 33£ per cent, of the value of the vessel, to the wreckers.
When he had made this payment he was replaced in possession by the
collector; the authorities declared that the law would not allow the
cruiser to touch the brig, but that, even if they wished, they had no
means of preventing it; and, finding himself under the guns of the
cruiser, he had preferred paying what was asked of him.
In the British counter case it is admitted that this statement may be
true, that there had been a conspiracy between the captain of the Bet-
 .	
avec faculte de chercher un autre marche; que ses instructions Fautorisaient a disposer
de la cargaison, et a en employer le produit a faire un chargement de sel et a traverser
le blocus avec ce chargement.
Les papiers du navire furent examines et trouves conformes aux declarations; ils
etaient. eu effet au nom du patron Washington Case, et ce fut sous ce nom que Locke
fut admis au port avec le Hanover et que la cargaison du navire fut changee contre une
de sel.
3. Plus tard, k la suite de denonciations faites par un agent americain, Locke fut
poursuivi en justice .a Nassau, a cause de cefait; la premiere fois, ilfut relache sous
caution, et reussit a se soustraire a la procedure en prenantla fuite et abandonnant son
cautionnement, (octobre 1863.) La seconde fois, ayant refait le meme voyage, il fut
acquitte par le tribunal, faute de preuves constatant son identite, (fevrier 1865.)
4. Anterieurement k ces procedls judiciaires, le Retribution avait aussi capture dans
le voisinage de Castle Island le brick americain Emily Fisher, portant une cargaison
de sucre. Le patron de ce dernier vaisseau, nomme Staples, raconte ce qui s'est passe
de la maniere suivante:
La prise faite, le capteur etait entre en relation avec quelques wreckers et avait en-
suite fait echouer le navire ; apres quoi les wreckers s'en etaient empares; eusuite il
avait ete ramene a Long Cay sous la conduite du Retribution.
Lui, patron de FEmily Fisher, n'avait ete en etat de reprendre possession de sou vaisseau qu'il n'eut paye aux wreckers 50 pour cent du prix de la cargaison, et 33£ pour cent
de la valeur du vaisseau. Lorsqu'il eut depose ce paiement, il avait ete rein is en possession par le collecteur; les autorites avaient declare que les lois ne permettraient pas
au croiseur de toucher au brick, mais que, quand memo elles le voudraient, elles n'auraient aucun moyen de Fempecher; et, se trouvant sous les canons du croiseur, il avait
mieux aime payer ce qu'on lui demandait.
Dans le coutre-memoire britannique, ou reconnalt que cet expose peut etre vrai, qu'il
y avait eu complot entre le capitaine du Retribution et les wreckers en vue d'extorquer140
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
ribution and the wreckers, with a view to extorting money from the
brig, from which, as a prize, he would otherwise have been able to obtain nothing; but that no complaint had been made against the
authorities of the colony, and that, since then, nine years had elapsed.
5. The Betribution thereupon went to Nassau Bay, was sold there on
the 10th of April, 1863, there changed her name to that of the Etta,
and both these transactions were registered by the authorities at Nassau. On her first voyage to New York as a transport she was recognized as the former Betribution, and was seized by the authorities and
sold.
(B.)—-"Considerations.
(A.)—What took place respecting the Hanover.
The British authorities are not responsible in this matter, since they
were deceived in regard to the entry and sale of the prize at Long Cay,
and since, from the manner in which this fraud was committed, they
cannot be accused of culpable negligence.
Nor can any responsibility be attached to the subsequent acquittal,
for this act, of Captain Locke by the courts at Nassau, inasmuch as it
is not shown that there were any evident defects in the proceedings or
the judgment.
(B.)—What took place respecting the Emily Fisher.
It appears to be proved that, in British jurisdiction, by means of a
conspiracy between the captain of the cruiser and some of the crew of
the wrecking-vessels, exactions were practiced on this vessel after she
had been captured and brought into the waters and port of Long Cay;
aud that the authorities of the port were aware of it, the affair having,
so to speak, taken place before their eyes; that, notwithstanding, these
authorities did not take any steps, either with a view of affording
efficient protection, or with a view of instituting judicial proceedings,
de Fargent au brick, dont il n'aurait sans cela rien pu retirer comme prise; mais qu'il
n'y avait pas eu de plainte portee contre les autorites coloniales, et que, depuis lors,
neuf ans s'etaient ecouies.
5. La-dessus, le Retribution se rendit dans la baie de Nassau, y fut vendu le 10 avril
1863, y changea son nom en celui de "Etta," et Fun et l'autre de ces actes furent enregis-
tres par les autorites de Nassau. Lors de sou premier voyage a New York, en qualite
de transport, il y fut reconnu comme Fancien Retribution, et fut sequestr6 par les
autorites et vendu.
( B.)—CONSIDEKiLNTS.
(A.) Ce qui se passa concernant le Hanover.
Les autorites britanniques n'en sont pas responsables, puisqu'elles furent trompees'
quant k l'entree et k la vente de la prise k Long Cay, et que, de la maniere dont cette
tromperie fut commise, il ne peut leur etre reproche de negligence coupable.
H n'y a pas non plus de motif de responsabilite dans l'acquittement subsequent, pour
ce fait, du captaine Locke par les tribunaux de Nassau, puisqu'il n'est pas etabli qu'il
y ait eu des defauts evidents dans la procedure et le jugement.
(B.) Ce qui se passa concernant VEmily Fisher.
II paralt constate que dans la juridiction britannique, au moyen d'un complotforme
entre le capitaine du croiseur et quelques hommes d'equipage de bateaux de sauvetage,
il fut commis des exactions contre ce vaisseau, apres qu'il eut ete capture et antene"
dans les eaux et le port de Long Cay; et que les autorites du port en avaient connaissance, les choses.s'etant, pour ainsi dire, passees sous leurs yeux; que, nonobstant cela,
ces autorites n'avaient pas fait une seule demarche, ni en vue d'accorder protection
effective, ni en vue d'entamer des poursuites judiciaires, ni en faisant rapport auxOPINIONS   OF   MR.   ADAMS.
141
or by reporting to their superiors what was taking place ; that, moreover, and as a sequel to these acts, on the 10th of April, 1863, seven
weeks after the events which had taken place, the sale and change of
name of the Retribution took place, and that these transactions were
registered by the authorities at Nassau.
(C.) Tbe objections made by Great Britain, that it was not until
nine years after these acts took place that a claim is made with respect
to the Emily Fisher, and that Long Cay is a distant and little frequented
port, are immaterial, because the nature of the offense committed at
Long Cay made it the duty of the authorities to interfere officially, or
to report to their superiors; and because, even if at the time of the
commission of the offense, there was not on the spot a force to prevent
it, it was, nevertheless, the duty of the authorities, immediately afterward, to take every step to repair it, even that of insisting that measures should be taken against the belligerent by whom the cruiser was
commissioned.
JUDGMENT.
Great Britain did not fail to observe her duties as a neutral with
respect to the facts whieh concern the Hanover; on the other hand,
in regard to the Emily Fisher, she did not fulfill her duties as a neutral, and is responsible on this head.
OPINIONS   OF   MB.   ADAMS.
I.—DUE DILIGENCE.
These words, which are found in the first and third of the rules
prescribed by the treaty of Washington, for the government of the arbitrators in making up their judgment, have
given rise to much discussion in the preparatory arguments of the
opposing parties.
autorites superieures de ce qui se passait; que, bien plus, et en suite de ces faits, le 10
avril 1863, sept semaines apres les evenements qui avaient en lieu, la vente et le change-
ment du nom de Retribution s'effectuerent et que ces actes furent enregistres par les
autorites a Nassau.
(C.) Les objections que presente la Grande-Bretagne—
Que ce n'est que neuf ans apres les faits accomplis que l'on reclame au sujet de
FEmily Fisher et que Long Cay est un port peu frequente et ecarte—n'ont pas d'im-
portance, parce que la nature du deiit commis a Long Cay faisait aux autorites un devoir d'intervenir d'office ou de faire raf port aux autorites superieures, et que quand
meme, au moment de la commission du deiit, l'on n'avait pas sur place la force de Fem-
pecher, les autorites avaient, cependant, le devoir de faire immediatement apres toutes
les demarches pour y reutedier et meme celui d'iusister pour qu'il fut pris des mesures
coutre le belligerant, commettant du croiseur.
(C.)—Jugement.
La Grande-Bretagne n'a pas manque k ses obligations de neutralite relativement aux
faits qui concernent le Hanover; par contre, pour ce qui concerne FEmily Fisher, elle
n'a pas satisfait k ses devoirs de neutralite, et elle est responsable de ce chef.
LES   "DUES DILIGENCES."
Ces mots, qui se trouvent dans la premiere et dans la troisieme des regies prescrites
par le traite de Washington, pour servir de guide aux arbitres, pour former leur jugement, ont donne lieu a beaucoup de discussions dans les exposes prepa-ratoires des parties opposantes.142
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
On the side of Great Britain, an explanation of them is given in the
9th, 10th, and 11th propositions, laid down on the 24th and 25th pages
of the case.
The subject is again considered in pages 21 and 22 of the volume
called the Counter Case.
It is again referred to in the 8th and 9th pages of the volume called
the Argument or Summary.
. Lastly, it is treated in a more general way in the argument presented
by Sir Bounded Palmer, counsel on behalf of Her Britannic Majesty, on
the 25th July last.
On the side of the United States, an explanation is presented in pages
150 to 158 of the volume called The Case.
It is again referred to in the sixth page of the Counter Case.
. The subject is again treated in pages 316 to 322 of the Argument or
Summary.
Lastly, it is discussed in a more general way in the argument submitted by the counsel on behalf of the United States on the 5th and 6th
of August.
The objection which I am constrained to admit as existing in my mind
to the British discussion is, that it appears to address itself -for the
most part to the establishment of limitations to the meaning of the
words rather than to the explanation of the obligations which they
imply.
The objection which 1 am constrained to find to the American definition is that I do not find the word " due" used in the sense attributed
to it in any dictionary of established authority.
Yet it does not appear to me so difficult to find a suitable meaning for
these words. Perhaps it may have been overlooked from the very fact
of its simplicity.
I understand the word diligence to signify not merely work, but, to use
a familiar phrase, work with a will.
The force of the qualifying epithet "due" can be best obtained by
tracing it to its origin. All lexicographers derive it from the Latin
verb " debere," which itself is a compound of two words " de" and
Du cOte de la Grande-Bretagne, une explication en est donnee dans les 9me, 10me et
llme propositions posees, pages 24 et 25 du "Case."
Le sujet est de nouveau considere, pages 21 et 22, du volume appeie le "Counter-case."
II y est encore fait allusion, pages 8*et 9, du volume nomme "Argument" ou " Summary."
Enfin il est traite d'uue maniere plus generale dans le plaidoyer presente par Sir
Roundell Palmer, couseiller de sa Majeste britannique, le 25 juillet dernier.
Du cote des Etats-Unis, une explication est presentee, pages 150 a 158 du volume
nomme le " Case."
IIy est encore fait allusion, page 6 du '•'Counter-case."
Le sujet est de nouveau traite, pages 316 a 322 de "FArgument" ou " Summary."
Enfin il est discute d'une maniere plus generate dans le plaidoyer presente par les
conseillers des Etats-Uuis, les 5 et 6 aoht.
L'objection que je suis oblige d'admettre comme existant dans mon esprit _t l'egard
des arguments anglais est, qu'ils semblent s'apptiquer pour la plupart a etablir des limitations du sens de ces mots, plutdt que de Fobligation qu'ils impliquent.
L'objection que je suis oblige de faire a la definition americaine est que je ne trouve
pas le mot "due" employe dans le sens qui y est attribue, dans aucun dictionnaire
d'une autorite reconnue.
Cependant il ne me semble pas si difficile de trouver un sens convenable pour ces
mots.   Pent-etre a^t-il echappe par le fait m6me de sa siinplicite.
Je comprends que le mot "diligence" signifie, non pas simplement agir, mais agir de
bon cceur.
La force de l'epithete qualificative "due" peut etre mieux trouvee en remontant a
son origiue.   Tous les lexicographes la font deriver du verbe latin debere, qui est lui
■mMOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
143
| habere," which means " quasi de alio habere"—that is, in English, to
have of or from another.
Assuming this to be the primary meaning, I now come to the second
step. The first having implied something received by one person from
another, the second implies equally an obligation incurred thereby.
I Debere," in Latin, means to owe. In French it becomes " devoir,"
which is equivalent to debt, to duty, or to obligation. Iu English it is
thus defined by two eminent authorities :
Bichardson: " That which is owed; which any one ought to have,
has a right to demand, claim, or possess."
Webster: "Owed; that ought to be paid or done to another; that is
due from me to another, which contract, justice, or propriety requires
me to pay, aud which he may justly claim as his right."
I have searched a great variety of other authorities, but do not cite
them, as they only repeat the same idea.
Hence it may be inferred that the sense of the words "due diligence" is that of "earnest labor owed to some other party," which that
party may claim as its right.
But, if this definition be conceded, it must naturally follow that the
nature and extent of this obligation cannot be measured exclusively by
the judgment or pleasure of the party subject to it.' If it could, in the
ordinary transactions between individuals, there would be little security
for the faithful performance of obligations. If it were not that the
party to whom the obligation has been given retains a right to claim it
in the sense that he understands it, his prospect of obtaining justice in
a contested case would be but slight.
If this view of the meaning- of the words be the correct one, it follows that, when a neutral governmeut is bound, as in the first and third
rules laid down in the treaty for our guidance, to use "due diligence" in
regard to certain things, it incurs an obligation to some external party,
meme compose de deux mots de et habere, ce qui signifie quasi de alio habere—c'est-a-dire,
en francais: avoir ou tenir d'un autre.
En admettant que ceci est la premiere signification, j'arrive maintenant k la seconde.
La premiere impliquant qu'une personne a recu quelque chose d'un autre, la seconde
implique egalement qu'une obligation s'en est suivie. Debere, en latin, signifie, eu anglais,
I to owe." En francais, il devient "devoir," ce qui equivaut a dette, devoir ou obligation.
En anglais, il est defini ainsi par deux autorites emiuentes:
Richardson: "Ce qui estdh; ce que quelqu'un doit avoir; ce qu'il a le droit de
demander, de redamer ou de posseder."
Webster: " Du.; ce qui doit etre paye ou fait a un autre; ce qu'on doit a uu autre; ce
qu'un contrat, la justice ou la propriete exige que je paye, et ce qu'il peut justenient
redamer comme son droit."
les cite pas, parce qu'elles
d'un tea''
comme
ail
■on
J'ai cherche un grand nombre d'autres autorites, mais je n.
ne font que repeter la m_me idee.
De la on peut inferer que le sens des mots "due diligence" est celui
serieux dft a quelque autre personne, que cette personne peut reclamei
droit.
Mais si cette definition est admise, il doit naturellement s'eusuivre que
l'etendue de -cette obligation ne peuvent pas etre estimeeR exclusive
jugement ou le plaisir de la personne qui y est soumise.    Si cda etait
les transactions ordinaires entre individus, il y aurait peu de securite
plissement fideie des obligations.    Si ce n'etait que la personne en vers laqui
tion a ete contractee conserve le droit de la redamer dans- le sens on elle
chance d'obtenir justice dans un cas conteste ne serait que legere.
Si cette maniere d'envisager le sens des mots est exacte, il s'ensuit que lorsqu'un
gouvernement neutre est tenu, comme dans la premiere et dans la troisifcme regie
posees dans le traite pour nous servir de guide, d'exercer '■' due diligence" a l'egard de
certaines choses, il encourt envers quelque autre partie une obligation d'ui;;■ il n'est
e la nature et
nent selon le
possible dans
pour l'aecom-
"le Fobliga-
entend, sa144
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
the nature and extent of which it is not competent to it to measure exclusively by its own will and pleasure.
Yet the assumption that it is competent appears to me to underlie the
whole extent of the British position in this controversy.
It may, indeed, be affirmed that no sovereign power in the last resort
is accountable to any other for the results of the exercise of its own
judgment, arrived at in good faith.
This proposition may be admitted to be true in point of fact; but it
is obvious that proceedings under it gain no sanction under any law
but that of superiority in physical force.
To escape this alternative, resort has been had to an attempt at definition of a system of rights and obligations, to which the assent of
civilized nations imparts authority in the regulation of their reciprocal
duties.
Under that system all the nations recognizing it are placed on a per-;;
fectly equal footing, no matter'what the nature of their relative force.
To borrow a sentence from the British counter case—
Her Majesty's government knows of no distinction between more dignified and less
dignified powers; it regards all sovereign states as enjoying equal rights, and equally I
subject to all ordinary international obligations; and it is firmly persuaded that there is ;
no state in Europe or America which would be willing to claim or accept any immunity
in this respect on the ground of its inferiority to others in extent, military force, or
population.
Admitting this position in its fullest extent, it may, at the same time,
be affirmed that, if Her Majesty's government were to enter into a contract with these various states, as a neutral power, to use due diligence
in certain emergencies, not one even of the smallest of them would fail
to deny that Her Majesty's government was the exclusive judge of the
measure of its obligations, contracted under those words.
What is then the rule by which the actual performance of this duty
pas competent pour estimer exclusivement, d'apres sa volonte propre et son bon plaisir,
la nature et Fetendue.
Cependant la supposition qu'il est competent me semble servir de base k toute la
position anglaise dans cette controverse.
On pent en effet affirmer qu'aucune puissance souveraine en dernier ressort n'a a'
rendre compte a une' autre pour les resultats de Fexercice de son propre jugement fait
de bonne foi.
Cette proposition pent etre admise comme vraie en fait, mais il est certain qu'une.
conduite qui s'y eonforrne ne gagne aucune saction d'aucune loi si ce n'est de celle d'une.
superiorite en force physique.
Pour echapper a cette alternative on a eu recours a une tentative pour definir un
systeme.de droits et d'obligations, auquel Fassentimeht des nations civilisees donne
autorite dans le reglement de leurs devoirs reciproques.
D'apres ce systeme, toutes les nations qui le reconuaissent sont placees sur un
pied jjarfaitement egal, n'importe la nature de leur force relative. Pour emprunter
une phrase du "counter-case" anglais:
"Le gouvernemeut de sa Majeste . . . ne connalt aucuue distinction entre desj
puissances plus ou moinseievees en dignite; ilregarde tous les etats souverains comme
jouissant de droits egaux, comme egalement assujettis a toutes les obligations ordi-
nairesinternattonales; il a laferme conviction qu'il n'est pas en Europe ou en Amerique,
un seul etat, qui veuille preteudre ui accepter a cet. egard aucune exemption motivee
sur son inferiorite relative comme territoire, comme puissance militaire ou comme
population."
En admettant cette position daus toute son etendue, on peut affirmer en m.me temps
que, si le gouvernement de sa Majeste devait faire un coutrat avec ces divers etats
comme puissance neutre pour exercer "due diligence" dans certaines circonstances, il
n'est pas uu des plus petits d'eutr'eux qui manqu&t de nier que le gouvernement de sa
Majeste fut le juge exclusif de la mesure de ces obligations contractees d'apres ces
mots.
Quelle est done la regie d'apres laquelle on peut estimer Faccomplissement effectifOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
145
can be estimated? It seems to me tolerably plain. Whatever may be
the relative position of nations, the obligation between them rests upon
the basis of exact and complete reciprocity. Hence the compact embraced in the words " due diligence" must be fulfilled according to the
construction placed upon the terms by each separate nation, subject to
reasonable modifications by the just representations of any other nation
with which it is in amity, suffering injury from the consequences of a
mistake of negligence or intention. These may very naturally grow out
of the great differences in their relative position, which should properly
be takeu into consideration. In the struggle which took place in America, "due diligence § in regard to the commercial interests of one of the
belligerents-meant a very different thing from the same words applied.
to the other. The only safe standard is that which may be reached by
considering what a nation would consider its right to demand of another,
were their relative positions precisely reversed. If the due diligence
actually exercised by one nation toward another does not prove to be
exactly that diligence which would be satisfactory if applied to itself
under parallel circumstances, then the obligation implied by the words
has not been properly fulfilled, and reparation to the party injured is no
more than an act of common justice.
Such seems to be the precise character of the present controversy.
Her Majesty's government denies that the measure of diligence due by
her as a neutral to the United States as a belligerent, during the late
struggle, was so great under the law of nations as it has be
with
her consent, made by the terms of the treaty. But, in either case,
she claims to be the exclusive judge of her fulfillment of it, apart from
the establishment of this tribunal, to which she has consented to appeal.
But this very act implies the consciousness of the possibility of some
debt contracted iu the process by the use of these terms that may justly
be claimed by another party. Of the nature and extent of that debt,
and how far actually paid, it is the province of this tribunal to deter -
de ce devoir? Elle me semble assez claire. Quelle que soit la position relative des
nations, l'obligation entre elles repose sur la base d'exacte et complete reciprocite.
Des lors le contrat compris sous ces mots "due diligence" doit etre rempli d'apres Interpretation donnee des termes par chaque nation prise separement, sujette a des
modifications ratsonnables de la part des representations justes de quelque autre nation
avec laquelle elle est en rapport d'amitie, souffrant des dommages ensuite des consequences de malentendu ou de negligence, ou d'iutention. Celles-ci penvent naturelle-
ment decouler des grandes differences dans leur position relative, qui doivent etre
prises en consideration. Dans le conflit qui eut lieu eu Amerique " due diligence" par
rapport aux interets commerciaux de l'un des belligerants avait un tout autre sens que
les memes mots appliques a. l'autre. La seule pierre de touche est celle que l'on peut
trouver en considerant ce qu'une nation croirait avoir le droit de redamer d'une autre,
si leurs positions relatives etaient precisemeut inverses. Si la " due diligence"effective-
ment exercee par une nation en vers une autre ne se montre pas etre exactement cette
" diligence" qui serait satisfaisante si elle lui etait appliquee dans des circonstances
analogues, alors l'obligation impliquee par les mots n'a pas ete bien remplie, et une
reparation en vers la partie Msee n'est plus qu'un acte de simple justice.
Tel paralt etre le caractere precis de la presente controveise. Le gouvernement
de sa Majeste nie que la mesure de diligence due par lui comme neutre aux
Etats-Unis comme belligerant, pendant le dernier conflit, fut aussi grande, d'apres le
droit des gens, qu'elle a ete faite avec son consentement par les termes du traite.
Mais dans les deux cas il pretend etre le juge exclusif de la maniere dont elle Fa
accompli, k l'exception de l'etablissement de ce tribunal, auquel elle a consentt a eu
appeler. Mais cet acte lui-mSme implique, par Femploi de ces termes, la conscience tie
la possibilite de quelque dette contractee dans l'affaire, et qui peut justeineut etre
redamee par une autre partie. Quant a la nature et k l'etendue de cette dette, et
jusqu'oh elle a ete payee effectivement, il appartieut a ce tribunal d'en decider, apres
10 b
II146
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
mine, after full consideration of the evidence submitted.   Such is the construction I have placed upon the words "due diligence."
H.—THE EFFECT  OF COMMISSIONS.
Effect of cQmmis-
This question has been discussed, more or less extensively, in the
papers and arguments before us.
On behalf of Great Britain it is claimed that the rule is
perfectly established that a vessel belonging to any power recognized
as sovereign, or as a belligerent, has, in virtue of its commission, a
right to claim a reception, and the privilege of extraterritoriality, without regard to its antecedents, in the ports of every neutral power.
The authorities quoted" to sustain this position sustain it as an established general rule.   I see no reason to question it.
But the question that has been raised iu the present controversy is
an exceptional one, which is not touched by these decisions.
The reception of vessels having an origin exclusively or even partially American, and bearing on their front no evidence of fraud or
violence, does not seem to have been brought into question in this controversy,
the Chickamauga, &c.
The case is different in regard to that class of vessels which derive
their origin exclusively from a systematic and fraudulent abuse of the
amity of a neutral power, setting at defiance its laws within its own
jurisdiction, and taking advantage of its forbearance in the hope of involving it the more with its opponent in a responsibility for tolerating
its own misdeeds.
It admits of no question, in my mind, that the outfit and equipment
of the Florida, the Alabama, the Georgia, and the Shenandoah were
each and all made in defiance of the laws of Great Britain and the injunction of the Queen's proclamation of neutrality.   By this conduct
Such vessels were the Sumter, the Nashville, the Tallahassee,
un, examen complet des preuves qui lui ont ete soumises.   Telle est l'ihterpretation que
j'ai donnee des mots "due diligence."
l'effet des coajilissioNS.
Cette question a ete discutee d'une maniere plus ou moins developpee dans les docu-
meuts et plaidoyers devant nous.
Du cote de la Grande-Bretagne on pretend que la regie est parfaitement etablie
qu'un vaisseau, appartenant a un pouvoir quelconque reconnu comme souverain ou
comme belligerant, a, en vertu de sa commission, le droit de redamer une reception et
le privilege d'extra-territorialite, sans egard a ses antecedents dans les ports de toute
puissance neutre.
Les autorites citees pour appuyer cette position la soutiennent comme une regie
generale etablie.   Je ne vois pas de raison de la mettre en question.
Mais la question soulevee dans la presente controverse est une question exception-
nelle, a laquelle ces decisions ne se rapportent pas.
La reception de vaisseaux ayant une origine americaine en tout ou en partie, et ne
portant sur leur front aucune preuve de fraude ou de violence, ne semble pas avoir ete
mise en question dans cette controverse. Tels etaient le Sumter, le Nashville, le Tallahassee, le Chickamauga, etc.
Le cas est different eu ce qaj concerne cette classe de vaisseux qui tireut leur origine
exdusivement d'un abus systematique et frauduleux du comite d'une puissance neutre,
. mettant au defi ses lois dans sa psopre juridiction, et.prenaut avantage de sa bonne
disposition, dans Fespoir de Fentraruei. encore avec son adversaire dans une responsabilite pour avoir toiere ses propres mefaits.
Je n'eu doute point, la preparation et 1'equipement du Florida, de l'Alabama, du
Georgia et du Shenandoah furent, potir chacnu d'eux, fait en defi des lois de la Granct#
Bretagne et des injonctions de la proclamation de neutralite de la Reine.   Par cetteOPINIONS   OF  MR.  ADAMS.
147
the perpetrators had not only clearly forfeited all right to consideration,
but had subjected themselves to the penalties of malefactors if they
ever returned within the jurisdiction which they had insulted. The
right to exclude vessels from British ports on these grounds, without
regard to their commissions, is distinctly affirmed by Sir Boundell Palmer, one of the lawyers of the Grown during the whole period in question, and seems to be indubitable. To .deny it would place every
sovereign power at the mercy of any adventurous pirate on the ocean
who might manage to cover himself with the threadbare mantle of the
minutest belligerent.
It is a perfectly well understood principle of law that no citizen of a
foreign nation, excepting, perhaps, in certain cases, a representative
clothed with diplomatic privileges, is free from the obligation of conforming himself to the laws of the couutry in which he is residing. If
he willfully violates them he is subject to the same penalties which are
imposed upon native citizens. Even though not a citizen he is subject
in Great Britain to be tried for quasi treason. If instead of conspiring
against the Queen he enters into combinations which involve the king-(
dom in complications with foreign powers with which it is at peace, he
surely cannot come forward and plead the possession of a commission
from the authorities of his own country in his justification. Neither is
the commander of a ship of a foreign power which comes within the
harbor of another free from the same general obligation. If he violates
any of the regulations prescribed for his government he is liable to pay
the penalty by a withdrawal of his privileges or by an immediate order
of exclusion from the port.
For myself, therefore, I cannot see any reason why the existence of a
commission should have stood in the way of a clear expression by
Great Britain of its sense of the indignities heaped upon Her Majesty's
government by the violation of her laws within her various dominions,
continuously persisted in during the existence of this belligerent. In
my opinion it would have justified the seizure and detention of the
offending vessels wherever found within the jurisdiction.   But if that
conduite, les fauteurs avaient non-seulement perdu nettement tout droit au respect,
mais ils etaient assujettis aUx peines des malfaiteurs s'ils revenaient jamais dans la
juridiction qu'ils avaient insultee. Le droit d'exclure des vaisseaux des ports anglais
pour ces motifs, sans egard a l§urs commissions, est nettement affirme par Sir Rouudell
Paltner, un des couseillers de la couronne pendant toute la periode en question, et sem-
ble etre indubitable; le nier serait mettre toute puissance souveraine k la merci de tout
pirate aventureux sur l'ocean qui pourrait reussir a se couvrir du manteau use du plus
petit belligerant.
C'est un principe ne loi parfaitement bien compris, qu'aucun citoyen d'une nation
etraugere, si ce n'est, peut-etre, un represeutaut revetu de privileges diplomatiques.
n'est exempt de l'obligation de se conformer aux lois.du pays dans lequel il demeure.
S'il les vioie volontairement, il est assujdti anx memes peines qui sont imposees aux
citoyens natifs. Meme s'il n'est pas citoyen, il est expose en Angleterre a etre poursuivi
pour quasi-trahison. Si,.au lieu de conspirer contre la Reine, il entre dans des combi-
naisons qui predpitent le royarame dans des complications envers des1 puissances souve-
raiues avec lesquelles celui-ci est en paix, il ne peut certainetneut pas se presenter et
s'appuyer pour sa justification sur la possession d'une commission des autorites de son
propre pays. Le commandant d'un vaisseau d'une puissance etrangere qui vient dans
le port d'une autre n'est pas exempt non plus de la meme obligation generale. S'il
vioie qnelqu'un des reglements prescrits pour sa conduite, il est expose a snbir la
peine d'un depouillement de ses privileges ou d'un ordre immediat d'exclusion du port.
Quant a;nioi, par consequent, je ne puis voir aucun motif pour lequel l'existence
d'une commission aurait empeche une manifestation nette de la part de la Grande-
Bretagne de son sentiment des indignites ainassees sur le gouvernement de sa Majeste
par la violation de ses lois, dans ses differents etats, continuee avec persistance pendant
l'existence de ce belligerant. Dans inon opinion, elle aurait justifie la saisie et l'arret
dea vaisseaux coupables, partout oh on les aurait trouves dans la juridiction.   Mais sL.14Q
o
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
were considered inconsistent with a clear impartiality, it certainly
demanded an entire exclusion from Her Majesty's ports. The right to
decide such a point rests exclusively with every sovereign power. But
an opportunity was lost for establishing a sound principle of international maritime intercourse which may not soon occur again.
III.—ON THE SUPPLY OF PROVISIONS, AND ESPECIALLY OF COALS.
This question of coals was little considered by writers on the law of
nations, and by sovereign powers, until the present century.
It lam become one of the first importance, now that the
motive-power of all vessels is so greatly enhanced by it.
The effect of this application of steam-power has changed the character of war on the ocean, and invested with a greatly preponderant'
force those nations which possess most largely the best material for it
within their own territories and the greatest number of maritime places!
over the globe where deposits may be conveniently provided for their
use.
It is needless to point out the superiority in this respect of the position of Great Britain. There seems no way of discussing the question
other than through this example.
Just in proportion to these advantages is the responsibility of that
country when holding the situation of a neutral in time of war.
The safest course in any critical emergency would be to deny altogether
to supply the vessels of any of the belligerents, except perhaps when in
positive distress.
But such a policy would not fail to be regarded as selfish, illiberal, and
unkind by all belligerents. It would inevitably lead to the acquisition
and establishment of similar positions for themselves by other maritime
powers, to be guarded with equal exclusiveness, and entailing upon them
enormous and continual expenses to provide against rare emergencies.
ces mesures etaient envisagees comme ne s'accordant pas avec une stricte impartialiteS
elle exigeait certainement une exclusion absolue des ports de sa Majeste.   Le droit de
decider sur un tel point appartient exclusivement k toute puissance souveraine.   Mais
Foccasion fut alors perdue d'etablir un principe juste des relations maritimes interna-
tionales, laquelle peut ne pas se representor de longtemps.
LES SUBSIDES DE PROVISIONS, ET SPECIALEMENT DE CHABBON.
Cette question du charbon a peu ete examinee par ceux qui ont ecrit sur le droit des-
gens, et par les puissances souveraines, j usqu'au sifecle actuel. Elle est devenne de la
premiere importance, maintenant que la puissance motrice de tous les vaisseaux en est
si fort augmentee.
L'effet de cette application de lavapeur a change le caracterede la guerre sur l'ocean,
et donne une force tres-prepond€rante aux puissances qui possedent en plus grande
abondance les meilleurs materiaux pour cela dans leurs propres territoires, et le plus
grand nombre de places maritimes sur le globe oh des depdts peuvent etre etablis a
propos pour leur usage.
II est inutile de faire remarquer la grande superiorite sous ce rapport de la position
de la Grande-Bretagne. II n'y a pas moyen de considerer la question autrement que
par son exemple.
La responsabilite de ce pays, quand il garde la position d'un neutre en temps de
guerre, est exactement proportionnee a ses avantages.
La conduite la plus sure, dans une circonstance critique, serait de refuser absolument
d'approvisionner les vaisseaux d'aucun des belligerants, si ce n'est peut-etre en cas de
detresse.
Mais une telle conduite ne manquerait pas d'etre regardee comme egoiste, illiberale,
mediante, par tout belligerant. Elle conduirait inevitablement k l'acqnisition et a
l'etablissement de positions semblables pour elles-memes, par toutes les puissances
maritimes, pour se garder avec un €gal exclusivisme; et elle les entralnerait dans des
depenses 6jaormes_6t coatinuelles pour subvenir k des circonstances rares.*<s_
OPINIONS   OF  MR.  ADAMS.
149
It is not therefore either just or in the interest of other powers, by
exacting severe responsibilities of Great Britain in time of war, to force
her either to deny all supplies, or, as a lighter risk, to engage herself iu
war.
It is in this sense that I approach the arguments that have been presented in regard to the supply of coals given by Great Britain to the
insurgent American steamers as forming a base of operations.
It must be noted that, throughout the war of four years, supplies of
coal were furnished liberally at first, and more scantily afterward, but
still indiscriminately, to both belligerents.
The difficulty is obvious how to distinguish those cases of coals given
to either of the parties as helping them impartially to other ports, from
those furnished as a base of hostile operations..
Unquestionably, Commodore Wilkes, in the Vanderbilt, was very much
aided in continuing his cruise at sea by the supplies obtained from British
sources.   Is this to be construed as getting a base of operations ?
It is plain that a line must be drawn somewhere, or else no neutral
power will consent to furnish supplies to any belligerent whatever in
time of war.
So far as I am able to find my way out of this dilemma, it is in this
wise:
The supply of coals to a belligerent involves no responsibility to the
neutral, when it is made in response to a demand presented in good faith,
with a single object of satisfying a legitimate purpose openly assigned.
On the other hand, the same supply does involve a responsibility if it
shall in any way be made to appear that the concession was made, either
tacitly or by agreement, with a view to promote or complete the execution of a hostile act.
Hence I perceive no other way to determine the degree of the responsibility of a neutral in these cases, than by an examination of the evidence to show the intent of the grant in any specific case. Fraud or
falsehood in such a case poisons everything it touches.   Even judiffer-
II n'est, par consequent, ni juste, ni dans Finteret des autres puissances, en imposant
des responsabilites severes a. la Grande-Bretagne en temps de guerre, de la forcer a refuser
tout subside; ou, comme un moindre danger, k s'engager elle-meme dans'la guerre.
C'est dans cet esprit que j'aborde les exposes qui ont ete presentes quant aux subsides
de charbon donnes par la Grande-Bretagne aux steamers americains insurges comme
formant uue base d'operations.
II faut remarquer que pendant la guerre de quatre ans des subsides de charbon furent
fournis liberalement d'abord, moins abondamment ensuite, mais toujours indistiucte-
ment, aux deux belligerants.
La difficulte est evident.e de savoir comment distingner les cas de charbon donne k
chacun des deux partis pour leur aider impartialement k se rendre a. d'autres ports, de
ceux oh il fut fourni pour servir comme base d'operations hostiles.
II n'est pas douteux que le commodore Wilkes, du Vanderbilt, n'ait ete beaucoup aide,
pour contiuuer sa croisiere en mer, par les subsides obtenus de sources anglaises. Faut-il
interpreter ceci comme formant une base d'operations ?
II est clair qu'une ligne doit etre tiree quelque part, ou autrement aucune puissance
neutre ne consentira k fournir des subsides a aucun belligerant quelconque en temps de
guerre sur l'ocean.
Si je puis sortir de ce dilemme, ce n'est que de cette maniere.
Le subside de charbon k un belligerant n'implique aucune responsabilite du neutre,
quand il est fait en reponse a une demaude presentee de bonne foi dans le simple but
de satisfaire un desseiu legitime ouvertement indique.
D'autre part, le m.me subside implique une responsabilite, si on peut demontrer
que la concession a ete faite, tacitement ou par entente, en vue d'aider ou d'achever
l'execution d'un acte hostile.
Des lorsje ne vois pas d'autre maniere de determiner le degrede la responsabilite d'un
neutre dans ces cas, que d'examiner la preuve pour faire voir Fiutention dn subside,
dans chaque cas particulier.   La fraude ou le mensonge dans un tel cas souille tout ce150
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
ence may degenerate into willful negligence, aud that will impose a burden of proof to excuse it before responsibility can be relieved.
This is the rule I have endeavored to apply in judging the nature of
the cases complained of in the course of this arbitration.
Florida
IV.—THE FLORIDA.
On the 18th February, 1862, Mr. Adams addressed a note to Lord Bus-
sell, calling his attention to a letter he had received from
Mr. Dudley, the consul of the United States at Liverpool, touching a certain gun-boat fitting out at that port, which he had
reason to believe was intended for the use of the American insurgents in
their war against their Government.
On the 19th Mr. Hammond, on behalf of Lord Bussell, replied to this
note, apprising Mr. Adams that he " would move the lords commissioners to cause immediate inquiries to be made respecting the vessel, and
to take such steps in the matter as might be right and proper."
Ou the 22d the commissioners of the customs made a report to the effect
that there was a vessel of the sort described called the Oreto; that it
had been built by Messrs. Miller & Sons for Messrs. Fawcett, Preston &
Co., engineers, and intended for the use of Messrs Thomas Brothers, of
Palermo. Messrs. Miller & Sons expressed their belief that her destination was Palermo.
The fact is now clear that in this statement there was either equivocation or positive falsehood somewhere between the parties named. The
testimony of Mr. Prioleau, of the firm of Fraser, Trenholm & Co., of Liverpool, agents of the insurgent organization in America, (than whom no
man on earth was more sure to know,) testimony, too, extorted from him
with great reluctance on his oath in a British court, establishes beyond
dispute the fact that she was built for the order of J. D. Bullock, agent,
of the insurgents.
So with regard to the statement made by Mr. S. Price Edwards, col-
qu'il tottche.   Meme l'indifference peut degenerer en negligence volontaire, et cela
imposera le devoir de se justifier, avant d'etre decharge de la responsabilite.
.Telle est la regie que je me gui6 efforce d'appliquer en jugeant la naturb des cas sur
lesquels on a fait des reclamations dans le cours de cet arbitrage.
LE FLORIDA.
Le 18 fevrier 1862, M. Adams adressa a Lord Russell une note pour appeler son at"
tention sur une lettre qu'il avait recue de M. Dudley, le consul des Etats-Unis a Liverpool, au sujet d'une certaiue canonuiere, que l'on appareillait dans ce port, et que l'on
avait des raisons de croire de^tineee a servir aux insurges' americains dans la guerre
qu'ils soutenaient contre leur Gouvernement.
Le 19 du m6me mois, M. Hammond repondit, au nom de Lord Russell, en informant
M. Adams qu'il engagerait les lords commissaires k faire uue enquete immediate k
l'egard de ce vaisseau et a. prendre les mesures convenables.
Le 22, les commissaires des douanes rapporterent qu'il y avait un vaisseau, semblable
a. celui decrit, appeie l'Oreto; qu'il avait ete construit par MM. Miller et fils pour MM,.
Fawcett, Preston et Cie, ihgenieurs, et qu'il etait destine a l'usage de MM. Thomas
freres, de Palermo. MM. Miller et fils exprimaient leur croyance a cette destination de
Palermo.
II est maintenant aver6 qu'il y avait dans ces declarations on une equivoque ou une
faussete positive imputable a quelqu'une des dites parties. Le temoignage de M. Prioleau, de la maison Fraser, Trenholm et Cie, de Liverpool, agents de Forganisation des
insurges americains, personnage qui devait savoir mieux que personne ce qu'il en etait,
et dont le temoignage fut arrache avec quelque peine, sous serment dans une cour de
justice anglaise, etablit irrefragablement le fait que ce vaisseau fut construit d'apres
les ordres de J. D. Bullock, agent des insurges.
Ainsi, quant aux allegations de M. S. Price Edwards, receveur a Liverpool, dans saOPINIONS   OF  MR    ADAMS.
151
lector of Liverpool, in his letter of the 21st, transmitted by the commissioners to Lord Bussell, that he had every reason to believe that she was
for the Italian government, it is now made clear that he either told a
falsehood or had been willfully deceived by Mr. Thomas, or others connected with the transaction.
Earl Bussell directed Her Majesty's minister at Turin to inquire as to
the fact of this proceeding on the part of the Italiau government, and on
the 1st of March he received an answer that Baron Bicasoli had no
knowledge whatever of any such ship.
It is admitted that at the time now in question Her Majesty's government had no reason to suspect any of these statements to be false, excepting the last. Subsequently, on the 25th of March, the final information came, completely establishing the fact in that case. But even the
earlier information would'have been likely; as it would seem, at least to
shake confidence in the veracity of the party making the statement.
And here I trust I may be permitted a general remark, possibly rather
trite, as to the moral effect of falsehood upon the general credit of men.
In the private relations established between persons if any individual
in a matter of importance be one detected in a deliberate falsehood the
consequence is a habitual distrust of him by his associates for the future
in any transaction whatever. So I doubt not if my respected colleague,
who has done so much honor to the bench over which he has long presided, should discover, in the examination of any important witness iu
a case, the fact that he had deliberately perjured himself, he would at
once feel it his duty in charging the jury to set his evidence aside as
generally undeserving of confidence.
Now, upon a calm review of the voluminous transactions recorded in
the numerous volumes which have been submitted to the judgment of
this tribunal, I do not hesitate to say that it contains a record of the
most continuous, persistent, willful, and flagrant falsehood and perjury
carried on in the British possessions by individuals associated in the American insurgent cause aud their British affiliations, from the date of the
building of the Oreto, at the beginning, to that of the return of the Shen-
lettre du 21, transmise par les commissaires, oh il dedarait qu'il avait tout lieu de
croire que le vaisseau etait construit pour le gouvernement italien, il est maintenant
evident, ou qu'il a dit uue faussete, ou qu'il a ete trompe par M. Thomas ou autres
personnes engagees dans l'affaire.
Le Comte Russell fit faire au ministre de sa Majeste britannique k Turin des demarches
pour savoir du gouvernement italien ce qu'il en etait, et le ler mars reput reponse
que le baron Ricasoli n'avait aucune connaissance d'un vaisseau semblable.  -
II est admis qu'a. l'epoque dont il est question, le gouvernement de sa Majeste
britannique n'avait aucune raison de considerer ces declarations comme fausses, ex-
cepte la derniere. Plus tard, le 25 mars, les derniers renseignements etablirent com-
pietement le fait dans ce cas. Mais meme les premiers renseignements auraient du, a ce
qu'il semble, ebranler la foi daus la veracite des parties dont venaient les declarations.
Et ici l'on me permettra une remarque generale un peu usee quant aux eff'ets moraux
de l'absence de veracite sur le credit accorde aux gens. Dans les rapports de la vie
privee, si l'on a une fois decouvert dans une question de quelque importance que
quelqu'un, de propos deiibere, a vioie la verite, la consequence en est que l'on se
defie de lui i.our toujours. C'est ainsi que je suis convaincu que" si mon honore
coliegue, qui a tant illustre le tribunal dont il a ete longtemps le president, decouvrait
dans l'examen de quelque important temoin, dans un proces, qu'il s'est, le sachant et
le voulant, parjure, il n'hesiterait pas k considerer comme de son devoir en demandant
au jury de mettre son temoignage de c6te comme indigne de creance.
Et maintenant, apres un examen calme et refiechi des volumineuses procedures rap-
portees dans les nombreux volumes qui out ete soumis au jugement de ce tribunal, je
n'hesite pas de dire qu'il coutient une relation des faussetes et des parjures de personnes
associees a la cause des insurges americains et de leurs affiliations sur territoire britannique, depuis la construction de l'Oreto, au commencement, jttsqu'au retour du Shenact-152
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
I
andoah to Liverpool, at the close, that has yet been brought to light in
history.
The' earliest evidences of the truth of this affirmation are found
thickly strewn among the transactions relating to this vessel. They
appear most strikingly in the reports made by Mr. Dudley, the consul
of the Uuit^^»tes at Liverpool, both to his own Government and to
Mr. Adams. His duty was, with such imperfect means as he had in his
possession, to exercise due diligence in exposing every trace of an attempt to carry on from that place hostile operations against his own
country; and, I must add, niost faithfully and energetically does he
seem to me to have performed it. But just in the proportion to the
efficacy of his exertions was the attention of those engaged in such enterprises directed to the means of baffling his aim. To this end it appears clear that among the parties to which he was driven to resort for
the purpose of gathering information were not a few of indifferent
character, and probably some employed by his opponents expressly to
put him on a false scent. Having no power in his hands to extort unwilling testimony, he was compelled to rely entirely on his own judgment to pick out of the mixed mass before liim that which might seem
to him most in harmony with the probabilities of the case. That he
should h.||ye been occasionally misled, and thus have made representations through Mr. Adams to Her Majesty's government which were
proved on investigation not to be accurate, ought to be neither surprising nor matter of blame to him. In point of fact, he seems in the present
case to have supplied pretty much all the correct information which
Her Majesty's govefiiment actually received, and which, if they had followed it up with corresponding diligence, would certainly have ended
iu the detention of the vessel. And her detention at that critical moment in these enterprises would probably have had the effect of putting
a stop to them all, as well as to the necessity of any such tribunal as
the one now constituted here.
But this was not to be.   The government, which had in its hands al.
doah a Liverpool, k la fin, les plus continus, premedites et flagrants que l'histoire ait
jamais connus.
Les premieres demonstrations de cette affirmation se trouvent nombreuses parmi les
procedures relatives & ce vaisseau. Elles apparaissent le plus clairement dans les rapports de M. Dudley, consul des Etats-Unis a Liverpool; rapports transmis a son
gouvernement aussi bien qu'a M. Adams.   Son devoir 6tait, avec les moyens imparfaits
" necessaire tout indice de
jfflgjpris ces operations fut dirigee sur les moyens de les contrecarrer.
II appkralt claireinent que, dans ce but, parmi les personnes aupres desquelles il etait
oblige de chercher des reseigneorients, il s'en trouvait de peu estimables, et qui etaient
probablement employees par ses adversaires pour le derouter. N'ayant aucun pouvoir
pour arracwr des renseignements qu'on ne voulait pas lui donner, il fut oblige de s'en
remettre a-son propre jugement pour choisir dans ce qui lui etait rapporte ce qu'il y
avait de plus vraisem'blSble. Qu'il ait ete quelquefois trompe, et qu'il ait, a cause de
cela, fait au gouvernement de sa Majeste britannique, par Fentremise de M. Adams, des,
representations qui, sur enquete, ont ete trouvees non-fondees, ne peut etre etonnaut et
ne peut devenir un snjet de blame a son egard. En fait il paralt bieu, daus le cas
actuel, avoir fourni presque tous les renseignements exacts que le gouvernement de
sa Majeste britannique a vraiment recus; et qui, si on en avait tenu compte avec itn
soin egal, auraieut certainement amene la saisie du vaisseau. Cette saisie Ii ce moment
aurait probablement eu pour resultat de mettre un terme, non-seulement a cette entreprise, mais k toutes les autres, et nous aurait, par consequent, evite la constitution de
ce tribunal.
Mais il ne devait pas en etre ainsi.   Le gouvernement, qui avait tous les moyensOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
153
the means of extorting unwilling testimony, through efficient and trustworthy agents, does not seem to have been, at this moment at least,
conscious of the existence of any obligation to originate investigations
at all. It may reasonably be doubted, from the evidence before us,
whether it believed in it if it was. On the 1st of March—that is, twenty
days before the escape of the Oreto—an inquiry made of the government
of Italy respecting one of the official statements received from Liverpool had been replied to in terms which, if not absolutely decisive as to
its falsehood, certainly tended to throw the greatest possible doubt upon
its truth. In such an important transaction as the building of a gunboat, it would seem to be clear that a grave misstatement of its destination by responsible parties was not likely to be made carelessly, or
without giving rise to some possible suspicion of an adequate motive to
account for it. It does not appear from anything contained in the
papers before us that the attention of the parties concerned was called
to this circumstance at all. But it does appear very clear that, both in
the letters of Mr. Adams and Mr. Dudley, under the eyes of Her Majesty's government, there was presented an adequate motive to explain it,
to wit, the wish to elude the vigilance of Her Majesty's government and
her officers in preventing the outfit from one of her ports of a vessel
sadly wanted by the insurgent Americans to carry ou war on the ocean
against their Government. All the external circumstances indicating
a state of peace everywhere else in the civilized world pointed to that
quarter alone as the probable one, not simply to explain the destination
of the vessel itself, but likewise the false representation which had been
made for the purpose of concealiug it. Her Majesty's government does
not seem to have entered into any such process of reasoning.
On the 23d of February it has already been observed that Her Majesty's commissioners of eustoins had addressed a letter to the treasury
board, making a report in regard to the condition and destination of
the vessel called the Oreto. At the close of that letter are the following words:
We beg further to.add that.special directions have been given to the officers at Liv-
d'obtenir tous les renseignements d'employes honnetes et digues de foi, ne semble pas
avoir eu conscience, a cette epoque, de l'existence d'une obligation de sa part de faire
des enquetes voloutaires de son cot6. Ou peut raisonnablement douter, en voyant les
documents, qu'il crht meme a ce devoir. Le ler mars—c'est-a-dire, vingt-deux jours
avaut le depart de l'Oreto—une enquete, faite aupres du gouvernemeut italien au sujet
de Fune des declarations offi^ielles recues de Liverpool, avait eu pour resultat une
reponse faite dans des termes qui, s'ils n'etaient pas absoluruent decisifs qnaut a l'exacti-
tude de ces declarations, tendaient du moins a jeter sur elles le plus grand doute. Dans
une affaire aussi importante que la construction d'une canonniere, on pourrait croire
qu'une fausse declaration faite quant k sa destination par des personnes responsables
ne devait pas etre faite par negligence et devait faire naitre un soiipcon qu'il y avait
des raisons suffisantes de la faire. II ne parait pas, d'apres les documents que nous
avons sous les yeux, que Fattention de ces personnes ait ete appeiee du tout sur ce fait,
mais ce qui est clair alors, c'est que dans les lettres de M. Adams, aussi bien que dans
eelles de M. Dudley, lettres placets sons les yeux des membres du gouvernement. de sa
Majeste britannique, des raisons bien suffisantes de ce fait furent donnees—c'est-a-dire,
le desir d'echapper a la vigilance du gouvernement de sa Majeste britannique et de
ses employes r>our empecher l'armement dans un port anglais d'un vaisseau dont les
insurges americains avaient le plus grand besoin, pour faire sur mer la guerre a leur
Gouvernement. La paix qui regnait partout, ailleurs, devait diriger Fattention sur ce
point seul et devait non-seulement ouvrir les yeux, quant a la destination du vaisseau,
mais aussi expliquer la fausse declaration faite dans l'intention de cacher cette destination.
II a dejj_ ete remarque que, le 22 fevrier, les commissaires des douanes de sa Majeste
britannique avaient adresse a la tresorerie un rapport sur l'etat et la destination du
vaisseau appeie l'Oreto.   A la fin de ce rapport se trouve la phrase suivante:
"Nous ajoutons que des instructions speciales ont ete donnees a Liverpool pour154
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
erpool to watch the movements of the vessel, and that we will not fail to report forthwith
any ^Humstances which may occur worthy of your lordship's cognizance.
THO. F. FREMANTLE.
GRENVILLE C. L. BERKELEY.
After a diligent search, I do not succeed in finding a trace of any
report of these gentlemen earlier than the 4th April. Probably they
did not regard the circumstances of her outfit and departure from the
port as worthy of their lordships' cognizance, unless the news were
absolutely demanded.
Yet, when Mr. Adams, on the 25th of March, addressed another remonstrance to Earl Bussell, it seems to have had the effect of prompting his lordship, on the 2Gth of March, to direct a note to be sent to the
secretary of the treasury requesting the commissioners of customs | to
give directions that the Oreto may be diligently watched."
This seems to have brought forth a letter from Mr. S. Price Edwards
to the following effect.   It is dated the 28th of March:
To the Commissioners of Customs:
The screw-vessel Oreto was registered at this port on the 3d instant, as per copy of
registry annexed. She cleared on the following day, the 4th, for Palermo and Jamaica
in ballast, as per inclosed victualing-bill. She sailed on the22d instant, the day upon
which the American consul's letter is dated, having a crew of fifty-two men, all British, save some three or four, one of whom only was an American. She had nothing
whatever on board save the stores enumerated. She had neither gunpowder nor even
a signal-gun, and no colors save Maryatt's Code of Signals aud a British ensign. With
reference to the passengers brought by the Annie Child, it is clear that they were not
intended to form any portion of the crew of the Oreto, for they are still in Liverpool;
and as respects the dipping of the ensign, this, as far as I can ascertain, was a compliment paid to one of the Cunard steamers and some other vessel, which saluted the
Annie Child on her arrival, the masters being parties known to one another.
What became of this letter it is difficult to explain. It seems clear
that Lord Bussell could have known nothing of it on the 7th of April,
Ii  ]!■'
surveiller les mouvements de ce vaisseau et que nous ne manquerons pas de vous rap-
porter immediatement toute circonstance digne d'etre portee a la connatssance de votre
seigneurie.
(Signe) "THO. F. FREEMANTLE.
" GRENVILLE C. L. BERKELEY."
Malgre une recherche tres-active, je ne reussis pas a trouver une settle trace de rapport fait par ces messieurs anterieurement au 4 avril. Probablement ils n'ont pas
consider l'armement et le depart de ce vaisseau comme des circonstances digues d'etre
portees a la connaissance de leurs seignenries, a. moins que les nouvelles ne leur fussent
demandees expres.
Et cependant, lorsque M. Adams, le 25 mars, adressa une seconde representation au
Comte Russell, le resultat en fut, k ce qu'il semble, que sa seigneurie envoya au
secretaire de la tresorerie une note, ordonnant aux commissaires des douanes "de
donner des instructions pour que l'Oreto fut snrveille avec soin."
Ceci semble avoir provoque une lettre de M. S. Price Edwards, dans les termes
suivants.   Elle est datee du 28 mars.
"Aux commissaires des douanes:
I Le vaisseau a heiice l'Oreto a ete enregistre dans ce port le 3 courant, d'apres copie
du registre ci-joint. II s'acquitta le lendemain, 4, pour Palerme et la Jamaique en
lest, d'apres le memoire des vi vres, cSiclus. II mit k la voile le 22 courant, le jour dont
la lettre du consul americain est datee, ayant un equipage de,trente-deux hommes, tous
anglais, a l'exception de trois on qnigra, dont un seul etait americain. II n'avait rien
k bord, si ce n'est les provisions euumerees. II n'avait ni poudre ni meme uu canon
de signaux, et point de coulenrs, si ce n'est le systfeme de signaux de Marryatt et un
pavilion anglais. Quant aux passagers amenes par FAnnie Childs, il est Blair qu'ils
n'etaient pas destines a former une portion quelconque de 1'equipage de l'Oreto, car ils
sont encore k Liverpool; et quant au salut du pavilion, c'etait, autant que je puis le
constater, un compliment fait a. Fuu des 'steamers Cunard' et k quelque autre
vaisseau qui salua ' FAunie Childs' a. son arrivee, les capitaines se connaissant
mntuellement."
II est difficile d'expliquer ce qu'il advint de cette lettre. II semble clair que Lord
Russell ne pouvait rien en savoir le 7 avril, car il paralt alors avoir donne FordreaOPINIONS  OF  MR   ADAMS.
155
for he appears then to have directed Mr. Hammond to write to the Secretary of the Treasury | to cause his lordship to be informed whether
any report has been received from the commissioners of customs respecting the vessel the Oreto." This was the sixteenth day after that vessel
had sailed, a fact which he appears at that time not to have officially
known, though doubtless he had gathered it from the newspapers.
The report before alluded to was then produced, dated the 4th, but not
received until the 8th. It then first gave the information that the vessel
had sailed on the 22d, having been registered in the name of John
Henry Thomas, of Liverpool, as sole owner, and cleared for Palermo and
Jamaica in ballast.
The reports indicative of any observation whatever made in watching
the movements of the Oreto appear not to have been collected until the
latter part of August, and then only at the instance of Lord Bussell, for
another purpose.
One more report was made by the commissioners of customs on the
1st of May. The official declaration of the minister of state of the Italian
government to Earl Bussell, denying all knowledge whatever of the Oreto,
had been put into their hands. This declaration had been sent to Mr.
Edwards, the collector of the port, who had been the first person to declare his faith in the falsehood, and was now called to make further observations. He did not think fit to make any explanation of the reasons
of his belief nor of its source, but contented himself with a reference to
the registry of the vessel in the name of a native of Palermo, which he
probably knew to have been a fraud, because he went on to admit the
fact of its real destination,, and to place his absence from action on the
ground that ueven in that case no act had been committed to justify his interference." It does not seem to have occurred to him to ask himself, if
the dispatch of the steamer was a legitimate act, where was the heed
of the falsehood about the Italian government, or the further falsehood
of the ownership of Mr. Thomas. Neither does it seem to have occurred
to Her Majesty's government to consider whether they had been cheated
by their own officers.
M. Hammond d'ecrire au secretaire de la tresorerie,- " que sa seigneurie soit informee
si l'on a regu quelque rapport des commissaires des douanes tonchant le vaisseau
l'Oreto." C'etait le seizeme jour apres que le vaisseau avait mis a la voile, fait qu'il
me semble a cette eqoque n'avoir pas counu offlciellemeut, quoique sans doute il l'eut
appris par les journaux. Le rapport auqttel il est fait allusion ci-dessus fut alors
produit, date du 4, mais non recti avant le 8. II donna alors, pour la premiere fois,
l'informatlon que le vaisseau avait mis k la voile le 22, qu'il avait ete enregistre au
nom de John Henry Thomas, de Liverpool, comme seul proprietaire, et qu'il s'etait
acquitte en lest pour Palermo et la Jamaique.
Les rapports indiquaut les observations faites en surveillant les mouvements de
l'Oreto ne paraissent avoir et6 rassemble3 que vers la fin du mois d'aoht, et alors
settlement a la demande du Comte Russell, dans un autre but.
Un rapport fut en outre ecrit par les commissaires des douanes le ler mai. On avait
mis entre leurs mains la note officielle du ministre d'etat du gouvernement italien au
Comte Russell, par laquelle il dedarait n'avoir aucune connaissance de l'Oreto. Cette
declaration avait ete envoyee k M. Edwards, le receveur du port, qui avait ete le
premier a. se declarer convaincu de la verite des fausses indications donnees, et qui fut
alors appeie a faire de plus amples observations. 11 ne crut pas devoir donner des
explications sur les raisons de sa foi en ces indications, ni sur l'origine. de cette foi,
mais se contenta de s'en referer aux registres qui portaient ce vaisseau au nom d'uu
habitant de Palerme, ce que probablement il savait etre une fraude, parce qu'il alia
jusqn'a admettre le fait de sa vraie destination et a excuser son abstention eu disant
que, "meme dans ce cas, on n'avait commis aucuu acte pour justifier une intervention
de sa part." II ne paralt pas qu'il lui soit venn a l'esprit de se demander pourquoi,
si le depart de la canonniere etait legal, il etait besoin d'une fausse declaration au
sujet du gouvernement italien, ou du second mensonge au sujet de la propriete da
vaisseau par M. Thomas.156
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
A steamer, completely fitted in all respects as a man-of-war, had succeeded in escaping from Liverpool, and nothing was left to make her a
power ohllhe ocean but the receipt of arms and ammunition. How that
proceeding was accomplished we shall see in the sequel. At present, I
desire to point out the extent to whieh the falsehood and fraud that had
been rested to in the course of the transaction, to cover it from observation, betray the consciousness of the parties concerned in it of the
danger they were incurring, of the indignation of Her Majesty's government in case they were detected in preparing such a hostile enterprise in a British port. At least they appear to have had no idea that
such an attempt, if really understood, was not an act which would justify the interference of the government. Hence the studied efforts to
misrepresent the transaction from the beginning to the end. Hence
the labor to substitute a false British owner, and a false destiny for the
real one. Hence the studied representation of Palermo, in Sicily, as the
term of the voyage, even to the simple seamen decoyed by this means
into an unwiiing s|lyice. In a word, the affair reeks with malignant
fraud from its incejlion to its close. The parties concerned appear to
have had no conception how easy it was to paralyze the action of Her
Majesty's government, or they would at once have relieved themselves
of all the opprobrium that afttended their proceedings. Doubtless they
would not h|&e indulged in mendacity for the mere love of it. They
did not then conceive that the principle of action was not to initiate any
active measures of thorough investigation into the truth of their words
and the good faith of their acts, but to wait for the disclosure of the
necessary evidence by the agents of the United States, who could not
in the nature of things possess anything like their power of extorting
the truth from unwilling lips.
I have now reached the moment when it seems necessary to apply
myself to the question so much discussed in the arguments laid before
us by the respective parties to the litigation. What is the diligence
due from one nation to another in preventing the fitting-out of any vessel which it has reasonable ground to believe intended to cruise against
Un vaisseau arme sous tous les rapports comme vaisseau de guerre avait reussi a sortir
du port de Liverpool, et il ne lui manquait plus, pour etre une puissance sur l'ocean,
que des armes et des munitions. Nous verrous dans la suite comment on arriva a> lui-
en fournir. Pour le moment je desire faire remarquer combien la fraude employee
pour cacher l'armement de ce vaisseau denote, chez ceux qui trempaient dans l'affaire,
la conscience des dangers qu'ils couraient, si le gouvernement de sa Majeste
brit-nnuique avait decouvert les preparatifs de cette enterprise hostile dans tin port
anglais. Ils paraissent au moins n'avoir eu aucune idee qu'une telle enterprise n'etait
pas un acte justifiaut Fiuterveution du gouvernement. De la ces efforts reiteres pour
presenter la question sous un autre jour que le vrai. De la ce travail de substituer uu
faux proprietaire anglais et une fausse destination, au proprietaire red et a la vraie
destination. De la cette declaration de Palerme comme le but du voyage, declaration
faite m.me aux simples matelots entralnes de cette maniere dans un service qu'ils ne
voulaient point. En un mot, cette affaire est un tissu de fraudes du commencement a
la fin. Les personnes interessees ne semblent avoir eu aucune idee de la facilit6 avec
laquelle on pouvait paralyser Faction du gouvernement de sa Majeste britannique, ou
elles auraient assit6t dositv de se deiivrer de Fopprobre de toutes' leurs machinations.
Ils ne comprenaient pas alors que les principes d'action etaient de ne point prendre
Finitiative de mesures actives et completes pour reconnaltre la verite de leurs
allegations et la bonne foi de leurs actes, mais d'atteudreTes revelations des agents des
Etats-Unis, qui ne pouvaient en aucuue maniere posseder le pouvoir d'extorquer la
verite k des gens qui ne voulaient pas la faire connaltre.
Je suis maintenant arrive au moment oh il me semble necessaire d'examiner la question, objet de tant 8e discussions de la part des deux parties dans ce debat. Avec
quelle diligence une nation doit-elle agir pour empecher l'armement d'un vaisseau que
l'on a des raisons suffisantes de croire destine k coinbattre une autre nation?   QnoiqneOPINIONS  OF- MR.   ADAMS.
lb I
the other ?   Although my own judgment is distinctly formed upon it, I
feel that this is not the place in which I can, with the most propriety,
explain my reasons in full. It is enough for my purpose here to say
that, in my mind, the diligence manifested by all the requisite authorities of Great Britian in the case now before us does not appear to me
to be that contemplated by the language of the treaty, because it was
not in any sense a spontaneous movement. So far as the papers before
us are concerned, I cannot perceive that Her Majesty's government
acted in any case excepting after representations made by the agent of
the United States; and even when they did act, they confined themselves exclusively to the allegations therein made, presuming that, if
they could report upon them satisfactorily to themselves, their obligations were fully performed. It must be obvious that such a method of
action furnishes every possible opportunity to the parties implicated,
if they be at all adroit, to escape convictiou, by resort to equivocation,
if not absolute falsehood. I can form no definition of the word " diligence" which does not embrace direct original action, persevered in not
merely to verify acts of offence one by one, but to establish the general
fact of intent as obtained from continuous observation of the operations
going on; not merely to detect the motives for falsehood, but to penetrate to the bottom of the truth. If there was a conspiracy of persons
at home engaged in a treasonable effort to overthrow the government,
would not due diligence comprehend in its meaning a close and constant observation of each and every one of the persons reasonably suspected of being engaged in it, aud an immediate action to prevent
any movement in advance of its maturity 1 Especially, would not such
energy be called for in time of war, when the danger to the state from
external co-operation might become extreme ? Most of all, would it not
be natural to expect from every power in amity to furnish all the means
it could command to render abortive every combination suspected to be
forming within its borders to render assistance to the maneuvers of
the malcontents at home? All these are parts of a complete whole,
the maintenance of order at home and of peace abroad.
mon avis a. cet egard soit parfaitement forme, je sens que ce n'est pas ici le lien oh je
puisse avec le plus de couvenance exprimer mes raisous d'une maniere .complete. II me
suffit de dire que, selon moi, la diligence exercee par toutes les autorites int.eressees de
la Grande-Bretange, dans le cas actuel, tie me paralt nu .lenient correspondr.; au texte
du traite, parce qu'elle n'a nullement ete spontanee, comme elle devait l'etre. Je ne
vois pas, en effet, dans aucun des documents sous nos yeux, que le gouvernement de sa
Majeste britannique ait agi, si ce n'est sur les representations des agents des Etats-
Unis, et mfime, lorsqn'il agit, il s'en tient exclusivement aux informations qui lui sont
donnees par ces agents, et semble supposer que, s'il pent rapporter d'une rnaniere satis-
faisante pour lui sur ces informations, ses obligations intemationales sont pleinemeut
remplies. II est evident qu'une telle maniere d'agir fournit aux personnes iuteressees,.
pour peu qu'elles aient nue certaine habilete, toutes les facilites pour eviter d'etre de-
couvertes, au moyen d'equivoques, sinon de mensonges. Je ne puis donner aucune definition du mot " diligences " qui ne siguifie pas seulemeut une premiere action, directe
prolongee dans le but de verifier des deiits un a un, mais aussi dans le but d'etablir le
fait general de l'intention, tel que ce fait ressort d'une observation continue des operations qui s'executent. Supposons une conspiration destinee a renverser le gouvernement de son pays, n'entenarait-on pas, par les dues diligences, une surveillance attentive et constante de chacuue et de toutes les personnes que l'on a des raisons de
soupgonner, et une action immediate pour empecher le mouvement de se prononcer et
de se declarer? C'est surtout en temps de guerre qu'une energie semblable serait exi-
gee, alors que le danger d'une cooperation etrangere est imminent. N'est-il pasnaturel
d'attendre, de toute puissance avec laqnelle on est en paix, qu'elle fera tons ses efforts
pour faire avorter toute entente notoirement formee sur sou territoire pour porter
secours aux insurges ?   Tout ceci fait partie d'un tout complet, le maiutien de la paix
chez soi et a l'etranger.158
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
That there did exist in Great Britain a combination of persons, composed pljltly of Americans and partly of British subjects, having for
its olwBCt and inteiS|the fitting out of vessels to carry on war with the
United States, to the end of overturning the Government, is made perfectly plain by the evidence plaee_ptwj|_>re us by the t#o parties. That'
Her Majesty's government considered it no part of her duty to originate any proceedings tending to preventionf&t the time of the outfit of
the Oreto, or to pass at all beyond the range of investigation especially
pointed out by the agents of ipe Ameiidiin government to its attention,
appears to me certllfi. A)tja later stage of the difficulties this policy
appears to have been partially changed. TheiSEvorable effects of it are
claimed as a merit in a portion of the papers before us, and I am ready,
at any and at all proper times, to teis^fy to my sense of its efficiency and
value wherever it is shown. But after close examination I fail to see
any traces of this policy in the present instance.
piiis, then, my opinion at this stage of the transactions that Her
Majesty's government did fail to use due diligence to prevent the fitting-
out, within its jurisdiction, of the Oreto, which it had reasonable ground
to believe intended to cruise against the United States.
I now proceed to the next step in the career of this vessel.
Nassau.—On the 22d offl^feh, 1862, the Oreto escaped from Liverpool with an intent to carry on war against the United States. Her
Majesty's government had not been tempted to penetrate the deception
which had been deliberately practijfld upon it.
On the 2Sth of April she arrived at Nassau, and was reported by the
governor as a registered jiritish. vessel and carrying the British flag.
On the 30th Commander McKillop, of Her Majesty's ship Bulldog,
addressed a letter to the secretary of the admiralty to this effect:
A very suspicious steamer, the Oretro, evidently intended for a gunboat, is now in
the upper anchorage under the British flag; but as there are no less than three cargoes
of arms and ammunition united to run the blockade, some of these guns, &c, would
turn her into a privateer in a few hours.   Agents of the confederate government and
Qu'il a existe dans la Grande-Bretagne une entente entre des Americains et des sujets
britanniques ayant pour but d'armer des vaisseaqgLpour faire la guerre aux Etats-Uuis
pour renverser le Gouvernement, c'est une choseparfaitement prouvee par les temoigna-
ges mis devant nos yeux par les deux parties. Que le gouvernement de sa Majeste
britannique n'a pas considoro de son devoir de prendre des mesures preventives au moment de l'armement de l'Oreto, ou de faire pour son compte une enquete en dehors des
renseignements specialement fournis par les agents du Gouvernement americain, c'est
encore une chose iudiscutable.
A une epoque posterieure cette politique semble avoir change en partie; on'en reclame
les bops rdsultats dans une partie des documents qui sour devant nous, et je suis prdt
a temoigner en favour de sa yaleur et de sou efficacite. Mais apres nihr examen je ne
reussis pas a trouver traces de cette politique daus le cas actuel.
- Mon opinion est, »i|jj:eons"equeut, que, dans cette p6riode de FafFaire, le gouvernement
de sa Majeste britannique n'a pas exerce la diligence necessaire pour empficher l'appa-
reillemeut de l'Oreto dans les limites de sa juridiction, lorsqu'il avait des raisons suffisantes de croire que ce vaisseau etait destine contre les Etats-Unis.
JVassau.—Je passe niainteuaut a la seconde periode de la carriere de ce vaisseau.
Le 22 mars 1862, l'Oreto sorfcit de la ra.de de Liverpool avec Fintention de faire la
guerre aux Etats-Unis. Le gouvernement de sa Majeste n'avait pas etc teuto de pene"-
trei' la fraude qui avait 6t6 commise de propos deiibere a son 6gard.
Le 28 avril, il an-i va a Nassau et fut anuonc6 par le gouverneur comme vaisseau
anglais, portaut le drapeau an.:_lais.
Le 80, le commandant, .McKillop. du vaisseau de sa Majeste britannique le Bulldog
expedie an secretaire de l'amiraute une lettre a cet efFet:
" Uu vaisseau tres-suspeot, l'Oreto, evidemmeut construit pour etre une canonniere, 86
trouve maintenant k l'ancre, sous les couleurs britanniques ; mais, comme il n'y a pas
moins de trois cargaisons d'a-rmes et de munitions ici renuics pour forcer le blocus,
quelques-uns de ces canons, etc., pourraient eu faire uu corsaire en peu d'heures.   DesOPINIONS   OF  ME.   ADAMS.
159
officers of their navy are here on the spot, and I have no doubt that the Oreto is intended
for their service.
Such was the natural and just couclusion of a gallant British officer,
writing under no bias on one side or the other, but moved only by his
sense of justice and fair dealing. Let us now proceed to consider the
manner in which events contributed to verify his prediction to the
letter.
On the 9th of May, Mr) Whiting, the consul of the United States at
Nassau, addressed a note to the governor, calling his attention to the
fact of the almost concurrent arrival from the port of Liverpool of the
gunboat Oreto, and of the tug Fanny Lewis, laden with gunpowder for
the insurgent Americans.
This letter was referred by the governor to the consideration of the
attorney-general, with an indorsement on it to the effect that he wished
the agents of the Oreto to be informed that, if they put arms on board
that vessel, he should then enforce the rules laid down in the Queen's
proclamation.
The receiver general enters his minute on Mr. Whiting's letter, to the
effect that the Fanny Lewis has an assorted cargo not to be landed.
He is confident that no part of the cargo had then been transferred.
But on the 28th of the month his tone changes, and he is convinced
that the consignees of the Oreto intend shipping large quantities of
arms and munitions as cargo.
Two days days later Commander McKillop writes to the governor as
follows:
Several steamers having anchored at Cochrane's anchorage, I sent- an officer yesterday to visit them and muster their crews, aud ascertain 'what they were and how employed.
The officer reports that one steamer, the Oreto, is apparently fitting and preparing
for a vessel of war; under these circumstances, I would suggest that she should come
into the harbor at Nassau, to preveut any misunderstanding as to her equipping in
this port, contrary to the foreigu-enlistment act, as a privateer or war-vessel.
agents du gouvernement confedere et des officiers de sa marine se trouvent ici mfime, et
je n'ai aucun doute que l'Oreto est destine k leur service."
Telle etait la juste et naturelle conclusion d'un brave officier anglais, ecrivant sans
etre prevenu pour un parti ou pour l'autre, mais n'ecoutant que sa conscience et son
sentiment d'equite.
Examinons maintenant comment les evenements se chargerent de verifier a la lettre
ces predictions.
Le 9 mai, M. Whiting, consul des fetats-Unis a Nassau, adressa une note au gouverneur pour apporter son attention sur le fait de l'arrivee presque simultanee de la ca-
nbnnifere l'Oreto et du remorqueur Fanny Lewis, tous deux venant de Liverpool
charges de poudre pour les insurges americains.
Cette lettre fut soumise par le gouverneur a l'examen du procureur g6ueral, avec
une note ecrite au dos, oh il exprimait le cbSsir que les agents de l'Oreto fussent informed
que s'ils embarquaient des armes k bord de leur vaisseau, il mettrait k execution les
prescriptions eaictees dans la proclamation de la Reine.
Le receveur general prend note de la lettre de M. Whiting, en ce sens, que la Fanny
Lewis a une cargaison assortie qui ne doit pas etre deharquee. II exprime sa conviction qu'aucune partie de la cargaison n'a encore ete debarqu6e.
Mais le 26 il change devton, et il est convaincu que les agents de l'Oreto ont Finten-
tion d'embarquer comme cargaison de grandes quantites d'armes et de munitions.
Deux jours'plus tard, le commandant, Mr. McKillop, ecrit au gouverneur ce qui
suit:
" Plusieurs vapeurs etant a l'ancre dans la rade de Cochrane, j'ai envoye hier un
officier pour les visiter, rassembler leurs equipages,, et recounaltre ce qu'ils etaient et
la mapiere dont ou les emploie. L'officier me rapporte-qjiie " Fun des vapeurs, l'Oreto,
est, selon toute apparenco, arrne pour 6tre un vaisseau de guerre. Daus ces circonstances, je suggererais qu'on le fit entrer dans la rade de Nassau, afin d'eviter tout
malentendu relativement a son armement dans ce port, comme vaisseau. de guerre ou
de course, contniireinent au foreign-enlistment act."■u
160
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
The governor referred the question to the attorney-general, who gave;
it as his deliberate opinion that an order for the removal of the Oreto
to a place where she was within reach of observation should not be;
made, as such order could not be legally enforced unless it was distinctly
shown that such a violation of law had taken place in respect to her as.
would justify her seizure.
Here also it is to be noted that the attorney-general, following the
example given in the mother country, considers it not incumbent upon
tbe government to initiate any measures whatever of a preventive,
nature. In other words, not' until a vessel should succeed in an undertaking of an illegal nature, which would necessarily imply her escapej
from the jurisdiction, would the proper time come for proceeding with
proof that she ought to have been detained.
It was not until 1 became familiar with all these transactions that I
fully comprehended the singular facility of adaptation of the law, as understood and practiced in Great Britain, to the delay and defeat of the
ends of justice.
It is due to the governor to say that be was not altogether satisfied
with the passive policy recommended by his attorney-general; and he
proceeded to recommend to Commander McKillop to take active mea-s- ■
ures of prevention in the event of his beiug convinced that the vessel
was about to be armed wMiin that jurisdiction.
On the Sth of June. Commander McKillop, in a letter to the governor,
announces that he will seize the vessel should she attempt to take ammunition on board.
Ou the very next day the consignees of the Oreto began to load the
Oreto with arms and ammunition. But Commander McKillop did not
execute his purpose.   On that day he quitted his command.
But on the very next day his successor, Commander Hickley of Her
Majesty's ship Greyhound, visited the Oreto, and found the consignees
just as busy discharging the arms and ammunition taken in the day
before, in point of fact, they had received a private notice from the
governor and the commander that it would uot do; but it was not a
Le gouverneur renvoya la question au procureur general. Celui-ci dedara que son
opinion, apres mhre reflexion, etait que l'on ne devait point ordonner le deplacement
de l'Oreto pour le conduire en un lieu oh il serait mieux surveilie; qu'un tel ordre ne
serait point legal, tant qu'on n'aurait pas prouve clairement que la loi avait ete vioiee
de maniere a justifier sa saisie.
Remarquons encore ici que le procureur general, suivant Fexample donne en
Angleterre, he considere pas qu'il soit du devoir du gouvernement de prendre aucune
mesure .preventive. En d'autres termes, ce n'est que lorsqu'nn vaisseau aura reussi
dans une entreprise iliegale—c'est-a-dire, lorsqu'il se sera sonstrait a la juridiction—que
l'on pourra prendre des mesures pour arriver a la preuve qu'on devait le detenir.
Ce ne fut qu'apres m'etre familiarise avec toutes ces affaires, que j'ai compris la
k singuliere facilite avec laquelle on pent adapter la loi, telle qu'elle est pratiquee dans
la Grande-Bretagne, au delai et enfin a Faunnlation de la justice.
C'est une justice Prendre au gouverneur que de recounaltre qu'il ne.fut pas com-
pietement satisfait de la politique passive recommandee par le procureur general, et il
eujoiguit au Commodore McKillop de prendre d'actives mesures preventives,, dans le
cas oh il serait convaincu qu'on etait sur le point d'armor le vaisseau dans cette
juridiction.
Le 8 juin, le commandant, McKillop, dans une lettre adressee ah gouverneur,
annonce qu'il saisirWe vaisseau, si l'on tente d'embarquer des munitions.
Le jour suivant, les agents de l'Oreto commencent k le charger d'armes et de munitions. Mais le commandant, McKillop, ne met pas a execution sa menace ; il avait
quitte ses fonctions le meme jour.
Le lendemain, son successeur, le commandant, Hickley, du vaisseau de sa majeste
britannique Greyhound visita l'Oreto, et tronva les agents en train de decharger le vaisseau des armes et des munitions enibarquees la veille. En effet, ils avaient recu un avis
particulier du gouverneur et du commandant, qu'il ne pouvait en 6tre ainsi, mais ceOPINIONS'  OF  MR.   ADAMS.
161
menacing intimation as to absolute action.   They were cunning enough
to take the hint, and change the line of their operations.
They now declared their intention to clear the Oreto in ballastfor Havana.
This assurance quieted the apprehensions of the British commander.
But finding that the vessel still remained, on the 15th of June he again
visited her, iu company with eight of his officers. The crew had refused to get the anchor up until they could be made certain as to where
the ship was going. The Oreto was a suspicious vessel. After close
observation, Captain Hickley and his eight officers all signed a report,
addressed to the governor, to the effect that she is in every respect
fitted as a man-of-war. She had left Liverpool fitted in all respects as
they saw her.   No addition or alteration had been made at Nassau.
This paper was submitted to the attorney-general for his opinion, and
he gave it to the effect that nothing contained in it would justify the
detention of the vessel.
But Commander Hickley saw the thing in a different light from the
attorney, and on the 15th addressed a new letter to the governor, reporting the result of his conversations with the portion of the crew that
had come to see him. He was now so convinced of the intent of the
parties controlling the Oreto, that be was strongly inclined to take the
responsibility of'her seizure and removal to another station at which
was placed the commodore or commander-in-chief. And he actually put
one of his officers temporarily in charge.
On the 16th of June the governor wrote, in reply, deprecating all
action of the kind contemplated, and throwing the responsibility wholly
upon him, if he should take it.
On the same day the attorney-general gives an opinion that no case
has yet been made out for seizure. He does not appear to have thought
it his duty to initiate any measures to ascertaiu what was the evidence
upon which Commander Hickley was impelled to his convictions. It
was the passive policy, the example of which had been set at home.
The evidence must come to the government.   It was not for the gov-
n'etait pas un avis menacant d'une action de la part du gouvernement, et ils furent
assez fins pour en tenir compte et pour changer leur ligne de conduite.
Ils dedarerent alors qu'ils avaient Fintention de s'acquitter pour l'Oreto en lest pour
la Havane. Cette declaration rassnra pour quelque temps le commandant britannique. Mais le 13 juin, voyant l'Oreto toujours a l'ancre, il alia le visiter, accompagne
de huit officiers. L'equipage avait refuse de lever l'ancre tant qu'on ne lui aurait pas
fait connaltre la destination du vaisseau. L'Oreto etait un vaissoati suspect. Apres une mi-
nutieuse inspection, le capitaine Hickley et ses huit officiers signent uu rapport adresse
au gouverneur, declarant que l'Oreto est, sous tons les rapports, arme comme tin vaisseau de guerre. II avait quitte Liverpool tel qu'ils le voyaient alors; on ne lui avait
fait ni changement ni addition a, Nassau.
Ce document fut soumis au procureur general, et il dedara qu'il ne contenait rien de
capable a justifier la detention du vaisseau.
Mais le commandant Hickley ne voit pas les choses sous le meme jour, et, le 15, il
adresse une nouvelle lettre au gouverneur pour lui faire connaltre le resultat d'une
conversation avec une partie de 1'equipage de l'Oreto, qui etait venu le trouver. II est
si convaincu de connaltre les veritables intentions des agents de l'Oreto, qu'il est tout
dispose a prendre sur lui la responsabilite de le saisir, et de le conduire au mouillage
oh se trouve le commandant en chef. II va meme jusqu'a commettre temporairemeut
un de ses officiers a sa garde.
Le 16 juin, le gouverneur repond en blftmant toute mesure de ce genre, et le rend re-
sponsable de ce qu'il pourrait faire a cet egard.
• Le meme jour le procureur general declare qu'il n'y a encore aucun motif de saisir le
vaisseau. II ne semble pas avoir cru qu'il etait de son devoir de prendre des mesures
pour reconnaltre sur quoi le commandant Hickley fondait sa conviction. C'etait toujours cette politique passive dont on lui avait donne l'example en Angleterre; la preuve
devait arriver au gouvernement, et ce n'etait pas au gouverueinent a rechercher cette
11 B162
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
ernment to go to the evidence. Of course it naturally happened that
this worked entirely for the benefit of the malefactors, and to the injury of the party that ought to have been protected. Ou the same day,
Commander Hickley wrote a reply maintaining his conviction, but declining to assume the responsibility of acting in the face of the attorney-
general's opinion. He therefore withdrew the officer whom he had placed
in charge of the ship.
But the governor is not satisfied with the action of either party, and
is afraid to commit himself entirely against the clear conviction of the
commander, so he decides in €avor of a seizure of the vessel, with a view
to a submission of the question to the local court of vice-admiralty at
Nassau. *
This was on the 17th of June. The information of the act of Captain
Hickley was transmitted to the government at London, and received
tbe approbation of Earl Bussell. Indeed, there is a degree of heartiness in the terms he uses to express it, and in his anxiety to see the
officer properly secured from any hazard to himself by reason of his
course, that clearly shows the earnestness of his satisfaction. I hope I
may not be exceeding my just limits if I seize this occasion to do a simple act of justice to that eminent statesman. Much as I may see cause
to differ with him in his limited construction of his own duty, or in the
views which appear in these papers to have been' taken by him of the
policy proper to be pursued by Her Majesty's government, I am far from
drawing any inferences from them to the effect that he was actuated in
any way by motives of ill-will to the United States, or, indeed, by unworthy 'motives of any kind. If I were permitted to judge from a calm
comparison of the relative weight of his various opinions with his action
iu different contingencies, I should be led rather to infer a balance
of good-will than of hostility to the United States.
The law-officers of the Crown were likewise consulted, and they gave an
opinion favorable to the action of Governor Bayley, but strongly urging
that evidence of what occurred at Liverpool of building and fitting oulr
preuve.   Cette maniere d'agir devait necessairement tourner au profit des coapables et
au prejudice de ceux qui devaient etre proteges.
Le m.me jour le commandant Hickley repond que sa conviction demeure entiere,
mais qu'il n'eutend pas assumer la responsabilite d'agir contrairement k Fopinion du
procureur general. En consequence il retire Fofficier qu'il avait commis a la garde du
vaisseau.
Le gouverneur, peu satisfait des deux opinions opposees, ou craignant de se compro-
mettre en se declarant contre la conviction absolue du commandant, se decide a faire
saisir le vaisseau, et k porter la question devant la cour de la vice-amiraute a Nassau.
Ceci se passait le 17 juin. On fit connaltre au gouvernemen$|a Londres ce qu'avait
fait le capitaine Hickley, et le Comte Russell y donna son approbation. II y a en effet
un ton de cordialite dans les terms qu'il emploie pour l'exprimer, et dans son anxiete de
voir Fofficier bien garanti contre tout hasard a cause de sa conduite, qui montre claire-
ment le serieux de sa satisfaction. J'espere ne pas depasser mes justes limites, si je
saisis cette occasion d'accomplir un simple acte de justice envers cet homme d'6tat,
eminent. Autant je puis voir de motifs de differer d'avec lui quant k sa maniere cir-
conscrite d'envisager son propre devoir ou dans les vues qui, par ces documents, sem-
blent avoir ete adoptees par lui quant a la conduite k suivre tor le gouvernement de
sa Majeste, autant je suis loin d'en tirer aucune conclusion qu'il ait ete mil, en aucune
maniere, par des motifs do mauvaise volonte envers les Etats-Unis, ou m.me par des
motifs indignes d'aucune espece. S'il m'etait perms de jnger, en comparant avec calme
la valeur relative de ses opinions diverses, a sa conduite en differentes conjonctures, je
serais plutdt porte a conclure en faveur de la bonne volonte que de l'hostilite a l'egard
des Etats-Unis.
Les avocats de la couronne, egalement consultes, donnferent une opinion favorable
aux mesures prises par le gouverneur Bayley, mais recommanderent fortement d'en-
voyer le recit de ce qui s'etait passe a Liverpool, au sujet de la construction et de l'arme-OPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
163
should be at once sent forward, in order to complete the proof of her
hostile destination to the United States.
And here I trust I may be permitted to express my sense of gratification on reading the reports and observing the action of the two gallant
naval officers. Their clear good sense and rapid judgment had led them
straight forward to the penetration of the motives of the authors of the
wretched equivocations and falsehoods by which they were surrounded,
as well as to the adoption of the most effective measures to bring their
machinations to naught. Neither does this course appear to have been
in any way prompted by a mere spirit of good-will to the United States,
which were to be protected by their action. It seems to have sprung
from that natural impulse of a conscience void of offense, which perceived an act of injustice and fraud to be in contemplation, and determined at once to resort to the best measures to prevent it.
Had such an energetic spirit animated the whole action of Her Majesty's government at all times and in all conjunctures, there would have
been no question about the exercise of due diligence in this narrative*.
The opinion of the law-officers in London wras received by Earl Bus-
sell on the 12th of August. Ten days before that date he had addressed
a letter to Mr. Stuart, the British secretary at Washington, requesting
him, in view of this proceeding, to dissuade the American Government
from proceeding in the measure then contemplated of issuing letters of
marque. He little thought of what had been laid up in store for him by
the learned judge of the court of Nassau.
On that very same day he had pronounced his judgment that there-
was no sufficient evidence to prove any act committed at Nassau to-
justify the seizure. But, considering the very suspicious nature of the-
circumstances, he should release his own government from the payment
of costs.
It is the general rule of courtesy between nations to recognize the-
action of their respective courts without seeking to analyze the principles upon which the decisions are made. And it is a wise rule, as conducive to the general maintenance of law and order in the performance-
ment du vaisseau, afin de completer la preuve de la destination hostile de l'Oreto a-
l'egard des fitats-Unis. Et ici j'espere qu'il me sera permis d'exprimer mon sentiment
de satisfaction en lisant ces memoires, et en remarquant la conduite de ces deux braves
officiers de marine; leur bon sens lucide et leur jugement rapide les conduisirent di-
rectement k penetrer les motifs des auteurs des miserables equivoques et des mensonges
dont ils etaient enveloppes, aussi bien qu'a adopter les mesures les plus efficaces pour
mettre a n6ant leurs machinations. Cette conduite ne semble pas non plus avoir ete
provoquee en aucune rnaniere par un simple esprit de bon vouloir k l'egard des Etats-
Unis, qui devaient etre proteges par leurs mesures. Elle semble avoir jailli de Fim-
pulsion natnrelle d'une conscience nette de toute faute, qui voit se preparer un acte
d'injustice et de fraude, et qui se determine en m.me temps a p-rendre les mesures les
plus dedsives pour l'empecher.
Si le meme esprit euergique avait anime toute la conduite du gouvernement de sa.
Majeste, toujouTs et dans toutes les conjonctures, il n'eut pas ete question de la pratique
des "dues diligences" dans ce memoire.
Cette opinion fut recue par le Comte Russell le 12 aout; six jours auparavant il avait-
adresse une lettre k M. Stuart, secretaire de la legation a Washington, pour lui demander,
en consideration de cette decision, de dissuader le Gouvernement americain de mettre k-
execution la mesure dont il etait question alors, de deiivrer des lettres de marques. II
prevoyait peu ce que lui reservait le tres-eminent juge de la cour de Nassau. Le meme
jour, ce juge avait prononce son jugement; il dedarait qu'il n'y avait pas de preuves-
suffisantes qu'il eut ete commis k Nassau tin acte justifiant la saisie. Mais considerant
la nature suspecte des circonstances, il liberait son gouvernement du paiement des frais.
C'est une regie generale de courtoisie entre les nations de reconnaitre les agissements-
de leurs cours de justice respectives sans chercher k analyser les principes sur lesquels-
se basent leurs decisions. C'est la une regie sage, aussi utile pour le respect de la loi
que pour le maintien des droits redproques de proteger les interets de Fune et de Fautre-164
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
of their reciprocal duties of protection to individual interests. But I
am not altogether sure whether this rule should be held to extend so far
as to bind the members of this tribunal to absolute silence in this and
similar instances that come before us. Whilst most anxious on all occasions to preserve the decorum appropriate to a station of such eminence, I am at the same time oppressed by the conviction that in no
portion of the history of this proceeding is the responsibility of Her
Majesty's government for the subsequent career of this vessel more
deeply implicated than by the action of this vice-admiralty judge, in
letting this vessel go upon the reasoning which he presents in his justification. It would be easy for me, if it were necessary, to go into an
analysis of the various points in which he appears to have ruled erroneously both in regard to the law and to the evidence. It is made certain by the papers that, in the former, he was not sustained by the law-
officers of the Crown at home. And as to the latter, I cannot but assume
the-presence of some strong external bias which should have induced
him to give credit to certain persons on the mere score of personal
character, where testimony proves them so clearly, in my eyes, to have
been arrant cheats, and to discredit the seamen, chiefly on account of
their low condition, who are as clearly manifested to have told the substantial truth. My mode of explanation of this flagrant perversion of
the law is, that the judge partook so largely of the general sympathy
admitted by the governor to have held sway over the entire population
of the island, as to render him absolutely incapable, iu this case, of a
perception of justice. It is not probably without a strong conviction of
this truth that the plain sense and clear appreciation of facts prompted
Commander Hickley to advise the removal of the vessel entirely out of
this jurisdiction. For the honor of Great Britain, which must be held
responsible through its agents for this flagrant wrong done to the injured,
party, it had been perhaps well if the desire of the gallant officer had
been complied with.
Many strictures have likewise been made upon the action?of the attorney-general, Mr. Anderson, throughout these proceedings, of so harsh a
Mais je ne shisjpas shr si cette regie doit s'appliquer si rigoureusement, jusqu'a obliger.
les membres de ce tribunal |||i_., silence absolu, dans ce cas et daus d'autres semblables
qui nous sont sounds. Quoique tres-desireux en toute occasion de respecter le decorum
gffiu||. une position si eminente, je suis presse par la conviction que nulle part dans le
cottrs de cette affaire, la responsabilite du gouvernement britannique au sujet de ce
batiment n'est devenue aussi grande que par suite de ce jugemeut de la vice-amiraute,-i
et des.arguments presentes pour sa justification. II me serait facile, s'il etait necessaire,.|
d'analyser les differents points oh il s'est trompe, soit sous le rapport de la loi, soit dans
le rapport du droit, soit sous le rapport de la preuve. Les documents prouvent snra-
'ibondamment que, quant au premier, il n'a pas ete appuye par les avocats de la couronne en Angleterre. Quant k la seconde, je ne puis que croire k l'existence d'une
^grande partialite qui Fa conduit k donner creance au temoignage de certaines personnes,
'sous pretexte de leur reputation personnelle, alors que ce temoignage me prouve claire-
ment qu'ils etaient des fourbes, et a ne pas ajouter foi au temoignage des marins, prin-
•cipalement a cause de leur sang inferieur^ que l'on a prouve avoir dit la verite substan-
tielle. J'explique cette flagrante injustice par le fait que le juge participait en une
grande mesure a la sympathie generale eprouvee par la population peu nombreuse de
File, sympathie admise du reste par le gouverneur, et qui le rendait incapable d'un jugement impartial. II est probable que ce fut parce qu'il etait convaincu de ce fait que
le commandant Hickley eouseilla de conduire le vaisseau.hors de cette juridiction. Pour
l'honneur de la Grande-Brejbagne, qui doit etre tenue responsable des actions de ses
.agents pour ce dommage evident cause a la partie ies4e, il eht peut-etre ete bien que
l'on se fht rendu au desir de ce brave officier.
Bien des critiques ont ete egalement faites de la conduite de l'attorney-general, M.
Anderson, dans le cours de cette procedure, d'une nature si grave qu'il a ete engage aOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
165
nature as to have called from him a formal paper in his justification,
which has been placed among the documents before us.
After a careful examination of the question, I am led to the belief
that it is possible to arrive at a clear comprehension of the motives
which actuated him, without the necessity of imputing any purpose
deeply affecting his integrity.
It appears that if, on the one hand, he was slow in his disposition to
reach any effective action to defeat the enterprise of the Oreto in 1862,
on the other, he appears in proportion quite as swift in the process of
seizing the vessel known as the Alexandra, and subsequently the Mary,
and pressing for her condemnation, when she made her appearance at
Nassau in the winter of 1864, under much less dubious circumstances.
The reason is plain. Mr. Anderson virtually admits in his statement
that, in the earlier stages of the struggle in America, he considered the
fate of the United States as settled, and he did not regret it. But, in the
last months of the war, not a shadow of doubt could have remained in
his mind as to its permanence. He then cheerfully accepted a retainer
on their side. The transition from one state of feeling to the other can
be no cause of surprise to any one observant of the relations of the
small population of Nassau to the United States. Neither is it difficult
to perceive among the documents the traces of a similar revolution of
sentiment and action going on simultaneously in other portions of Her
Majesty's dominions far removed from that relatively insignificant island.
Be this as it may, the effect of the decision of the admiralty court in
1862 was not only to liberate the ship, but to put an end to all serious
attempts to prevent the full accomplishment of the nefarious purpose of
her owners. On or about the 7th of August, the Oreto sailed from Nassau. On the 9th of the same month the schooner Brince Alfred also left
the place. They met at a spot agreed upon, about sixty miles distant,
called Green Cay; and there the Oreto received her armament and
ammunition, as well as her true officers and crew. The commander was
relieved from the terror of a new arrest which he had felt iu the event
ecrire pour sa justification un memoire fbrmel qui a ete place parmi les documents exposes devant nous.
Apres un examen scrupuleux de la question, je suis arnene a croire qu'il est possible
d'arriver k une perception claire des motifs qui le dirigeaient, sans qu'il soit necessaire
de lui imputer aucun desseiu affectant son integrite au fond.
II semble que, si d'un c6te il a ete lent dans sa disposition a adoptej aucune mesure
efficace pour empecher Fentreprise de l'Oreto en 1862, de l'autre, il paralt en proportion
aussi avide k poursuivre le vaisseau nomme FAlexandra, et plus tard la Mary, et k
pressor sa condamnation, lorsqu'il fit son apparition a Nassau, l'hiver de 1864, dans des
circonstances beaucoup moins douteuses.
La raison est evidente. M. Anderson admet virtuellement dans son memoire que,
dans les premieres phases du conflit en Anierique, il considerait le sort des Etats-Unis
comme termine, et il ne le regrettait pas. Mais, dans les derniers mois dfe la guerre, il
ne pouvait pas rester dans son esprit Fombre d'un doute sur leur permanence. II agit
alors volontiers pour eux. La transition de Fune de ces facons de sentir a l'autre ne
peut etre une cause de surprise pour aucun observateur des relations de la petite population de Nass.au avec les Etats-Unis. II n'est pas non plus difficile de decouvrir parmi
ces documents les traces d'une revolution semblable, k propos de la maniere de sentir et
d'agir, simultanement|dans bien d'autres parties des etats de sa Majeste, tres-eloignees
de cette lie relativement insignifiante.
Quoi qu'il en soit, la consequence du jugement de la cour en 1862 fut, non-seulement
de liberer le batiment, mais encore de mettre uu terme a toute tentative serieuse
pour empecher l'accoruplissement des projets criminels de ses proprietaires. Vel§|le 7
aoht, l'Oreto quitta Nassau. Le 9 du meme mois, le schooner Prince Alfred quitta
aussi ce port. Ils se rencontrerent a un endroit convenu, a une distance de 60 ntilles,
appeie Green Cay, et la, l'Oreto recut ses armes et ses munitions, aussi bien que ses
vrais officiers et son evuipage.   Le commandant n'avait plus a.craindre une nouvelle166
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
of his continuance at Nassau for another day. There was no cause for
this apprehension. His victory was complete. On the morning of the
11th August, in a place called Blossom Channel, believed to be within
the British jurisdiction, the log-book found in his vessel shows the trans*
action to have been completed. The authority of Her Majesty's govern-
ernment had been successfilly defied, and the decision of her admiralty
court proved a mockery and a show.
Hence it appears to me that Great Britain had clearly failed in enforcing the second rule prescribed in the treaty of Washington, as well as
the first; and if these two rules were not enforced as they should have
been, a failure in regard to the third appears to result as a matter of
course.
The next step in the career of the Florida, material to the present discussion, is the fact of her entry into Mobile, a port held by the insurgents, although at the time blockaded by the vessels of the United
States. Here she remained for more than four months. On the 15th
of January, 1863, she again succeeded in running the blockade outward,
and on the 25th her captain had the cool insolence to go at once to the
very place of the island of Nassau from which he h«H just escaped under
terrors which belong only to a malefactor. ItffB proper to add that in
the interval he had shipped an additional motley force of fifty-four men:
at Mobile.
The question here naturally arises whether by this process the vessel
had so far changed her previous character, as to be ftvested of any trace
of her British origin and fraudulent equipment, and entitled to claim a=
new departure as a legitimate offspring of a recognized belligerent power.-
This question, appertaining exclusively to the case of this vessel among
all those submitted to our consideration, and touching the release of
Her Britannic Majesty's government from any further responsibility for
the taint of her origin, appears to me one of the most interesting and:
difficult of all that we are called to decide.   But in order to complete-
the review of the career of the vessel, so far as it relates to the action of
arrestation, crainte qU'il aurait eprouvee a Nassau, s'il y etait reste un jour de plus.l
H n'avait pourtant aucune raison decraindre; sa victoire etait complete. Le 17 aohty
au matin, dans un endroit nomme Blossom Channel, dans les limites de la juridiction.
britannique, le livre du log Fatteste, la transaction fut achevee. L'autorite du.
gouvernement de sa Majeste avait ete bravee avec succes, et la decision de la cour de-
Famiraute se montra comme une derision et une moquerie. II me semble ressortir de-
la que la Grande-Bretagne-avait echoue a faire respecter la seconde regie du traite de<
Washington aussi bien que la premiere. Et si ces deux rhgles etaient vioiees, la
troisieme devait l'etre necessairement.
Le pas suivant dans la carriere du Florida, relatif a la discussion presente, est le fait de-
son entree k Mobile, port occupe par les insurges, quoique, k cette epoque, bloque pari
les vaisseaux des Etats-Unis. II y resta plus de quatre mois. Le 15 Janvier 1863, il
reussit de nouveau a forcer le blocus, et le capitaine, le 25 du meme mois, eut
Finsolence de se rendre de suite au meme endroit de File de Nassau, d'oh il avait.
echappe sous les terreurs qui n'appartienneut qu'k un malfaiteur. II convient-
d'ajouter que dans Fintervalle il avait enrdie cinquante-quatre hommes de plusde^
toute espece, a Mobile.
Ici s'eieve naturellement la question de savoir si par ce procede le vaisseau avait*
assez change son caractere primitif pour &tre depouilie de toute trace de son origine
britannique et de son equipement frauduleux, et pour etre autorise a pretendre partir?
de nouveau comme un produit legitime d'une puissance belligerante reconnue. Cette
question, appartenant exclusivement an cas de ce vaisseau, entre toutes celles qui
sont soumises a notre examen, et embrassant la decharge du gouvernement de sa
Majeste britannique de toute responsabilite ulterieure au sujet de la tache de son
origine, me semble une des plus interessantes et des plus difficiles de toutes celles que
nous sommes appeies a decider. Mais afin de completer la revue de la carriere entiere
de ce vaisseau, en tant»qu'elle sesltpporte k la conduite de la Grande-Bretagne, quant a
_JOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
167
Great Britain upon the occasion of her visits at any ports within that
jurisdiction, I deem it expedient to postpone the observations I propose
to make upon it until the end.
. Whatever may be the doubts elsewhere expressed about this point,
none whatever were admitted at Nassau, the very spot where the flagrant fraud had been most successfully perpetrated and Her Majesty's
dignity insulted and defied. She was immediately recognized as a
legitimate belligerent, the only objection made to her presence being a
violation of a minor regulation of the port, which required a previous
application for permission before coming to anchor. For this minor
offense the captain could afford to apologize, when the vastly greater
one had been so readily condoned. The object he now had in view was
the procuring a good supply of coals for the prosecution of his cruise.
Permission seems to have been given without stint. Some question has
been raised about the precise quantity; but if there was no limit prescribed by the authorities, it may reasonably be inferred, from the general sympathy strongly manifested by the population, that all would be
supplied the captain would be ready to take. So, likewise, with provisions. A person on board of the Florida at the time seems to have
recorded his impression that enough had been supplied to last several
months. This is doubtless exaggerated. So with the testimony of two
persons, taken several years afterward, of their recollection of the facts,
which would naturally be subject to serious reduction. Yet, after making every possible allowance for these circumstances, it appears reasonable to me to conclude that Captain Maffit succeeded in getting all that
he desired to put him in a condition to commence, and continue for
some time, a predatory cruise. It is also alleged that the captain
shipped here eleven men, which is not unlikely to be true also, if he
needed them.
Captain Maffit, thus completely fitted out from Nassau as a basis, proceeded on his cruise, which lasted for about a month, and in which he
alleges that he experienced very rough weather.   This is the reason
ses visites k certains ports sous cette juridiction, je crois plus convenable de remettre
jusqu'_. la fin les observations que je me propose de faire la-dessus.
Quels que pussent etre les doutes'entretenus ailleurs k ce sujet, on n'en admettait
aucun a Nassau, Fendroit oh la fraude flagrante avait ete commise avec le plus grand
succes, et oh la dignite de Sa Majeste avait ete le plus outragee. II fut immediatement
reconnu comme belligerant legitime, la seule objectiou faite k sa presence ayant ete
qu'il avait vioie un petit reglement du port, qui exigeait qu'on demandat d'abord la
permission avanfc de mettre. k l'ancre. Pour cette legere faute, le capitaine Maffitt
pouvait bien faire une apologie quand celle qui etait beaucoup plus grande avait ete
pardonnee si promptement. Maintenant le but que le capitaine Maffitt se proposait
dans cette visite etait de se pourvoir d'une bonne provision de charbon pour la
poursuit6 de son entreprise. La permission semble avoir ete donnee sans reserve.
On a agite la question de la quantite precise, mais s'il n'y avait pas de limite prescrite
par les autorites, on peut raisonnablement conclure de la sympathie generale,
hautement manifestee par la population, que tout ce que le capitaine ettt ete pret a
prendre lui eht ete donne. . De meme pour les provisions. Une personne a bord du
Florida, k cette epoque, semble avoir mis par ecrit son impression qu'on en avait
accorde assez pour plusieurs mois. Ceci est sans doute exagere. De m_me quant au
temoignage de deux personnes, emprunte plusieurs annees apres, a leur recueil des
faits, qui devrait etre soumis k une reduction serieuse. Mais aprfes avoir fait toutes
les concessions possibles k l'egard de ces circonstances, il me semble raisonnable de
conclure que le capitaine Maffitt reussit a obtenir tout ce qu'il desirait pour se mettre
en etat de commencer et de continuer pendant quelque temps une course de pillage.
On aliegue aussi que le capitaine y enr61a onze hommes ; fait dont la verite n'est pas
improbable, s'il en avait besoin. Le capitaine Maffitt, ainsi compietement pourvu a
Nassau, place prise pour sa base, commenca sa course, qui dura environ un mois,
pendant lequel il dit avoir eprouve de tres-rudes temps.   Au moins, c'est la raison168
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
assigned for his visit to Barbadoes, where he applied for more coal and
some lumber.   He suppressed the fact of his late supply, and reported.
himself as last from Mobile.   He succeeded in obtaining 90 tons, and
thus prosecuted his predatory voyage on his renewed stock. •
Much damage as these permissions unquestionably entailed upon the
United States commerce, it is proper to add that they had not been
given so much from any willful disposition on the part of the officers of
Her Majesty's government, but rather from their indifference to all
measures of early prevention. So soon as information of these events
had been received at the colonial office iu London, this liberality was
checked, and orders were issued to be more cautious in the future.
After a visit of four days to Pernambuco, the next British port
entered by Captain Maffit was Bermuda, on the loth of July. His application for government coal was here, for the first time, refused. He
succeeded, however, in obtaining plenty from other sources, and in'
transgressing the limit prescribed for his stay for repairs without censure, which enabled him to cross the ocean and reach Brest, in France,
on the 23d of August.
It should be noted that this long cruise, from the 25th of January to
the 23d of August, of nearly seven months, was made with supplies of
coal received exclusively from Brfijsh sources.
It seems to be unnecessary to enter into further particulars of her
career after she left Brest. She seems to have touched at some British
ports in the West Indies and obtained assistance, and she finally put into
Bahia, which proved to be the termination of her record, in October.
The length of her term on the ocean had been about eighteen months 1
—long enough to perpetrate much too large an amount of mischief.
It now remains to me only to recur to the question, already proposed
in the course of this opinion, regarding any change of original character
that may be considered to have taken place in this vessel by the fact of
donnee par lui pour la visite qu'il fit le 24 fevrier k la Barbade, pour prendre encore
plus de charbon et du bois pour les reparations.   II supprima le fait de sou dernierl
subside, et il dedara qu'il venait en dernier lieu de Mobile.   II reussit a obtenir
quatre-vingt-dix tonnes, et continua ainsi son voyage de pillage.
Quelque grand que soit le dommage cause, sans aucun doute par ces permissions, au
commerce des Etat-Unis, il convient d'ajouter qu'elles u'ont pas tant ete donnees avec
malveillance de la .part de Fofficier du. gouvernement de sa Majeste qu'a cause de
cette indifference qui ne prevoyaifc jamais la necessite de prendre des precautions
;3|R8l&nce. AussiJ;6t que la uouvell6 de ces evenements eut ete rejue a l'office colonial
de Londres, cette sberalite fut reprimee et des ordres furent donnes d'etre plus
"circonspect a l'avenir.
Aprfes une visite de quatre jours a Pernambouc, le premier port anglais oh entra le
capitaine Maffit fut Bermuda, le 15 juillet, Sa demande d'obtenir du charbou du
gouvernenent fut ici refusee pour la premiere fois. II reussit cependant a. en obtenir
en abondance d'ailleurs, et a depasser sans censure les limites prescrites k son sejour
pour reparations, ce qui lui donna les moyens de traverser l'ocean et d'atteindre
Brest, en France, le 23 aout.
II faut remarquer que cette longue course, du 25 Janvier au 23 aout, de pres de sept
mois, fut faite avec des subsides de charbon recus exclusivement ete sources britanniques.
II ne me semble pas necessaire d'entrer dans des details ulterieurs sur la carriere de
ce vaisseau apres son depart de Brest. II semble avoir touche a quelques ports
anglais, dans les Indes occidentales, et avoir obtenu des secours; et enfin il entra a
Bahia, ce qui mit fin a son histoire, en octobre. La dur€e de sa carriere sur l'ocean
avait ete d'environ deux ans et demi. Sa course comme belligerant avait dure environ
dix-huit mois; assez longtemps pour commettre une somme de dommages beaucoup
trop grande.
II ne me reste plus qu'a revenir a la question dej_t proposee dans le cours de cet avis,
a l'egard du chaugement de caractere national, qu'on pourrait considerer comme ayantOPINIONS  OF MR.  ADAMS.
169
her having succeeded in reaching a port of the belligerent power to
which she claimed to belong.
I have endeavored to give to this point the most careful and diligent
study of which I am capable. The result is, that I cannot arrive at
any conclusion satisfactory to myself which even implies a necessity to
assent to the proposition that success sanctifies fraud. All law recognized
by the conscience of civilized nations has for its only solid basis a conviction that it is based upon clear principles of right. In some
languages the word used to express these ideas is identical. At the same
time, I am not unaware that, in the progress of international relations,
there may happen from time to time occasions when a necessity will
arise to recognize a simple fact without reference to its nature. But
this must happen under circumstances which imply neither participation
nor approval. It ought not to be permitted to happen when these circumstances are clearly within control, and the motive to act should be
imperative as upholding the majesty of law.
In the case before us, it seems to me conclusively established by
evidence that, from the moment of inception to that of complete execution, the building, equipping, and dispatching of the vessel were equally
carried on by a resort to every species of falsehood and fraud, in order
to baffle and defeat the legitimate purpose of Her Majesty's government
to uphold the sanctity of her laws and make good her obligations to a
foreign nation with which she was at peace. Down to the moment of
arrival at Mobile, I fail to perceive any good reason for supposing that
the character the vessel took at the outset had not substantially adhered
to it to the end.
It has always been to me a cause of profound regret that Her
Majesty's government had not seen fit to mark her sense of the indignities heaped upon her by the flagrant violation of her laws in these
cases, at least by excluding the vessels from her ports. Thus she would
have rescued her own honor and escaped the evil consequences which
have ever since attended her opposite decision.   Such a course had not
eu lieu dans ce vaisseau par le fait de sa reussite a atteindre un port de la puissance
belligerante a laquelle il avait la pretention d'appartenir.
Je me suis efforce' de consacrer a ce point l'etude la plus soigneuse et la plus
attentive dont je sois capable. "Le resultat en est que je ne puis arriver a aucune
conclusion satisfaisante pour moi-meme qui impliquat la necessite de donner mon
assentiment k la maxime que le succes sanctifie la fraude. Toute loi reconnue par la
conscience des nations civilisees a, pour base solide unique, la conviction qu'elle est
fondee sur des principes moraux de droit. Dans quelques langues le mot employe pour
exprimer ces idees est identique. En meme temps je n'ignore pas que, dans le progres
de tous les rapports internationaux, il peut se presenter de temps en temps des
occasions oh une necessite arrive de reconnaitre un simple fait sans egard a sa nature.
Mais il faut, pour cela, que celui-ci se presente dans des circonstances qui n'impliquent
ni participation ni approbation. On ne devrait pas permettre qu'il arrivat, quand ces
circonstances sont evidemment sous contrdle et que le motif d'agir serait iinperieux,
comme appuyant la majeste de la loi. Dans le cas que nous avons devant nous, il me
semble incontestablement etabli par la preuve que, depuis le moment du commencement jusqu'il celui de l'execution complete, la construction, l'equipement et l'expedi-
tion du vaisseau out ete egalement conduits au moyen de toute espece de mensonges
et de fraudes combines pour dejouer et pour annuler les desseins legitimes du
gouvernement de sa Majeste, de maintenir la souverainete de ses lois et de remplir ses
obligations envers une nation etrangere avec laquelle il etait en paix. Jusqu'au
moment de l'arrivee k Mobile, je ne puis trouver aucune bonne raison de supposer que
le caractere pris par le vaisseau au commencement ne lui ait pas ete attache essen-
tiellement jusqu'a. la fin.
J'ai toujours regrette profondement que le gouvernement de sa Majeste n'eht pas
juge convenable de montrer son sentiment a l'egard des indignites accumuiees sur lui
par la violation flagrante de ses lois, dans ces cas an moins, en excluant les vaisseaux
de ses ports. II aurait ainsi sauve son honneur et echappe" aux consequences fachenses
qui ont toujours ete attachees a sa decision contraire.   Une telle demarche.n'avait pas
^pH170
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
been without its advocates among jurists of eminence in the kingdom,
at least oue of whom had recorded his opinion. A significant example
may be found in the papers before us. Such a course could not have
failed to maintain itself in the end by the simple force of its innate harmony with justice and with right.
To suppose that the moral stain attached to a transaction of thW
character can be wiped out by the mere incident of visiting one place
or another, without any material alteration of the constituent body inspiring its action, seems to me to be attaching to an accident the virtue
which appertains solely to an exercise of the will. 1 cannot, therefore,
concede to this notion any' shade of weight. The vessel called the
Florida, in my view, carried the same indelible stamp of dishonor from
its cradle to its grave; and in this opinion I have been happy to discover that I am completely sustained by the authority of one of the
most eminent of the jurists of my own country who ever sat in the
highest seat of her most elevated tribunal. I find it recorded in one of
the volumes submitted to our consideration by the agent of Her
Majesty's government, from which I pray for leave to introduce the following extract, as making an appropriate close:
"If this "were to be admitted," says Chief Justice Marshall, "the laws for the preser-J
vation of our neutrality would be completely eluded. Vessels completely fitted in our
ports for military expeditions need only sail to a belligerent port, and there, after obtaining a commission, go through the ceremony of discharging and re-enlisting their
crew, to become, perfectly legitimate cruisers, purified from every taint contracted at||
the place where all their real force and capacity for annoyance was acquired. This
would, indeed, be fraudulent neutrality, disgraceful to our own Government and of
which no nation would be the dune."
For the reasons herein specified-, I have come to the conclusion in the
case now presented of the Florida, that Great Britain, by reason of her
omission to use due diligence to prevent the fitting-out, arming, and
equipping within its jurisdiction, of that vessel, and further of her omission to forbid the crew of that vessel from making use of its ports' or
manque d'avocats parmi les juristes les plus distingues du royaume, dont un au moins
a donne son avis.   On peut en trouver un exemple significatif dans les documents qui
sont devant nous.   Une telle conduite n'eut pas manque de se soutenira, la longne par:
la simple force de son harmonie innee avec la justice et le droit.
Supposer que la tache morale imprimee a une transaction de cette nature puisse
etre effacee par le simple incident d'une visite k un li||n ou k un autre, sans aucun
changement materiel du corps constituant qui inspire sa conduite, me semble attacher
k un accident la vertu qui n'appartient qu'a. un exerciee de la volonte. Je ne puis, par
consequent, accorder a cette idee aucune espece de valeur. Le vaisseau nomme le
Florida, k mon point de vue, porta le meme cachet indeiebile de deshonneur de son
berceau jusqu'a sa tombe. Et j'ai ete heureux de trouver que je suis entierement
appuye dans cette opiniou par Fautorite d'un des juristes les plus eminents de mon
pays qui ait jamais occupe le siege le plus haut de son tribunal le plus eieve; Je la
trouve rapportee dans un des* volumes sounds k notre examen par l'agent du
gouvernement de sa Majeste, dont je vous prie de me permettre de presenter l'extrait
suivant comme faisant une fiu bien appropri.ee k cet avis:
"Si l'on admettait ceci, (dit le Chief Justice Marshall,) les lois pour le maintien de
notre neutralite seraient compietement eiudees. Des vaisseaux entierement equipes
dans nos ports pour des operatious militaires n'ont qu'_i faire voile jusqu'a un port belligerant, et Ik, apres avoir obtenu une commission, a faire la ceremonie de licencier et
de reenr61or leur equipage, pour devenir des croiseurs parfaitement legitimes, purifies
de toute tache contractee dans le lieu oh toute leur force et leur pouvoir de nuire ont
ete acquis. Ce serait en verite une neutralite frauduleuse, deshonorante pour notre
propre gouvernement, et dont aucune nation ne serait la dupe."
Pour les raisons specif_e"es ci-dessus, je suis arrive a la conclusion, dans le cas main-
tenant presente du Florida, que le Grande-Bretagne—en omettant de faire usage des
I dues diligences " pour empecher l'arrangemeut, l'armement et Fequipement, daus sa
jurisdiction, de ce vaisseau; et de plus, en omettant de defendre a 1'equipage de ce
vaisseau de se servir de ses ports ou de ses eaux comme base d'operations contre lesOPINIONS  OF  MR.   ADAMS.
171
waters as the base of operations against the United States, has failed
to fulfill the duties set forth in each and every one of the three rules
prescribed to the arbitrators as their guide under the terms of the
treaty of Washington.
V.—THE ALABAMA.
On the 24th of June, 1862, Mr. Adams addressed a note to Earl Bus-
sell, reminding him of the representation he had made some
time before touching the equipment of the Oreto, and alluding to the verification of his apprehension of its true destination.
In point of fact, Lord Bussell had had in his hands for a fortnight
a copy of a letter of Commander McKillop to the secretary to the admiralty, which has already been quoted in the memoir on the Florida, as
clearly indicating the character of that vessel and its destination.
Her Majesty's government had then had no reason to doubt as to the
nature of the vigilance which had been promised on the part of her officers at Liverpool, or of the manner in which it had been deceived.
Mr. Adams then proceeded to call his lordship's attention to another
and more remarkable case of a vessel in process of construction at
Liverpool, in the yard of one of the most noted building firms of that
place, intended for the same purpose as designated in the case of the
Oreto, and controlled virtually by the same parties.
Mr. Adams at the same time transmitted to his lordship a letter from
Mr. Dudley, the consul of the United States at Liverpool, addressed to
himself, giving all the information touching the matter he had been
able to collect.
On the next day Mr. Hammond, on behalf of his lordship, addressed
one letter to the secretary to the treasury, requesting immediate inquiries to be made respecting this vessel, &c, in the customary form.
At the same time he addressed another to the law-officers of the
Crown, transmitting the note of Mr. Adams and the letter of Mr. Dudley for their consideration, and asking for such observations as they
might have to make on the subject.
Etats-Unis—n'apas rempli, dans ce cas, les devoirs exposes dans les trois regies prescrites
aux arbitres comme guides d'apres les termes du traite de Washington.
1,'ALABAMA.
Le 24 juin 1862, M. Adams'adressa une note au Comte Russell, lui rappelaut la representation qu'il avait faite quelque temps attparavant touchant Fequipement de l'Oreto,
et faisant allusion k la verification de son apprehension sur la vraie destination de
celui-ci.
En effet, Lord Russell avait eu en mains, pendant une quinzaine de jours, une copie de
la lettre du commandant, McKillop, au secretaire de Famiraute, qui a deja ete citee
dans le memoire sur le Florida comme indiquant clairement le caractere de ce vaisseau et sa destination.
Le gouvernement de sa Majeste n'avait done en aucune raison pour douter dela
nature de la vigilance qui avait ete promise de la part de ses officiers k Liverpool, ni
de la maniere dont il avait et6 trompe.
M. Adams attira ensuite Fattention de sa seigneurie sur un autre cas, plus remarqua-
ble, d'un vaisseau en construction a Liverpool, dans le chautier d'un des plus fameux
constructeurs de cette ville, destine au meme but que celui qui a 6te indique dans le
cas de l'Oreto et contrdie effeetivement par les memes parties.
M. Adams transmit en meme temps a sa seigneurie une lettre de M. Dudley, le consul
des Etats-Unis a Liverpool, adressee a lui-meme, donnant tous les renseignements
touchant cette affaire qu'il avait pu rasseinbler.
Le lendemain, M. Hammond, au nom de sa seigneurie, adressa une lettre au secretaire de la tresorerie, dans la forme ordinaire, demandant qu'on fit immediatement une
enquete a l'egard de ce vaisseau.
En meme temps il adressa une lettre aux avocats de la couronne, en transmettant
la note de M. Adams et la lettre de M. Dudley, pour qu'elles fussent prises en consideration, et en demandant les observations qu'ils pouvaient avoir a faire sur ce sujet.172
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
It is presumed that this last measure was a precaution additional to
anything that had been done in the case of the Oreto.
Five days later a report was made by the law-officers, in reply to this
application, in substance to this effect:
If the representation made by Mr. Adams is in accordance with the facts, the building and equipment of the steamer is a manifest violation of the foreign-enlistment
act, and steps ought to be taken to put that act in force, and to prevent the vessel from,
going to sea.
This was a great step in advance of anything that had taken place in
the former case.   It fully recognized the duty of prevention, and strongly!
recommended that proper steps be taken by the authorities at Liver^
pool to ascertain the truth, and if sufficient evidence could be obtained
to justify proceedings under the act, to take such proceedings as soon_
as possible.
xlothing could be more satisfactory than this direction. If it had
been carried out in its spirit by the parties who had it in charge, there
is little reason to doubt that the policy pointed out would have been
effected.
But it appears more than doubtful whether this injunction produced
the smallest effect upon the parties concerned; for it could hardly.;
have reached its destination before the time at which the report of the
commissioners of the customs was made up. That report was clearly
made in answer to the earlier letter of Mr. Hammond of the 25th; for
the reports of Mr. S. Brice Edwards, the collector, and of E. Morgan,
surveyor at Liverpool, dated the 28th instant, inclosed therein, precede
by two days the opinion of the law-officers. No allusion appears to be
made to it in this reply. The substance of it is the admission of the
fact that the vessel is intended for a ship of war. But no evidence has
been produced of its destination sufficient to justify.proceedings, and
unless the cfbnsul, Mr. Dudley, should be able to submit such evidence
to the collector of the port, any attempt to seize the vessel would end
only in entailing upon the parties concerned very serious consequences.
On peut presumer que cettederniere mesure etait une precaution en plus de tout ce qui
avait ete fait dans le cas de l'Oreto.
Cinq jours plus tard, un expose fut fait par ces "officiers," en reponse a cette demande,
contenant en substance ce qui suit:
"Si la representation faite par M. Adams est d'accord avec les faits, la construction
et Fequipement du steamer sont une violation manifeste du foreign enlistment act, et
des mesures doivent etre prises pour faire executer cet act et pour emptscher le vaisseau
de partir."
C'etait un grand progres sur tout ce qui avait eu lieu daus le cas precedent.   Cet
expose reconnaissait pleinement le devoir Aeprevenir, et recommandait fortement que-
des mesures convenables fussent prises par les autorites de Liverpool pour constater la
verite, et si l'on pouvait obtenir des preuves suffisantes pour justifier des poursuites;
conformement a Facte, pour prendre ces mesures aussitdt que possible.
Rien ne pouvait etre plus satisfaisant que ces directions. Si elles avaient ete suivies
dans cet esprit par les parties qui en etaient chargees, il y a peu de motifs de douter
que la conduite indiquee au»t ete efHcace.
Mais il paralt plus que douteux que cette injonction produislt le moiudre effet sur
ceux qu'elle concernait. Car elle aurait a peine pu atteindre sa destination avant
l'epoqne oh fut ecrit le rapport des commissaires des douanes. Ce rapport fut evidem-
ment fait en reponse a la precedente lettre de M. Hammond, du 25, car les rapports de
M. S. Price EdwariS le receveur, et de M. E. Morgan, surveyor de Liverpool, dates du
28, qui y etaient renfern_.es, precedent de deux jours Favis des "officiers de la loi." II
n'y est fait aucune allusion dans cette reponse. La substance en est Fadmission du
fait que le vaisseau est destine a etre un vaisseau de guerre; mais qu'aucunepreuve de
sa destination n'a ete produite qui suffise a justifier des poursuites, et, qu'a moins que
le consul, M. Dudley, ne put prodnire une telle preuve au receveur du port, toute ten-.
tative de saisir le vaisseau n'aboutirait qu'a attirer sur les poursuivants des conse-„
quences tres-serieuses.OPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
1 to
The report of the commissioners terminates in the customary form,
to wit:
We beg to add that the officers at Liverpool will keep a strict watch on the vessel,
and that any further information that may be obtained concerning her will be forthwith reported.
On a first examination this paragraph would seem by its terms to
imply a promise in the nature of a pledge of constant vigilance; but
upon comparing the phrases with the almost identical ones used in the
preceding case of the Oreto, and observing the results which happened
iu both cases, it must be inferred that it was regarded by the parties
only as one of the established forms of'ending a dispatch.
A copy of this report was, on the 4th of July, transmitted to Mr.
Adams, with a request that the United States consul at Liverpool, Mr.
Dudley, should be instructed to submit to the collector of the customs
such evidence as he might possess tending to show that his suspicions
as to the destination of the vessel were well founded.
The name of this collector was S. Brice Edwards, and I have already
had occasion to point out in my examination of the destination of the
Oreto the very peculiar situation in which he was placed by the representations on that subject made by him at that time to Her Majesty's
government.
Mr. Dudley, in accordance with Mr. Adams's instructions, accordingly
addressed to Mr. Edwards, on the 9th July, a letter furnishing a long
array of detail's as to the nature and source of the information he had
obtained, and providing, as it would appear, abundant means of prosecuting further inquiries if there were any inclination so to do.
To this letter Mr. S. Brice Edwards replied by promising that he
would submit it to the consideration of the board of customs. He did
not fail, however, to add an expression of opinion that the statements
made by him must, first of all, be substantiated by evidence furnished
by himself.
But this Mr. S. Brice Edwards happened to have received from the
Le rapport des commissaires se termine daus la forme ordinaire, c'est-a-dire :
"Nous prions d'ajouter que les officiers de Liverpool exerceront une surveillance
severe sur le vaisseau et que tout renseignement ulterieur qui pourrait etre oh tenu le
concernant sera rapporte sur le champ."
A un premier examen, ce paragraphe semblerait par les termes impliquer une pro-
niesse clans le genre d'un engagement d'une vigilance const-ante; mais en comparant ces
phrases, k celles, presqu'identiques, qui sont employees daus le cas precedent de
l'Oreto, et en remarquant- les resultats arrives daus les deux cas, on peut eu conclure
qu'il n'etait consider par les parties que comme une des formes etablies pour terminer
une depeche. Une copie de ce rapport fut transmise, lo 4 juillet, k M. Adams, avec une
demande quele consul des Etats-Unis k Liverpool fht charge de soumettre au receveur
des douanes telles preuves qu'il pourrait posseder tendant k montrer que ses soupcons
k l'egard de la destination du vaisseau etaient bien fondes.
Le nom de ce receveur etait S. Price Edwards, et j'ai deja eu Foccasion d'indiquer,
daus mon examen de la destination de l'Oreto, la situation tres-particuliere dans
laquelle il etait place, par les representations qu'il fit k ce sujet, a cette epoque, au
gouvernement de sa Majeste.
M. Dudley, selon les instructions de M. Adams, adressa en consequence a M. Edwards,
le 9 juillet, une longue lettre, fournissant une s6~rie de renseignements sur la nature et
les sources des informations qu'il avait obtenues, et dounant, a ce qu'il semblait, des
moyens abondants de poursuivre des enquetes ulterieures s'il y avait quelque disposition a en faire.
A cette lettre M. S. Price Edwards repondit en promettant qu'il la soumettrait a
l'examen des commissaires des douanes. II ne manquait pas cependant d'ajouter une
expression de son opinion que les affirmations de M. Dudley devaient etre avant tout
verifiees par des preuves fournies par lui-meme.
Mais ce M. S. Price Edwards se trouvait avoir recu, du meme consul, environ trois174
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
same consul, Mr. Dudley, nearly three weeks before, a letter giving
many details strongly pointing to the destination of this vessel, which,
so far as appears from these papers, must have been entirely Suppressed.
It has been published in one of the latest volumes of the papers appended to the American case. I can only account for this omission upon
the supposition that, as Mr. Dudley's letter addressed to Mr. Adams on the
following day had found its way to him soon after, he inferred that a
notice of the latter would do for both. The fact really is, however, that
the evidence is of a different kind, and, though not decisive in itself,
was calculated to open a way to further investigation if such were desired.
The letter of the 9th July was referred to the solicitor of the customs, Mr.
Hamel, who replied in the customary manner—a insufficient evidence."
On the 15th of July the commissioners of customs wrote to the
collector of Liverpool to the same effect, and on the 17th copies of
papers were sent to the treasury for the information of the lords commissioners.
Thus it appears that three weeks had passed since the injunction laid
upon the authorities of the customs at Liverpool to ascertain the truth,
and not a syllable had been returned to them excepting of a negative
character. No sufficient evidence of intention offered to them, and no
disposition to search for any; that was the sum of the whole matter.
Tired of waiting for the action of Her Majesty's government, Mr.
Adams, on the 17th July, wrote instructions to Mr. Dudley to employ a
solicitor, and get up affidavits to'lay before the collector. That officer had
had abundant reason to know, in the case of the Oreto, how difficult it
was, in a city swarming with sympathizers in the success of these adventures, for him to find persons who, however clearly they might know
what was going on, were not at all disposed to subject themselves to the
odium attending a public declaration of the truth. He did, however,
by the 21st, succeed in procuring six persons ready to take their de-.
positions before the collector.   The process was completed, and the col-
semaines auparavant, une premiere lettre renfermant force details, donnant & entendre
qu'il s'agissait de la destination du vaisseau, qui, autant qu'il ressort de ces documents,
doivent avoir ete entierement supprimes. Ils ont ete publies dans les derniers volumes
des documents annexes a Fexpose americain. Je ne puis expliquer cette omission que
par la supposiSn que, comme la lettre adressee k M. Adams le lendemain lui etait
parvenue bient6t apres, il en conclut qu'une mention de la derniere valait pout toutes
les deux. Le St en realite est cependant que la preuve est d'une espece differente, et
quoique non decisive en elle-m_-me, elle etait calcuiee pour ouvrir la voie a des recher-
ches ulterieures, si on voulait les faire.
La lettre du 9 juillet fut envoyee au solliciteur des douanes, M. Hamel, qui repondit
de la maniere ordinaire, "preuves insuffisantes."
Le 15 juillet, les commissaires des douanes ecrivirent au receveur de Liverpool dans le
m6me but, et, le 17, des exemplaires des documents furent envoyes a la tresorerie pour
Finformation des lords commisSres.
Ainsi il paralt que trois semaines s'etaient passees depuis que Finjonction avait ete
faite aux autorites des douanes de Liverpool de s'assurer des faits, et pas une syllabe
n'avait ete renvoyee, si ce n'est d'un caractere negatif. " Point de preuves suffisantes
d'intention " ne leur etaient fburnies, et point de disposition k en chercher eux-memes.
Voila le resume de toute l'affaire.
Lasse d'attendre Faction du gouvernement de.sa Majeste, M. Adams ecrivit, le 17
juillet, des instructions a M. Dudley afin d'employer un "avoue" et de faire faire des
declarations ec&es et affirmees par serment k porter devant le receveur. Cet officier
avait eu des raisons nombreuses pour apprendre a connaltre, dans le cas de l'Oreto,
combien il lui etait difficile, dans une ville fourmillant de gens sympathiques au succes
de ces aventures, de trouver des personnes qui, quoiqu'elles pussent savoir clairement
ce qui se passait, fussent le moins du monde disposees & s'exposer a Fodieux qui etait
attache a une declaration publique de la verite. II reussit cependant, le 21, k se. procurer six personnes pretes k deposer devant le receveur.   L'affaire fut termtnee et leOPINIONS   OF  MR.  ADAMS.
175
lector transmitted them on the 22d to the commissioners of customs,
who handed them to the solicitor, who promptly returned his customary
reply—"no sufficient evidence." But tlie United States authority might
try to stop the vessel at their own risk.
But there were two influences now converging from different quarters
which were destined to threaten the sluggish officers of the customs
with responsibilities much greater than their solicitor had labored to
throw upon the United States.
The one proceeded from the United States agents, who had assumed
the entire labor of procuring eight depositions to prove what should
have been established by the energy of Her Majesty's government itself—the intent and destination of the gunboat. But they seem scarcely
likely to have had any chance of weight if supported exclusively by the
authority of their judgment alone. The first symptom now appeared of
the possibility of a doubt of the policy which had been marked out by
the customs solicitors. The papers had been submitted to the consideration of an eminent gentleman of the law, a Queen's counsellor, Mr. B.
B. Collier, who, in reply, gave the following as his deliberate opinion:
I have perused the above affidavits, and I am of opinion that the collector of customs would be justified in detaining the vessel. Indeed, I should think it is his duty
to detain her, and that if, after the application which has been made to him, supported
by the evidence which has been laid before me, he allows the vessel to leave Liverpool,
he will incur a heavy responsibility, of which the board of customs, under whose directions he appears to be acting, must take their share.
The last sentence was the most significant of all.   It was this:
It well deserves consideration whether, if the vessel be allowed to escape, the Federal Government would not have serious grounds of remonstrance.
The idea that, instead of a responsibility for stopping the vessel
thrown upon the United States, there was to be a responsibility to be
imposed upon the customs authorities and their superiors in office, appears never to have entered into their conception. It was like a thunderbolt in a clear sky.
receveur transmit ces depositions, le 22, aux commissaires des douanes, qui les remirent
au solliciteur, qui envoya promptement sa reponse ordinaire: "point de preuves suffisantes; mais que les Etats-Unis pouvaient essayer d'arreter le vaisseau a leurs risques
et perils."
Mais il y avait deux influences convergeant alors de differents points, qui etaient
destinees a menacer les paresseux officiers des douanes d'une responsabilite beaucoup
plus grande que celle que leur solliciteur avait cherche a rejeter sur les Etats-Unis.
L'une procedait des agents des H-tats-Unis qui avaient assume toute la charge de
procurer huit depositions pour prouver ce qui aurait dft etre etabli par l'energie du
gouvernement de sa Majeste lui-meme, le but et la destination de la canonniere.
Mais il semble peu probable qu'elles auraient eu aucune valour si elles avaient ete
appuyees exclusivement par Fautorite de leur propre jugement seul. Alors parut le
premier signe de la possibilite d'un doute sur la conduite qui avait ete indiquee par
les solliciteurs des douaues. Les documeuts avaient ete sounds k l'examen d'un
eminent jurisconsulte de la Reine, M. R. P. Collier, qui en r6ponse donna ce qui suit
comme son avis reflechi :
"J'ai etudie les affidavits ci-dessus, et je suis d'avis que le receveur des douanes
ferait bien de fetenir ce vaisseau. En effet, je penserais que c'est son devoir de le
retenir, et que, si aprfes la demande qui lui a ete faite, appuyee par les preuves qui ont.
ete mises devant moi, il permet au vaisseau de quitter Liverpool, il encourra une
lottrde responsabilite, dont le ' board of customs,' [sous les directions .duquel il semble
agir, doit prende sa part."
La derniere phrase etait la plus significative de toutes. La voici: " II convient bien
de considerer si, dans le cas oh on laisserait echapper le vaisseau, le Gouvernement
federal n'aurait pas de serieux motifs de remontrances."
L'idee qu'au lieu d'une responsabilite pour la saisie du vaisseau rejetee sur les Etats-
Unis il devait y avoir une responsabilite k imposer aux autorites des douanes et k
leurs superieurs, semble alors etre entree pour la premiere fois dans leur esprit. Ce fut
comme un coup de tonnerre dans un del serein.
j|ii|H176
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
The assistant solicitor of customs immediately sought to put himself
under the protection of the law-officers of the Crown. Meanwhile the
same papers had been transmitted by Mr. Adams to Lord Bussell, and'
by him likewise referred to the law-officers of the Crown.
These papers reached their destination at different dates ; those sent
from the customs on the 23d July, in the evening, while those from Mr.
Adams got to them three days later, though his note appears to have
been dated on the 24th. It is obvious that this difference could have no
effect in delaying their deeision. But one additional deposition was*,
added, which could scarcely .have done more than confirm the result.
Five whole days passed before a decision was returned. Meanwhile
the vessel was rapidly getting ready to depart. On the 28th, Mr. Dudley's solicitor sent a communication to the board of customs, to the effect
that they had every reason to believe the vessel would go on the 29th.'
This letter did not reach them until the 29th. The vessel sailed on
the 29th. That intelligence likewise was obtained from the same source.
Meanwhile what becomes of the profession, made on the 1st of July by
the commissioners of customs, that | a strict watch should be kept on
the vessel, and that any further information that might be obtained concerning her would be forthwith reported."
To be sure, on the 1st of August, Mr. S. Brice Edwards addresses a
letter to the commissioners of customs, in which appears the following,
significant line, i The board will see that the vesel has left the port."
How they could have seen through the spectacles presented by that officer remains to be explained. The surveyor, however, is more communicative. On the day before he gravely states that he had followed the
collector's directions to keep a strict watch on the vessel. He is confident she had no ammunition on board. He had visited the tug Hercules, where he found a considerable portion of the crew, some of whom
were on their way in that vessel to join the gunboat. Mr. Dudley had
given the same information to the collector. Even then the vessel could
have been traced and stopped by an energetic interposition of govern-
L'aide-solliciteur des douanes chercha immediatement & se mettre sous la protection
des officiers de la couronne.
Pendant ce temps les memes documents avaient ete transmis par M. Adams a Lord
Russell, et par lui egalement soumis a 1'exam en des officiers de la couronne. Ces.
documents atteignirent leur destination a des dates differentes. Ceux envoyes par lesi
douanes, le 23 juillet au soir, tandis que ceux de M. Adams leur parvinrent trois jours'
plus tard, quoique sa note semble avoir ete datee du 24. II est clair que cette
difference ne peut avoir nullement retarde leur decision. Une deposition additionnelle
fut ajoutee plus tard qui pourrait avoir a peine affecte materielleinent le resultat.
Cinq jours entiers se passfereut avant qu'une decision fut annonc6e. Pendant ce temps,
le vaisseau se preparait au depart tres-rapidemcut. Le 28 le solliciteur de M. Dudley
cuvoya une communication aux commissaires des douanes a l'effet: qu'ils aient touted
raison de croire que le vaisseau partirait le 29. Cette lettre ne leur parvint que le 29;
le vaisseau sortit le meme jour. Cette nouvelle fut egalement obtenue de la meme
source. Pendant ce temps, que devient la declaration, faite lo l" juillet par les commissaires des douanes, qu'une surveillance stricte serait exercee sur le vaisseau et que
toute information ulterieure qui pourrait etre obtenue le concernant serait rapportee
sur le champ?
Sans doute, le ler avril, M. S. P. Edwards adresse une lettre aux commissaires
des douanes, dans laquelle se trouve la ligne significative suivante: " Le board verra
que le vaisseau a quitte le port." Comment ils auraient pu voir a travers les lunettes
presentees par cet officier, c'est ce qu'il reste a expliquer. Le surveyor cependant est
plus communicatif; la veille, il expose gravement qu'il avait suivi les directions du
receveur, d'exercer uue stricte surveillance sur le vaisseau. II est persuade qu'il
n'avait point de munitions a bord. II avait visite le remorqueur, l'Hercule, et il avait
trouve, dans ce vaisseau, une partie considerable de 1'equipage, dont quelques hommes
etaient en route pour joindre la canonniere. M. Dudley avait donne le meine ren-
seignement au receveur. Mdme alors, ce vaisseau aurait pu etre suivi et arrete par
une intervention energique de l'autorite du gouvernement.   Las commissaires desOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
. .
ment authority. The commissioners of customs preferred to send harmless telegraphic orders to Liverpool and Cork, to Beaumaris and Holyhead, which looked like dispatch, but could by no reasonable probability
have been of any avail. And the collector could promise that, I should
opportunity offer, the vessel should be seized in accordance with the
directions given." It is presumed this must have meant if the vessel
should voluntarily present itself, and not otherwise. On a calm examination of the evidence presented to us respecting the measures taken
by the authorities charged with the duty of prevention, it really looks
as if they had chosen to look any way for it rather than the right way.
Upon a careful comparison of the language and the action of Mr. Edwards, the collector, as it has been heretofore explained in my observations upon the case of the Florida, with the course taken by him in this
case, it is very difficult in my mind to resist the suspicion that he was
more .or less in direct sympathy with the designs of the insurgents, and
not unwilling to accord to them all the indirect aid which could be
supplied by a purely passive policy on his part. Very surely, if he had
wished actively to promote their ends, he could scarcely have hit upon
more effective means than those to which he resorted.
It is alleged that the escape of this vessel was effected earlier than
originally contemplated, by reason of the reception, by the managers, of
intelligence from London of the intent of the government to detain her.
This statement appears in the deposition of one of the persons who served
as an officer on board from the start and during the whole of her first
cruise. Certainly a delay of five whole days in announcing a decision
might furnish ample opportunity for active sympathisers, of whom there
was notoriously an abundance in that capital, to watch and report every
symptom of change that might be gathered from sources of authority.
Even the fact of the long delay itself might be construed as ominous.
Of the causes of that delay no absolute knowledge has ever yet been
completely obtained. Neither is it deemed expedient here to enter into
any examination of it.   It is sufficient to the present purpose to say that
douanes prefiSrerent envoyer d'innocents ordres teiegraphiques a Liverpool et a Cork,
a Beaumaris et a Holyhead, qui avaient Fair de depeches, mais qui, selon toute
probabilite, ne purent etre d'aucune utilite. Et le receveur put promettre que, "si
1'occasion s'en presentait, le vaisseau serait saisit conformement aux directions dou- •
n6"es." On doit croire qu'il voulait dire, si le vaisseau se presentait volontairement, et
non autrement. -A un examen calme de la preuve qui nous est soumise touchant les
mesures prises par les autorites chargees du devoir de prevention, il semble reellement
qu'elles avaieut choisi de regarder partout ailleurs qu'au bon endroit.
En comparant soigneusement le langage et la conduite de M. Edwards, le receveur,
comme je Fai expliqiu. auparavant dans mes observations sur le cas du Florida, avec la
conduite tenue par lui dans ce cas, il m'est tres-difficile de resister au soupc.on qu'il
etait plus ou moins en sympathie directe avec les projets des insurges, et qu'il n'etait
pas fache de leur accorder tous les secours indirects qui pouvaient etre fournis par une
conduite purement passive de sa part. Tres-certainement s'il avait desire activement
les appuyer, il n'aurait gufere pu trouver des moyens plus efficaces que ceux auxquels
il eut recours.
■ On aliegue que Invasion de ce vaisseau s'executa plus t6t qu'on n'en avait eu d'abord
F intention, en raison de la reception par les proprietaires de nouvelles de Londres de
l'intention du gouvernement de l'arreter. Cette allegation apparalt dans la deposition
d'une des personnes qui remplit les fonctions d'officier k bord dfes le depart et pendant
toute la dnree de sa premiere course. Tres-certainement un delai de cinq jours entiers
dans Fannonce d'une decision pouvait fournir ample occasion aux partisans actifs, dont
il y avait une abondance notdire dans cette ville, d'epier et de rapporter tout sympt6me
de changement qui pouvait etre recueilli des sources d'autorite. Meme le fait du long
delai lu-r-meme pouvait etre interprete comme menacant. Quant aux causes de ce delai,
aucune connaissance absolue n'a pu encore en etre compietement obtenue. 11 ne paralt
pas non plus opportun d'en aborder id l'examen.   II suffit pour le but actuel de dire
12 b178
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
the omission to act in season was due to causes wholly within the province of Her Majesty's government to control, and that the failure is one
which must entail the responsibility for the great injuries that ensued,
not upon the innocent parties whom it was the admitted duty of that
government to have protected, but upon those through whom the injuries became possible.
One portion of this transaction having been, by the means already indicated, with difficulty accomplished, the other portion remaining to
complete it met with no resistance whatever. The British steamer
Bahama, laden with the armament prepared for the vessel by Fawcett,
Breston & Co., and having for passengers the insurgent Americans and
others destined to command the cruiser, cleared on the 13th of August,
on the pretense of going to Nassau. The English barque Agrippina
almost simultaneously left Loudon, ostensibly for Demerara, laden with
coals and munitions of war.
Somewhere about the third week in August the three steamers met at
Angra Bay in the Azores, and under the sanction of the British flag
this great fraud reached the point of its full accomplishment. The hospitality so freely extended to strangers of all nations in that kingdom,
at once so enlightened and so energetic, had been basely abused, almost
with an intent, not merely to gain an undue advantage on the ocean,
but to sow the seeds of dissension between it and a kindred nation with
which it was under the most solemn obligations to keep the peace.
Thus it was that the vessel which then first received the name of the
Alabama commenced her reckless career of destruction on the ocean.
Everything on board of her was of British origin, excepting a few of-
the directing spirits bent on making use of the means thus placed in
their hands to do an injury to their fellow-countrymen in America which
they could have compassed in no other possible manner.
I pass over the minor details of the mode in which supplies of coal
were subsequently obtained exclusively from British sources as matters
of relatively little consequence, and come to what appears to me the
next essential point in the narrative.
que la negligence a agir au moment convenable fut dhe a des causes qu'il etait en I
tierement du ressort du gouvernement de sa Majeste de contr61er, et que la faute est
de nature a imposer la responsabilite des grands dommages qui s'ensnivirent, non pas
' aux parties innocentes, qfte le devoir reconnu de ce gouvournement etait de proteger,
mais k ceux par qui les dommages devinrent possibles.
Une partie de cette affaire ayant ete accomplie avec difficulte par-les moyens dejajj
indiquls, l'autre partie qui restait a accomplir ne rencontra nulle part de resistance.
Le steamer anglais Bahama, charge de l'armement prepare pour le vaisseau par Fawcett,
Preston et Cie, et ayant pour passagers les insurges americains et d'autres destines a.
commander le croiseur, s'acquitta le 13 aout, sous pretexte d'aller a Nassau. La barque
anglaise Agrippina quitta Londres presque simultanement, en apparence pour le
Danemark, chargee de charbon et de munitions de guerre.
Vers la t.roisieme seniaine d'aout, les trois steamers se rencontrerent k Angra Bay,
aux Acores, et, sons la sanction du pavilion britannique, cette grande fraude atteignit
le point de son entier accomplissement. On avait honteusement abuse de Fhospitalite,
si liberalement etendue aux etrangers de toute nation, dans ce royaume k la fois si
edaire et si energique, presqu'avec l'intention, non-seulement d'obtenir un avantage
iliegitime sur l'ocean, mais de semer des germes de dissensions entre lui et une nation^
parente, avec laquelle il etait dans l'obligation la plus solennelle de garder la paix.
Ce fut ainsi que le vaisseau, qui, alors pour la premiere fois, recut le nom de l'Alabama,
cominenga sa carriere efitenee de destruction sur l'ocean. Tout k son bord etait d'origine angliise, excepte quelques-uns des esprits dirigeants, resolus a faire usage des
moyens ainsi mis entre leurs mains pour faire k leurs Compatriotes en Amerique un
dommage qu'ils n'auraient pu accomplir en aucune autre maniere.
Je passe sur les petits details du mode par lequel de subsides de charbon furent en-
suite obtenns exclusivement de sources britanniques, comme objet de peu d'mportance
relativement, et j'en viens a ce qui me paralt etre le point suivant esseutiel dans ce
r€cit.OPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
179
On the 11th of January, Captain Semmes, whilst on his cruise off the
coast of the United States, met the United States gun-boat Hatteras,
and, after a short engagement, sent her to the bottom. He was compelled to take the prisoners on board, and having received six large
shot-holes at the water-line, to navigate the ocean not without peril, in
quest of a port of some sovereign power or other in which he could not
only land his excess of numbers but likewise obtain the necessary means
wherewith to renew his capacity of cruising at all. The captain seems
to have reflected upon the matter carefully, and to have made up his
mind that, although at a very considerable distance from his actual
position, his best chance of a favorable reception would be in a port of
the kingdom whose laws had been so dexterously defied. He accordingly
made his way, not without great difficulty, to Bort Boyal, in Her Majesty's
island of Jamaica. In his own statement of this transaction will be
most clearly discovered the state of his feelings on approaching this
crucial experiment:
This was the first English port I had entered since the Alabama had been commissioned, and no question -whatever as to the antecedents of my ship was raised. I had,
in fact, brought in pretty substantial credentials that I was a ship of war, 130 of the
officers and men of one of the enemy's sunken ships. Great Britain had the good sense
not to listen to the frantic appeals either of Mr. Seward or Minister Adams, both of
whom claimed, as the reader has seen, that it was her duty to stultify herself and
ignore the commission of my ship. Nor did Commodore Dunlop say anything to me
<5f my destruction of British property, &c.
From this passage it appears very clearly that the possibility of such
an obstacle had not been entirely out of the line of his apprehension.
If the objection had been made, it is altogether probable that the career
of this vessel would have been terminated in a manner very different
from that which subsequently happened. But it was not raised. Governor Eyre, who was then the ruling authority, appears to have acted
with some hesitation, and to have been mainly determined by the obvious necessity of landing the great number of prisoners as a pure act
Le 11 Janvier, le capitaine Semmes, pendant qu'il croisait le long dela c6te des Ftats-
Unis, rencontra la canonniere des Etats-Unis le Hatteras, et, apres un court engagement, la Coula k fond. II fut oblige de prendre les prisonniers k bord, et, le vaisseau
ayant six grand trous de boulets k fleur d'eau, il dut naviguer sur l'ocean, non sans
peril, en quete .d'un port d'une puissance souveraine quelconque, dans lequel il put,
non-seulement mettre a terre le surcrolt de ces personnes, mais aussi obtenir les moyens
necessaires pour se remettre en etat de croiser, ce qu'il ne pouvait pas faire sans cela.
Le capitaine paralt avoir reflechi soigneusement sur ce sujet, et avoir decide que, quoi-
que k une distance tres-considerable de sa position actuelle, la meilleure chance pour,
lui d'une reception favorable serait dans un port du royaume dont les lois avaient ete
si habilement bravees. En consequence, il se dirigea, non sans grande difficulte, vers
Port Royal, dans File de la Jamaique, appartenant a sa Majeste. Dans son propre expose de cette affaire, on decouvrira tres-nettement l'etat de ses sentiments a l'approche
de cette epreuve supreme:
" Ce fut le premier port anglais dans lequel j'entrais depuis que l'Alabama avait ete
commissionne, et aucune question sur les antecedents de mon navire ne fut soulevee.
J'avais apporte en Qffet des lettres de creance assez substantielles, prouvant que j'etais
un vaisseau du guerre: cent trente officiers et soldats de Fun des vaisseaux ennemis
couie a fond. La Grande-Bretagne avait eu le bon sens de ne preter Foreille ni aux
appels frenetiques de M. Seward ni a ceux du ministre Adams, qui. tous deux soute-
naient,comme lelecteur l'a vu, que c'etait son devoir de se renier e]le-m6me et d'ignorer
la commission de mon navire. Le commodore Dunlop ne me dit rien non plus au sujet
de la destruction par moi de proprietes anglaises," etc.
II ressort tres-clairement de ce passage que la possibilite. d'un tel obstacle n'avait
pas ete entierement etraugere a ses apprehensions. Si l'objection avait ete faite, il
est tres-probable que la carriere de ce vaissean aurait ete tenminee d'une maniere bien
differente de celle-qui eut lieu dans la suite. Mais elle iie fut pas soulevee. Le gouverneur Eyre, qui etait alors Fautorite regnante, semble avoir agi avec quelque hesitation et avoir ete surtout determine par la necessite claire de mettre a terre le grand180
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
of humanity. The order sanctioning the repairs does not appear to
have been expressed by him in terms, and he immediately addressed a
letter to the Duke of Newcastle, the colonial secretary at home, submitting the facts, and soliciting his approbation.
On the 14th of February, by a letter from Mr. Hammond, on behalf
of Earl Bussell, that approbation appears to have been granted, though
not without reluctance, for it is followed by an injunction to get rid of
the vessel as soon as possible.
Nevertheless the evil was done. And by this proceeding Her Majesty's government appear, at least to my eyes, practically to have given
their formal assent to the principle in international law that success
sanctifies A fraud. In the memoir which I have heretofore prepared
on the subject of the Florida, I have gone so much into the examination
of that question that there is no necessity for my dwelling upon it further. I have always regretted that on this occasion Her Majesty's government failed to use the occasion for establishing a law on the ocean
most consistent with the principles of equity which should prevail upon
men, and not unlikely, in the distant future, to inure to the benefit of
her own marine quite as largely as to that of any other nation
The next step in the order of events essential to the purposes of the
narrative was the arrival of Captain Semmes at Cape Town. But I do
not, at this time, propose to pursue the matter further, partly because
the consideration of it is likely to be renewed in examining the case of
the Tuscaloosa, and partly because the facts material to a judgment in
the case seem to me to have been already collected.
It thus appears that this vessel was built and fitted up with the intent
to carry on war with the United States, in the kingdom of Great Britain,
in violation of her laws, and that, notwithstanding the evidence of the
fact was established so far in the opinion of Her Majesty's law-officers
as to justify detention, by reason of the absence of due vigilance, not
without suspicion of connivance on the part of some of Her Majesty's
officers, and of an extraordinary delay in issuing the necessary orders at the
nombre de prisonniers comme un pur acte d'humanite. L'ordre sanctionnant les reparations ne paralt pas avoir ete exprime par lui formellement, et il adressa iutmedb-;
atement une lettre au due de Newcastle, secretaire des colonies en Angleterre, lui
soumettant les faits et sollicitant son approbation.
Le 14 fevrier, par une lettre de M. Hammond, sur l'ordre du Comte Russell, cette
approbation paralt avoir ete accordee, quoique non sans repugnance, car elle est suiviei|
d'une injonction de faire partir le vaisseau le plus vite possible.
Neanmoins le mai etait fait, et par cette conduite le gouvernement de sa Majeste
semble, au moins a mes yeux, avoir donne pratiquement son assentiment formel an
principe de loi internationale que le 1 succes sanctifie une fraude." Dans le memoire que
j'ai prepare &6jk au sujet du Florida, je suis entre silonguement dans l'examen de cette
question qu'il n'y a nulle necessite de m'etendre davantage l&-dessus. J'ai toujours
regrette qa'k cette occasion le gouvernement de sa Majeste ait nianqu6 de saisir Foc-
casion d'ltablir une loi maritime tout k fait en rapport avec les principes d'equite qui
devraient prevaloir parmi les hommes, et qui vraisemblablement k l'avenir contri- ■
buera a Favantage de sa propre marine aussi largement qu'a celui de toute autre nation.
Le pas suivant dans l'ordre des- evenements essentiels au but de ce recit fut l'arrivee
du capitaine Semmes a Cape Town. Mais je ne me propose pas maintenant de poursuivre ce sujet plus longtemps, en partie parce que l'examen doit en etre renouveie en
examinant le cas du Tuscaloosa, et en partie parce que les faits qui doivent fournir la
matiere d'un jugement dans ce cas me semblent avoir ete deja reunis.
H semble ainsi: 1° que ce vaisseau a ete construit et equipe, avec Fintention de faire
la guerre aux Etats-Unis,.dans le royaume de la Grande-Bretagne, en violation de ses
lois; 2° que, quoique la preuve du fait ait ete etablie dans 1'opinion des officiers de la
loi de sa Majeste assez pour justifier une saisie, en raison de l'absence "des dues
diligences," non sans soupcon de connivence de la part de qudques officiers de sa
Majeste et d'un delai extraordinaire a donner les ordres necessaires au moment la plusOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
181
most critical moment, the vessel was suffered to escape out of the jurisdiction. That her armament, her supplies, and her crew were all provided and transported from Her Majesty's kingdom without the smallest
effort to investigate their nature or their purposes. That though orders
were freely given for the detention of the vessel at any of the colonial
ports at which she might arrive, the first time that she did actually appear she was received and recognized with all the honors due to the
marine of a recognized belligerent power, without the smallest manifestation of dissatisfaction with the gross violation of laws that had
entailed upon Her Majesty's government a grave responsibility to a power
with which she was at peace.
Thus it appears to me beyond a doubt that in the case of the Alabama, Great Britain, by her omission to exercise due diligence in preventing tbe fitting out of this vessel, which it had reason to believe intended to cruise against a power with which it is at peace, has failed to
fulfill the duties set forth in the first article prescribed to the arbitrators
as their guide under the terms of the treaty of Washington.
VI.—THE TUSCALOOSA.
In the series of papers which it has been my duty to prepare upon
the vessels successively brought to the attention of the tribunal, I have proceeded so far as to deduce from the evidence submitted one general rule, which I believe to be sound. This is,
that the assumption of a belligerency on the ocean, founded exclusively
upon violence and fraud, can at no later period have any issue different
in its nature from that of its origin.
This rule must receive another illustration from the case of the Tuscaloosa now beforeus. This was a merchant-ship belonging to the United
States, originally having the name of the Conrad, which was captured,
by the Alabama on the 21st of June, 1863, on the coafet 'of Brazil. Of the
case of that vessel, of its fraudulent origin, and of the unfortunate recognition afterwards made of its character as a legitimate vessel on
critique, ou permit au vaisseau d'echapper k sa juridiction ; 3° que son armement, ses
subsides et son equipage furent tous fournis et transportes du royaume de sa Majeste
sans le plus petit effort pour rechercher leur nature ou leurs projets ; 4° que, quoique
des ordres aient ete librement donnes pour la saisie du vaisseau dans quelque port des
colonies qu'il pht arriver, la premiere fois qu'il y apparut reellement, il fut regu et
reconnu avec tons les honneurs dhs k la marine d'une puissance belligerante reconnue,
sans la plus petite marque de mecontentement au sujet de la violation grossiere de ses
lois, qui avait attire une grave xesponsabilite envers une puissance avec laquelle elle
etait en paix.
Ainsi il me paralt hors de doute que, dans le cas de l'Alabama, la Grande-Bretagne,
en manquaut d'exercer les "dues diligences" pour empecher Fequipement de ce vaisseau,
qu'elle avait des motifs raisonnables de croire dispose k croiser contre une puissance
avec laquelle elle etait en paix, a manque a Faccomplissement des devoirs stipules
dans la premiere regie presentee aux arbitres comme guide d'apres le texte du traite
de Washington.
LE TUSCALOOSA.
Dans la serie de documents qu'il a 6te de mon devoir de preparer sur les vaisseaux
presenter successivement k l'examen de ce tribunal, je suis arrive a deduire, des
preuves qui nous ont ete soumises, une regie generale que je crois etre juste. Cette
regie est que, si l'on prend le titre de belligerant sur l'ocean, en se fondant exclusive-
ment sur la violence et sur la fraude, on ne peut finir antrement que comme on a commence. Cette regie recoit une autre illustration du cas du Tuscaloosa, qui est maintenant devant nous. C'etait un vaisseau marchand appartenant aux Etats-Unis et ayant
d'abord le nom du Conrad, qui fut pris par l'Alabama, le 21 juin 1863, sur la cdte du
Bresil. Quant au cas de ce vaisseau, a son origine frauduleuse et a la reconnaissance
malheureuse faite plus tard de son caractere comme vaisseau legitime sur l'ocean par182
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
the ocean by the government of tbe nation whose laws it had so iinpu.
dently set at defiance, I have already submitted my judgment in a
preceding paper. That government was now destined to go through
another crucial experiment, the necessary and legitimate consequence of
its primal error.
It should here be observed that, in the order of events naturally following what has ever seemed to me the great original mistake of the
recognition of this false maritime belligerent, sprang up a necessity of
immediately considering the question of the recognition of any prizes
which it might take and send iu under the established law of nations to
any of the ports of Her Majesty's kingdom, there to await a regular
condemnatiou in the courts at home. Unless some action were at once
taken to prevent it, the practical result would clearly be that the whole
commerce of the United States would be in danger of sacrifice to one
belligerent in British ports without a single chance of corresponding
advantage to the other. For the fact that the insurgents had no commerce of their own whatever had become quite notorious.
In order to guard against this danger Her Majesty's government
promptly resorted to a precautionary measure entirely within its power
to take, under the law of nations, the prohibition of the use of its ports
to either party for the admission of prizes. The same policy having
been adopted by all other naval powers, it became evident to the false
belligerent that nothing positive was to be gained to itself from its assumption of a place on the ocean. The only motive left for trying to
keep it was the possibility of injuring its opponent. Hence, a resort to
the barbarous practice of destroying the property it could not couvert
into plunder.
But this practice seems at times to have become unpleasant and
wearisome to its perpetrators. Hence, it was natural that their attention should be drawn to some manner of evading it. The commander
of the Alabama having made it the occupation of some of his leisure
hours to study the best known treatises on the law of nations, seems to
have hit upon a passage which he considered exactly to fit his purpose.
le gouvernement de la nation dont les lois avaient ete si impudemment bravees, j'ai
&6jk soumis mon jugement- dans un precedent memoire. Ce gouvernement etait des
lors destine k passer par une autre epreuve decisive, consequence necessaire et legitime
de sa premiere erreur.
II faut remarquer ici que datfs l'ordre des eveuements qui suivirent naturellement
ce qui m'a semble toujours la grande erreur originelle de la reconnaissance de ce faux
belligerant, s'eieva la necessite de considerer immediatement la question de la reconnaissance de toute prise qu'il aurait pu faire et envoyer dans quelqu'un des ports du
royaume de sa Majeste d'apres le droit des gens, pour y attendre un jugement regulier
devant les cours du royaume. Amoins de quelque mesure prise immediatement pour
Fempecher, le resultat pratique aurait ete clairement que tout le commerce des Etats-
Unis se serait trouve expose a etre sacrifie a l'un des belligerents dans des ports anglais,
sans une seule chance d'avantage correspondant pour l'autre. Car, le fait que les insurges u'avaient en propre aucun commerce du tout devait etre parfaitement notoire'.
Afin de se garder de ce danger, le gouvernement de sa Majeste recourut promptement
k une mesure de precaution qu'il etait entierement en son pouvoir de prendre d'apres
le droit des gens, la .defense aux deux parties de se servir de ses ports pour Fadmission
des prises. La meme conduite ayant ete adoptee par toutes les puissances maritimes,
il devint evident pour le faux belligerant qu'il n'avait rien a gagner en s'arrogeant le
titre de puissance navale sur l'ocean. ■ Le seul motif qui restat pour tacher de le garder
etait la possibilite de nuire a son adversaire. De la, le recours a la pratique barbare
de detrnire la propriete dont il ne pouvait pas faire du butiu.
Mais cette pratique semble parfois etre devenue desagreable et ennnyeuse pour ceux
qui s'y livraient. II etait des-lors naturel que leur attention se portat sur quelque
moyen de l'eviter. Le commandant de l'Alabama, en ayant fait Foccupation de
quelques-uns de ses moments de loisir pour etudier les ouvrages les plus connus du
droit des gens, semble etre tombe sur un passage qu'il considerait comrie tout a faitOPINIONS  OF  MR.   ADAMS.
183
This was au extract from Wheaton's well-known work, to the effect that
a legitimate authority might convert a captured merchant-vessel, without condemnation, into a ship of war, to such an extent at least as to
secure the recognition of it by neutral nations.
It was probably from this source that Captain Semmes contrived his
scheme of turning the United States merchantman Oonrad, laden with
a cargo of wool from a distant market, into the Confederate States ship
Tuscaloosa, tender to the Alabama, having two 12-pound rifle guns, and
ten men; and bringing her into Her Majesty's port of Simon's Bay,
Cape of Good Hope, to test the disposition of the local authorities to
recognize the proceeding.
As usually happened in the course of these transactions, the naval
officer in command in the harbor at once penetrated the fraud. Bear-
Admiral Sir B. Walker, on the 8th August, addressed a letter to Sir-B.
Wodehouse, iu which he used this language:
The admission of this vessel into port will, I fear, open the door for numbers of vessels captured under similar circumstances, being denominated tenders, with a view to
a,void the prohibition contained in the Queen's instructions ; and I would observe,-that
the vessel Sea Bride, captured by the Alabama off Table Bay a few days since, or all
other prizes, might be in like manner styled tenders, making the prohibition entirely
null and void.
I apprehend that to bring a captured vessel under the denomination of a vessel of
war she must be fitted for warlike purposes, and not merely have a few men and two
small gnus put on board her (in fact, nothing but a prize crew) in order to disguise
her real character as a prize.
Now, this vessel has her original cargo of wool still on board, which cannot be required for wailike purposes; and her armament, and the number of her crew, are quite
i nsufficient for any services other than those of slight defense.
But this sound judgment of the gallant naval officer met with little
response from the higher authorities of the Cape.
As usual, the governor had consulted his attorney-general, and, as
usual, the attorney-general gave an opinion, giving five reasons why
■convenable k son dessein. C'etait un extrait du volume bien connu de Wheaton, dont
le sens etait qu'une autorite legitime pouvait convertir un vaisseau marchand capture,
sans jugement, en vaisseau de guerre, assez, du moins, pour assurer sa reconnaissance
par des nations neutres.
Ce fut probablement a cause de cela que le capitaine Semmes congut son projet de
■changer le vaisseau marchand des Etats-Unis, le Conrad, charge d'une cargaison de laine
-d'un marche eioigue, en vaisseau des etats-confederes, le Tuscaloosa, tender de l'Alabama, ayant deux canons rayes de douze, et dix hommes, et de le conduire dans le port
de sa Majeste de Simon's Bay, Cap de Bonne-Esperance, pour eprouver la disposition
des autorites locales a. reconnaltre la fraude.
Comme il arrivait d'ordinaire dans le cours de ces transactions, Fofficier de marine
qui commandait dans le port p6netra immediatement la fraude. Rear-Admiral Sir B.
"Walker adressa, le 8 aout, une lettre a Sir P. Wodehouse, dans laquelle il tenait ce
langage:
" L'admission de ce vaisseau dans le port ouvfira, je le crains, la porte a nombre de
vaisseaux captures dans des circonstances semblables et que l'on nommera tenders, en
vue d'echapper k la defense contenue dans les instructions de la Reine; et je ferai re-
marquer que le vaisseau Sea Bride, capture par l'Alabama pres de Table Bay, il y a peu
de jours, ou toute autre prise, pourrait, de la memo maniere, 6tre nomme tender, rendant
ainsi la defense entierement nulle et non avenue.
" Je crois que, pour placer un vaisseau capture sous la denomination de vaisseau de
guerre, il faut qu'il soit propre k des projets de guerre et qu'il n'ait pas seulement
quelques hommes et deux petits canons a son bord (en fait, pas autre chose qii'tin
equipage de prise) afin de deguiser son vrai caractere de prise.
" Maintenant ce vaisseau a encore k bord sa cargaison primitive de laine, ce qui est
assez inutile pour des projets de guerre; et son armament et le nombre de son equipage
.sont tout k fait insuffisants pour aucun service autre que celui d'une leg^re defense."
Mais ce jugement sain de ce brave officier de marine trouva peu d'echo chez les autorites superieures du Cap.
Comme de coutume, le gouverneur avait consulte son attorney-general et comme de
■coutume l'attorney-general donna un avis renfermant cinq raisons pour lesquelles ce184
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
what was a captured merchantman to the eye of everybody else should
be regarded by the government as a legitimate ship of war of a recognized belligerent. He also relied on the extract from the work of Whea-
ton, having reference to a very different state of things. This was on
the 7th August, 1863.
The governor sent these papers in the regular channel to the authorities at home, and in due course of time they found their way to Earl
Bussell. He appears to have been so little satisfied with the singular
result that, had been reached at Cape Town as to desire a reconsideration of the question by the law-officers of the Crown. This was dated
on the 30th September.
The consequence was an opinion, not delivered until nineteen days
afterward and bearing marks of careful consideration, signed by all
three of the legal officers, the purport of which was a disavowal of the
fiction of law based upon a misconception of the doctrine of Wheaton;
and a distinct expression of a proposition so important in connection
with all the events submitted to our consideration that I deem it necessary to quote the very language:
We think it right to observe that the third reason alleged by the colonial attorney-
general for his opinion assumes (though the fact had not been made the subject of any
inquiry) that " no means existed for determining whether the ship had or had not been
judicially condemned in a court competent of jurisdiction; and the proposition that,
admitting her to have been captured oy a ship of war of the Confederate States, she was
entitled to refer Her Majesty's government, in case of dispute, to the court of her States
in order to satisfy it as to her real character," appears to us to be at variance with Her
Majesty's undoubted right to determine, within her own territory, whether her orders,
made iu vindication of her own neutrality, have been violated or not.
The opinion then went on to declare what the proper course should
have been. The allegations of the United States consul should at once
have been brought to the knowledge of Captain Semmes, while the Tuscaloosa was there; and he should have been obliged to admit or deny
their truth.   If the result were, in that case, the proof that the Tusca-
qui etait un vaisseau marchand capture, pour tout le monde ailleurs, devait etre
regarde par le gouvernement comme un vaisseau legitime de guerre d'un belligerant
reconnu. II s'appuyait aussi sur l'extrait de Fouvrage de Wheaton, serapportant k une
question toute diff6rente.    Ceci se passait le 7 aoht 1863.
Le gouverneur envoya ces documents, par le canal ordinaire, aux autorites du-
royaume, et avec le temps ils parvinrent au Comte Russell". H semble avoir ete si peu
satisfait du singulier resultat obtenu k Cape Town qu'il desira un nouvel examen de
la question par les "law-officers" de la couronne.
Ceci etait date du 30 septembre.
Le resultat fut un avis, qui ne fut livre que dix-neuf jours plus tard, renfermant des
marques d'un examen scrupuleux, signe par les trois officiers Mgaux, dont le resume
etait un desaveu de la fiction de loi, base sur uu rhalentendn de la doctrine de Wheaton,
et une expression claire d'une proposition si importante a l'egard de tous les evene-
ments sounds a notre examen que je crois necessaire d'en transcrire les propres
termes:
I Nous croyons qu'il est bon de faire remarquer que la troisieme raison aliegnee par
l'attorney-general de la colonie pour son avis affirme (quoique ce fait n'ait nullemeut
ete sounds k aucune enquete)" qu'il n'existait aucun moyen de determiner si le vaisseau
avait ete ou non juge formellement par une cour competente de juridiction; et la proposition qu'en admettant qu'il a ete pris par un vaisseau de guerre des etats-confederes,
il etait autorise a renvoyer le gouvernement de sa Majeste, en cas de dispute, a la cour
de ses etats, afin de douner satisfaction a celui-cl sur son vrai caractere, nous paralt en
desaccord avec le droit indubitable de sa Majeste de determiner, dans les limites de-
son territoire, si ses ordres, donnes pour le maintien de.sa neutralite, ont ete violas ou
non.
"L'avis en vient k declarer quelle aurait du etre la conduite convenable. Les allegations du consul des Etats-Unis auraient dh etre portes immediatement a la connaissance du capitaine Semmes pendant que le I'uscaloosa etait la. Et il aurait ete oblige
d'en admettre ou d'en nier la verite.   Si ce resultat etait, dans ce cas, la preuve que lesOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
185
loosa was an uncondemned prize brought into British waters in violation
of Her Majesty's orders for maintaing her neutrality, it would deserve
serious consideration whether the most proper course consistent with
HerMajesty's dignity would not be to take from the captors, at once, all
further control over the Tuscaloosa, and retain it until properly reclaimed
by her original owners.
This opinion, so far as I have had occasion to observe, contains the
very first indication of a disposition manifested on the part of Her Majesty's advisers to resent the frauds and insults which had been so continually practiced upon her from the outset of this struggle by these
insurgent agents. Had it been duly manifested from the beginning, it
can hardly be doubted that she would have been materially relieved
from the responsibility subsequently incurred.
On the 4th of November the Duke of Newcastle addressed a note to
the governor of Cape Town, communicating the decision of the law officers as to what ought to have been done.
On the 19th of December the governor addressed a note to the Duke
of Newcastle, defending himself in regard to the action which had been
disapproved, and praying for further directions what to do. The Tuscaloosa had meantime left Simon's Bay on a cruise, from which she did
not return until the 26th December, when she put in for supplies. But
on the 5th of January Bear-Admiral Sir B. Walker addressed a note to
the secretary of the admiralty, announcing that, by the request of the
governor, he had taken the necessary steps to ascertain from the insurgent officer then in command the fact that she was an uncondemned
prize captured by the Alabama, and thereupon he had taken possession
of her for violation of Her Majesty's orders, to be held until reclaimed
by her proper owners.
It was in vain that the insurgent entered a protest against this decided proceeding. The governor contented himself with a brief answer
to the effect that he was acting by orders.
Tuscaloosa etait une prise, non jugee, amenee dans les eaux anglaises en violation des
ordres de sa Majeste pour le maintien de sa neutralite, il faudrait examiner s6rieuse-
ment si la conduite la plus convenable a l'egard de la dignite de sa Majeste ne serait
pas de priver Fauteur de la prise de tout contr61e ulterieur sur le Tuscaloosa et de le
detenir jusqu'a ce qu'il fut propremeut reclame par ses proprietaires primitifs."
Cette opinion, pour autant que j'ai eu l'occasion de le remarquer, contient la toute
premiere indication d'une disposition manifestee de la part des conseillers de sa Majesty
a venger les fraudes et les insultes qui avaient ete si continuellement commises envers
elle, depuis le commencement de ce conflit par ces agents insurges. Si cette disposition
avait ete souvent manifestee des le commencement, ou peut difficilement douter qu'elle
n'eut ete materiellemeut dechargee d'une grande partie de la responsabilite qui lui fut
imposed dans la suite.
Le 4 novembre, le due de Newcastle adressa une  note au gouverneur de Cape'
Town, lui communiquant la decision des "law-officers" a l'egard de ce qui aurait du.
etre fait.
Ls 19 decembre, le gouverneur adressa une note au due de Newcastle, se defendant
a l'egard de la conduite qui avait ete desapprouvee et demandant des directions
ulterieures sur ce qu'il y avait a faire. Le Tuscaloosa avait pendant ce temps quitte
Simon's Bay pour une cause dont il ne revint le 26 decembre, lorsqu'il entra dans report pour prendre des subsides. Mais le 5 Janvier, Rear-Admiral Sir B. Walker adressa
une note au secretaire de Famiraute annoucant qu'& la requite du gouverneur il aVait
pris les mesures necessaires pour s'assurer, aupres de Fofficier insurge qui commandait-
alors, du fait quo e'etait une prise non jugee, capture par l'Alabama, et qu'en consequence il en avait pris possession pour violation des ordres de sa Majeste, et pour etre-
retenue jusqu'a ce qu'elle fdfc reclamee par ses proprietaires.
Ce fut en vain que l'insurge protesta contre cette mesure ferme. Le gouvernement
se contenta d'une courte reponse, disant qu'il agissait par ordre.186
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
There were at the moment no agents for the proper owners to whom
the vessel could be transferred, so that it remained in the hands of the
British authorities, until a new letter was received from the Duke of
Newcastle, dated the 10th March, rescinding the instructions given in
the preceding one, and directing the vessel to be handed over once more
to some person having authority from Captain Semmes, of the Alabama,
or from the government of the Confederate States.
Thus it appears to me that Her Majesty's government, from an over-
sensibility to the peculiar circumstances of the return of the vessel after
once leaving her port, lost all the advantages to which it had entitled
itself for maintaining the dignity of the Crown against an unworthy
-experiment upon her patience. The fact was that it was only making
the port of Simon's Bay a base of operations, an additional insult.
The time had gone by, however, when this vessel could be made of
any further use by the insurgent commander of the Alabama. He had
succeeded in executing a fraudulent sale of the cargo of that as well as
•of another prize, the Sea Bride, and was bound on another cruise, which
proved to be his last on the ocean.
Taking into consideration all the circumstances attending this singular narrative, I have arrived at the conclusion that as a prize captured
by the Alabama, and turned into a tender, she comes distinctly within
the scope of damages awarded by the judgment passed upon the course
-of Her Majesty's government respecting that vessel. And if in her own
brief career it should appear that she has herself committed any injury
to the people of the United States, I am clearly of opinion that Her
Majesty's government has made itself distinctly responsible for the neglect to prevent it under the rules. It is alleged in the argument on behalf of the United States that she had captured and released one vessel
-on a ransom bond, before reaching Cape Town; and on the 13th of
September, after her visit, she captured and destroyed one more. But
I have failed to discover the presence of any distinct claim in damages.
Should such be made visible, I hold the claim to be valid.
Alors la question etait claire: c'etait une prise amenee dans un port de sa Majeste
-contre la loi.
Mais il n'y avait aucun agent des proprietaires anqnel le vaisseau pht etre remis, eu
sorte qu'il resta aux mains des autorites anglaises jusqu'j_ I'arriv6e d'une nouvelle
lettre du due de Newcastle, datee du 10 mars, revoquant les instructions donriees dans
la precedente, et ordonnant que le vaisseau fht livre de nouveau a qnelqu'un ayant
autorite de la part du capitaine Semmes, de l'Alabama, ou du gouvernement de etats-
confederes.
Ainsi il me semble que le gouvernement de sa Majeste, a l'ombre des circonstances
particulieres de ce cas, perdit tout Favantage qu'il s'etait acquis en maintenant la
-dignite de la couronne contre la perpetration d'une fraude indigue.
Cependant le temps s'etait passe lorsque le vaisseau put de nouveau etre employe a.
-quelque service par le commandant insurge de l'Alabama. II avait reussi a operer une
vente frauduleuse de la cargaison de ce vaisseau aussi bien que d'une autre-prise, le
Sea Bride, et il faisait une autre course, qui fut sa derniere sur l'ocean.
Preuant en consideration toutes les circonstances qui se rapportent k ce singulier
redt, je suis arrive a la conclusion que, comme prise capture par l'Alabama, il toinbe
distinctement daus le domaine des dommages accordes par le jugement norte sur la
conduite du gouvernement de sa Majeste a l'egard de ce vaisseau.   Et si, dans sa courte
-carriere, il paraissait qu'il a commis lui-meme quelque dommage envers le peuple des
Etats-Unis, je suis nettement d'avis que le gouvernement de sa Majeste s'est rendue
clairement responsable pour sa negligence a Fempecher, selon les regies.   On aliegue
dans l'expose des Etats-Unis qu'il avait capture et relache un vaisseau sous promesse
-de rancon avant d'atteindre Cape Town, et que, le 13 septembre, apres sa visite, il en
captura et detruisit encore un. Mais je n'ai pu decouvrir la presence d'aucune demande
|||Ipncte en dommages.   Si l'on eu mon trait une, j'envisagerais la reclamation comme
valide.OPINIONS   OF   MR.   ADAMS.
187
VII.—THE   GEORGIA.
This vessel was built at Dumbarton on the Clyde during, the winter
of 1862-'63.    She was constructed in a manner to excite very
little suspicion of the purpose for which she was intended.
Indeed, her frame proved so weak after a few months' trial as to render
her uusafe with an armament, and she was laid aside.
When she was launched, on the 16th of January, a person known to
be in the insurgent service, by the name of North, was reported in the
public journals to have been present with his daughter, and she was said
to bave given to the vessel the name of the Yirginia.
It was, however, known, by the means of an intercepted letter received
by Mr. Adams from his government, that this officer had incurred the
censure of his employers at Bichmond to such an extent as to prompt
his recall.   The name thus given was not adhered to.
On the 17th of January, that is, the day after her launch, she was reported by the measuring surveyor as the steamer Japan, and intended
for commercial purposes, her framework and plating being of the ordinary sizes for vessels of her class.
On the 20th of March she was registered in the name of Thomas Bold,
a British subject resident in Liverpool, as the owner.
On the 27th of March she left for Greenock without exciting observations, and without clearance.
On the 30th of March a large number of men who had been shipped
at Liverpool by Jones and Company, a firm of which Mr. Bold was a
member, for a voyage to Singapore and Hong-Kong, and after arrival
there to be employed in trading to and from ports in the China and Indian seas, the voyage to be completed within two years by arrival at
some port of discharge in the United Kingdom, left Liverpool to get on
board the vessel at Greenock.
On the 3d of April she left the British waters.
On the 6th, the collector of customs at Newhaveu addressed a letter to
the commissioners of customs in the following, terms:
LE GEORGIA.
Ce vaisseau fut construit a Dumbarton, sur la Clyde, pendant l'hiver de 1862—'63. 11
fut construit de -maniere a exciter tres-peu de soupcons a. l'egard du but auquel il etait
destine. Eu effet, ses couples se montrlrent si faibles, apres quelques mois d'essai, qu'il
devint dangereux avec son armement, et il fut mis de cdte.
Quand il fut lance, le 16 Janvier, les journauxTepporterent qu'une personne du nom
de North, connue pour etre au service des insurges, se trouva presente avec sa fille, et
que celle-ci donna au*vaisseau le nom de Virginia.
On savait cependant, par une lettre interceptee, ref-ue par M. Adams de sou Gouvernement, que cet officier avait recu la censure de ses superieurs a Richmond au point de
motiver son rappel.   Le nom ainsi donne ne fut pas conserve.
Le 17 Janvier—c'est-_.-dire, le lendemain deson lancement—le mesurenrfit un rapport
dans lequel il Findiquait comme steamer le Japan et destine a des entrepriees coinmer-
ciales, ses couples et ses plaques 6tant des dimensions ordinaires pour des vaisseaux de
sa classe.
Le 20 mars, il fut enregistre au nom de Thomas Bold, sujet anglais, residant a Liverpool, comme proprietaire.
Le 27 mars, il partit pour Greenock, sans provoquer d'observations et sans papiers.
Le 30 mars, un grand nombre d'hoinmes quitterent Liverpool pour se reudre k bord
du vaisseau a Greenock. Ils avaient ete enrdies k Liverpool par Jones et Cie, maison
de commerce dont M. Bold faisait partie, pour un voyage a Singapore et a Hong-Kong,
et apres leur arrivee la-bas pour etre employes au commerce dans les ports des mersde
la Chine et des Indes; le voyage devait se faire en deux ans, et le retour avoir lieu
dans un port de debarquement du Royaume-Uni.
Le 3 avril il quitta les eaux anglaises.
Le 6, le collecteur des douanes au port de New Haven adressa une lettre aux com-,
missaires des douanes, concue dans les termes suivants:1
188
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
The steamship Alar, of London, 85 tons, owned by H. P. Maples, sailed on Sunday
morning, 5th instant, at 2 a. in., bound, according to the ship's papers, for Alderney anil
St. Malo. On Saturday, at midnight, thirty men, twenty of whom appeared to be
British sailors", ten mechanics, arrived by train. Three gentlemen accompanied them,
Mr. Lewis, of Alderney, Mr. Ward, and Mr. Jones. The men appeared to be ignorant
of their precise destination; somesaid they were to get 20.. ea-ch for 'their trip. A man,
rather lame, superintended them. Shortly after midnight, a man arrived from
Brighton, on horseback, with a telegram, which, for purposes of secrecy, had been sent
there and not to Newhaven, it is suspected. Mr. Staniforth, the agent, replied to my
inquiries this morning, that the Alar had munitions of war on board, and that they
were consigned by to a Mr. Lewis, of Alderney.   His answer was brief
and with reserve, leaving no doubt on my mind nor on the minds of any here that the
thirty men and munitions of war are destined for transfer at sea to some second Alabama. The telegram to Brighton intimated, very probably, having been reserved for
the last hour, where that vessel would be found. Whether the shipment of the men, who
all appeared to be British subjects, can, if it should be hereafter found that they have
been transferred to a Federal or confederate vessel, be held an infringement of the
foreign-enlistment act, and whether the clearance of the Alar, if hereafter found to be
untrue, can render the master amenable under the customs-consolidation act, is for
your consideration respectfully submitted.
R. J. DOLAX, Collector.
On contrasting the substance of this letter with any or all of those
communicated from a similar source at Liverpool, in the cases of the
Oreto or the Alabama, the difference cannot fail to be apparent to the
most ordinary apprehension. There is no equivocation or reservation
to be suspected here. The officer seems to me to have faithfully performed his duty, and completely relieved himself from responsibility.
This letter appears to have been received by the commissioners of customs on the 7th April, and they on that same day made a report to the
home office in the following terms:
I am desired to transmit, for the information of the lords commissioners of her
Majesty's treasury, aud for any directions their lordships may see fit to give thereon,
" Le vapeur Alar, de Londres, jaugeant 85 tonneaux, (proprietaire, H. P. Maples,) a
fait voile dimanche, le 5, a deux heures du matin, destine, du moins selon les papiers
de bord, ci-apres, pour Alderney et St.-Malo. H est arrive samedi k minuit, par le
chemin de fer, trente hommes, dont vingt paraissaient etre des marins anglais et dix
mecaniciens. Trois messieurs les accompagnaient, Monsieur Lewis, d'Alderney J Mr>
"Ward et Mr. Jones. Les hommes semblaient ne pas savoir au juste le lieu de leur destination. Quelques-uns d'entre eux disaient qu'ils devaient avoir £20 par tete pour le
voyage. Un homme qui boitait un peu avait la direction de la troupe. Peu apres
minuit, un cavalier est arrive de Brighton, porteur d'un teiegramme que l'on soup-
gohne avoir ete envoye dans cette ville au lieu de New Haven pour n'en pas laisser echap-
per le secret. Interroge par moi, le courtier, M. Staniforth, m'a repondu, ce matin,
que FAlar avait, k bord des munitions de guerre consignees par . . a M. Lewis,
d'Alderney. Ses reponses etaient breves et reservees; elles ne nous ont laisse aucutt
doute dans l'esprit, ni a moi ni a personne d'entre nous, que les trente hommes et les
munitions de guerre ne fussent destines & etre transbord6s >en mer sur un second Alabama. Le teiegramme prive, expedie k Brighton k la derniere heure, indiquait tres-
probablement le lieu de reunion. L'embarquement des hommes, qui tous paraissaient
etre des sujets anglais, peut-il etre consider comme une infraction au foreign-enlistment act, dans le cas oh il serait prouve plus tard qu'ils ont ete transbordes sur un
vaisseau federal ou confedere ? Les papiers de FAlar, s'ils sout reconnus faux dans la
suite, peuvent-ils exposer le patron k des poursuites en vertu du customs-consolidation
act ?   Ce sont Ik des questions que j'ose vous soumettre respectueusement.
"R. J. DOLAN, Collecteur."
En comparant la substance de cette lettre avec toutes celles communiquees d'une
source semblable a Liverpool, dans les cas de l'Oreto ou de l'Alabama, la difference ne
peut manquer de sauter aux yeux de Fintelligence la plus ordinaire. On ne peut soup-
conner ici ni equivoque ni reserve. L'officier me semble avoir rempli fideienient son
devoir et s'etre decharge de toute responsabilite.
Cette lettre parait avoir ete recue par les commissaires des douanes le 7 avril, et le
meme jour ils firent rapport au home office dans les termes suivants :
I On me requiert de transmettre, pour Fiuformation des lords-commissaires de la
tresorerie de sa Majeste, et pour les directions que leurs seigueuries pourront jugerOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
189
copy of a report of the collector of this revenue at Newhaven, relative to the clearance of the vessel Alar, having on board a number of sailors and munitions of war,
ostensibly for Alderney and Saint Malo, but suspected by the collector to be intended
for transfer to some other vessel belonging to one of the belligerents in America; and
I am to state that the board having conferred with their solicitor on the subject, that
officer is of opinion that there is no evidence to call for any interference on the part
of the Crown.
It thus appears very clearly that whatever may have been the opinions of the law expressed in this letter, the fact is certain that at that
date none of the officers of the government had received any information of the direction to which it could truly look for the destination of
these vessels. The whole operation had been conducted, it must be
admitted, with great skill and address. Nobody had ever guessed at
the result down to the time in which it was in process of execution within
the jurisdiction of another power.
Meanwhile, let us now turn our attention to the position in which the
representatives and agents of the United States, the party the most
deeply interested in preventing this undertaking if possible, were occupying.
This may most readily be gathered from the testimony of the most
vigilant officer they had in that kingdom, a man who spared no pains
and no expense to secure all the information that could be had, not
simply within his own district, but everywhere in the kingdom where
sea-going vessels were in process of construction outside of the capital.
On the 3d of April Mr. Dudley writes the following letter to Mr.
Seward at Washington:
Mr. Underwood, our consul at Glasgow, has no doubt informed you about the steamer
now called the Japan, formerly the Virginia, which is about to clear from that port to
the East Indies. Some seventy or eighty men, twice the number that would be required for any legitimate voyage, were shipped at Liverpool for this vessel, aud sent
to Greenock on Monday evening. They are shipped for a voyage of three years. My
belief is that she belongs to the confederates, and is to be converted into a privateer;
quite likely to cruise in the East Indies, as Mr. Young, the paymaster of the Alabama
convenable de donner a ce sujet, copie d'un rapport du collecteur des douanes a New
Haven relatif aux papiers du vaisseau Alar, ayant a bord une quantite de matelots et
de munitions de guerre, ostensiblement pour Alderney et St.-Malo, mais soupconnes
par le collecteur comme devant etre transbordes sur quelque autre vaisseau appar-
tenant a l'un des bellig6rants en Amerique; et je dois dire que le board ayant conf_re
avec leur solliciteur sur ce sujet, cet officier est d'avis qu'il n'y a pas de preuves qui
exigent une intervention de la part de la couronne."
II paralt ainsi tres-clairement que, quelles qu'aient pu etre les opinions de la loi ex-
primees dans cette lettre, le fait est certain qu'k cette date aucun des officiers du gouvernement n'avait recu de reseignements sur la direction oh il devait regarder pour
trouver ces vaisseaux. Toute Foperatioh avait ete oonduite, il faut l'admettre, avec
grande habilite et adresse. Personne n'avait meme devine le resultat, jusqu'au moment oh il etait en voie d'execution dans la juridiction d'une autre puissance.
Maintenant, tournons notre attention vers la position qu'occupaient les representants
et les agents des Etats-Unis, la partie la plus interessee k empecher cette entreprise, si
possible.
On peut s'en faire une idee plus facilement par le temoignage de Fofficer le plus vigilant
qu'ils eusseut dans ce royaume, homme qui n'epargnait ni peine ni argent pour se procurer tous les renseignements que l'on pouvait avoir, non-seulement dans son propre
district, mais partout dans le royaume oh. des vaisseaux destines a la haute mer etaient
en voie de construction, hors de la capitale.
Le 3 avril, M. Dudley ecrit la lettre suivante k M. Seward, a Washington:
"M. Underwood, notre consul a Glasgow, vous a sans doute ecrit au sujet du steamer
appeie maintenant le Japan, auparavant le Virginia, qui est sur le point de s'acquitter
de ce porte pour les Indes orientales. Environ soixante-dix oh quatre-vingts hommes,
deux fois le nombre necessaire pour un voyage legitime, ont ete enrdies a Liverpool
pour ce vaisseau et envoyes a Greenock lundi soir. Ils sont engages pour un voyage de
trois ans. Ma conviction est qu'il appartient aux confederes, et qu'il doit etre converti
en corsaire, tres-probablement pour croiser dans les Indes orientales, comme M. Young,190
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
tells me it has always been a favorite idea of Mr. Mallory, the secretary of the confed-v.
erate navy, to seud a privateer in these waters.   I sent a man from here to Glasgow to
accompany these men, to endeavor to find out the destination of the vessel, &c.   He
has not been successful as yet in his efforts.   He has been on board, and writes that
she has no armament, and he is still there watching her, &c.
At the date of this letter the Japan was actually gone to sea; aud the
vigilant consul had not even then obtained any testimony whatever
upon which to establish the truth of his very just conclusion as to the
purpose, though not just as to the destination of the vessel.
Let me now observe what the case was with Mr. Adams, the minister
of the United States at London. It appears, by a letter of his ad-
.dressed to Mr. Seward on the 9th of Arjril, that "he had been long in
the possession of information about the construction and outfit of thisi
A'essel on the Clyde;" and upon this part of the paragraph of his letter,
singularly euough, I perceive in the counter case presented to us on the
part of Her Majesty's government, an attempt made to throw upon him
the responsibility, for the escape of the vessel.   The language is this:
§ If recourse had been had to the navy, it is probable," the arbitrators are told,
I that the complaints of the United States might not have been necessary. They
might not have been necessary if Mr. Adams had communicated in good time such information as he possessed, instead of keeping it undisclosed until six days after the
sailing of the Georgia, and more than three days after the departure of the Alar, and
if that information had intended to form an actual or contemplated violation of the^
law."
Now, it should be observed that this passage begins by assuming that
the information to which Mr. Adams alludes in his letter of the 9th of
April, as having long been iu his possession, was the same which he
communicated to Earl-Bussell in his note addressed to him on the 8th.
If such had really been the case, the insinuation might have appeared
with some shadow of justice. But if the context of the passage quoted
had been given entire, it would show that at the period to which he referred, ''nothing had ever been furnished him of a nature to .base proceedings upon;" whereas, on the reception of what appeared more
le maitfe payeur de l'Alabama me dit que ca atoujours ete une idee favorite de M. Mallory, le secretaire de la marine confederee, d'envoyer un corsaire dans ces eaux. J'ai
envoye un homme d'ici a Glasgow pour les accompagner, pour essayer de decouvrir la
destination de ce vaisseau. Jusqu'ici il n'a pas reussi dans ses efforts. II a ete a bord,
et il ecrit que le vaisseau n'a point d'armement, et qu'il le surveille toujours," etc.
- A la date de cette lettre, le Japan avait pris la mer, et le vigilant consul n'avait,
meme alors, obtenu aucun renseignement quelconque sur lequel etablir la verite de sa
conclusion ties-juste quant au but, quoique erronnee quant a la destination, du vaisseau.
Permettez-moi de faire observer maintenant la position de M. Adams, ministre des
Etats-Unis a Londres. II semble par une lettre qu'il adressa a M. Seward le 9 avril,
| qu'il avait ete longtemps en possession de renseignements sur la construction et sur
les pr6paratifs de ce vaisseau dans la Clyde," et quant a cette partie du paragraphe
de sa lette,je remarque assez singulierement, dans le "Counter-case," qui nous est
presente de la part du gouvernement de sa Majeste, une tentative faite pour rejeter
sur lui la responsabilite de Invasion du vaisseau. Voici les termes:
"Si on avait eu recours a la marine, il est probable," c'est ce qu'on assure aux arbitres, § que les Etats-Unis n'auraient pas eu de plaintes a adresser relativement a ce
vaisseau. Us n'en auraient pas eu, si M. Adams avait communique en temps utile les
renseignements qu'il pouvait posseder, au lieu des les garder pour lui, jusqu'a six jours
apres le depart du Georgia, plus de trois jours apres celui de FAlar, et si ces reuseigneri
ments eussent ete de nature a prouver une violation actuelle on projetee de la loi."
•Maintenant, il faut remarquer que ce passage commence par poser que les renseignements, auxqnels M. Adams fait allusion dans sa' lettre du 9 avril comme ayant ete
longtemps en possession, etaient les memes qu'il avait communiques au Comte Russell
dans la note qu'il lui avait adressee le 8. Si tel avait et6 redlementle cas, Finsinuation
aurait pu avoir quelque ombre de justice, mais si le contexte du passage transcrit avait
ete donne entierement, on verrait qu'au moment auquel il renvoie, " il n'avait recu encore rien qui fut de nature a servir de base a des poursuites," tandis qu'a la reception plus
tard de ce qui lui parut une preuve plus nette de faits qui se passaient justement alors *OPINIONS   OF   MR.  ADAMS.
19:
distinct evidence of facts just then taking place, he lost not a moment in>
submitting them to the consideration of Her Majesty's government, iu
his note to Earl Bussell of the 8th of April. For the rest, it is probable
Mr. Adams had had too long an experience of the result attending the
transmission of insufficient evidence to be particularly desirous of drawing upon himself the customary replies. If Her Majesty's government
is to be justified at all in the course of the transactions now under consideration, it must be done by assuming the entire responsibility for her
action, or failure to act, rather than by attempting to share it with other
parties, in whom it could not possibly suspect any motive for indifference or neglect.
It thus appears that it was not until the eighth of April, that is, six
days after the escape of the Japan, and three days after the evasion of the
Alar, that Mr. Adams appears to have had within his control the requisite means for making a remonstrance. He then addressed to Earl Bus-
sell the following note:
From information received at this legation, which appears entitled to credit, I
am compelled to the painful conclusion that a steam-vessel has just departed from the
Clyde with the intent to depredate on the commerce of the people of the United States^
She passed there under the name of the Japan, but is since believed to have assumed
the name of the Virginia. Her immediate destination is the island of Alderney, where it
is supposed she may yet be at this moment.
A small steamer called the Alar, belonging to Newhaven, and commanded by Henry
P. Maples, has been loaded with a supply of guns, shells, shot, powder, &c, intended
for the equipment of the Virginia, and is either on the way or has arrived there. It is.
further alleged that a considerable number of British subjects have been enlisted at
Liverpool and sent to serve on board this cruiser.
Should it yet be in the power of Her Majesty's government to institute some inquiry
into the nature of these proceedings in season to establish their character if innocent,
or to put a stop to them if criminal, I feel sure that it would be removing a heavy
burden of anxiety from the minds of my countrymen in the United States.
The difficulty of the situation in writing so long after the execution of the chief portions of the operation objected to is here frankly
il ne perdit pas un moment pour les soumettre a l'examen du gouvernement de sa
Majeste, dans sa note au Comte Russell le 8 avril. Au reste il est probable que M.
Adams avait eu une trop longue experience du resultat qui attendait la communication
de preuves in suffisantes, pour etre particulierement desireux de s'attirer les reponses-
ordinaires. Si enfin le gouvernement de sa Majeste doit etre justifie dans le cours des
transactions qui sont maintenant soumises a notre examen, il faut que ce soit en assu-
mant la responsabilite entiere de sa conduite ou de sa negligence a agir, plutdt qu'en
essayant de la partager avec d'autres parties chez lesquelles on ne peut suspecter
aucun motif d'indifference ou de negligence.
II semble ainsi que ce ne fut que le 8 avril—c'est-a-dire, six jours apres Invasion du
Japan, et trois jours apres celle de FAlar—que M. Adams paralt avoir eu a sa disposition
les moyens necessaires pour faire une remontrance. II adressa alors au Comte Russell
la note suivante:
" D'apres des renseignements recus a la legation qui semblent m6riter toute croyance,
je suis amene a la conclusion penible qu'un steamer vient de sortir de la Clyde avec
Fintention de commettre des depredations contre le commerce des Etats-Unis. H por-
tait ici le nom du Japan, mais on croit, des lors, qu'il a pris le nom de Virginia. Sa destination immediate est File d'Alderney, oh l'on suppose qu'il peut etre encore dans ce
moment.
1 Un petit steamer nomme FAlar, de New Haven, et commande par Henry P. Maples,
a ete charge d'une grande provision de canons, d'obus, de boulets, de poudre, etc.,.
destines k Fequipement du Virginia, et il est en route pour s'y rendre ou il y est arrive..
Oh allegue en outre-qu'un nombre considerable de sujets anglais ont ete enrdles a Liverpool et envoyes pour servir a bord de ce croiseur.
" S'il etait encore au pouvoir du gouvernement de sa Majeste de faire une enquete sur
la nature de ces transactions; a temps pour etablir leur caractere si elles sont innocentes,
ou, pour les empecher si elles sont criminelles, ie suis certain que ce serait 6ter un pesant
fardeau d'anxiete de l'esprit de mes compatriotes aux Etats-Unis."
On reconnalt franchement combien il est difficile d'ecrire si longtemps apres l'execn-
tion des fai*s principaux de l'operation dont il s'agit.   Rien de ce qui 11 tit connu192
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
conceded. Everything known thus far gave no clear indication toward1
the unknown, and the only important affirmation of fact made in the
letter turned out not to be correct.
On the same day this letter was written and sent, Earl Bussell made
his reply. After repeating the substance of the complaint, it proceeds
as follows:
I have to state to you that copies of,your letter were sent without loss of time to the
home department and to the board of treasury, with a request that an immediate inquiry
might be made into the circumstances stated in it, aud that if the result should proved
your suspicions to be well founded, the most effectual measures might be taken which
the law admits of for defeating any such attempts to fit out a belligerent vessel from
British ports.
It is due to the government of Her Majesty to add that all it could do.
under the peculiar circumstances it tried to do. Mr. Adams had pointed
out the island of Alderney as the destination for the meeting of the
Japan and the Altar. This had been to a certain extent confirmed by
the report of the collector of customs at Newhaven, the only correct information which seems to have been at first obtained. Alderney and St.
Malo was the destination specified in the ship's papers.
Misled by this information, Lord Bussell took a step extraordinary,
and thus far exceptional, in the prosecution of preventive measures.
He caused a ship of war to be ordered from Guernsey to Alderney wittr
a view to prevent any attempt that might be made to execute the project of armament within that British jurisdiction. . Unfortunately the '
practical consequence of having been put on this false scent was to furnish the time lost there as a means of more completely carrying into
effect the projected scheme elsewhere.   Even had Her Majesty's government attempted to go further, it could have been no use.   The object'
had been completely gained within the jurisdiction of another sovereignty—the empire of Prance.
In the case presented on the part of the United States it is urged
that Her Majesty's government might have gone so far as to seize the
vessel within the French jurisdiction, and the case of the Terceira expe-
jusqu'alors ne fournissait une. indication claire k l'egard de l'inconnu.   Et la seule..,
affirmation importante faite dans cette lettre setrouvait n'etre pas exacte.
Le meme jour oh cette lettre fut ecrite et envoyee le Comte Russell reportdit. Apres
avoir repete la substance de la plainte, il continue comme suit:
I J'ai a vous exposer que des copies de votre lettre ont 6te envoyees sans perdre de
temps au departement de Finterieur et au conseil de la tresorerie, avec priere qu'une
enquete immediate fu.t faite dans les circonstances qui y sont indiquees, et que, si le
resultat prouvait que vos souppons sont bien fondes, les mesures les plus efficaces que
la loi autorise fussent prises pour empecher toute tentative d'6quiper un vaisseau bel^|
ligerant pour sortir des ports anglais."
II convient d'ajouter en favour du gouvernement de sa Majeste que tout ce qu'il ,-
pouvait faire dans ces circonstances particulieres, il a ess'aye de le faire. M. Adams,;
avait indique File d'Alderney comme le lieu oh le Japan et FAlar devaient se rencontrer.
Ceci avait ete confirme, jusqu'a un certain point, par le rapport du collecteur des
douanes de New Haven, le seul renseignement exact qui semble avoir ete obtenu
d'abord. Alderney et St.-Malo etaient la destination specifiee dans les papiers du vaisr
seau.
Induit en erreur par ce renseignement, Lord Russell fit une demarche extraordinaire,
et jusqu'ici exceptionnelle, dans la poursuite des mesures preventives. H fit qu'un.
vaisseau fat enyoye de Guernesy k Alderney, en vue d'empecher toute tentative qui
aurait pu etre faite d'executer le projet d'armement dans la juridiction anglaise. Mai-;,
heureasement la consequence pratique d'avoir ete mis sur cette fausse piste fut de donner
le temps qui y avait ete perdu pour effectuer plus compietement auleurs le plan promote. M6me si le gonvernement de sa Majeste aVait essaye d'aller plus loin, cela n'aurait
servi k rien. Le but avait 6te entierement atteintdans la juridiction d'une autre puissance souveraine, l'empire des Francais.
Dans l'expose presente de la part des Etats-Unis, on avance que le gouvernement de
sa Majeste aurait pu aller jusqu'_i saisir les vaisseaux dans la juridiction francaise, et !•OPINIONS   OF   MR.   ADAMS.
193
dition is cited as a precedent. But it seems to me that the Government
of the United States would scarcely be ready to concede the right of a
foreign power to settle questions of justice within its jurisdiction without its knowledge or consent.
It may be urged that the opinions of the officers of customs that no
violation of law had been committed in the expedition of the Alar, was
equivalent to a neglect of due diligence.
Upon which it may be remarked, that whether right or wrong at the
date it was given, and with the information then in possession of the
government, there is no reasonable probability that the Alar could
have been seized excepting perhaps in the waters of France.
On the loth of April, Mr. Adams addressed a note to Earl Bussell
covering certain papers which went to prove the manner in which men
had been enlisted in violation of the laws of the kingdom by parties in
Liverpool in co-operation with the insurgent, agents.
In consequence of these and other papers which followed them, Her"
Majesty's government were enabled to take the requisite steps to bring
the chief offender at Liverpool into the courts of justice. The reports
of the trials carried on in the court over which our distinguished colleague presides, are among the papers before us, and they satisfy my
mind entirely in regard to the justice and impartiality with which the
proceedings were conducted. The parties were all convicted, and
though the penalties inflicted were much too light, they appear to have
been thought sufficient to establish the efficiency of the law.
It was in connection with such proceedings as these that Mr. Dudley,
in one of his letters to Mr. Seward, wrote that " the prosecution of these
parties, if conducted vigorously with the view of convicting them, will
do more to break up these expeditions and fitting out of vessels in this
country than anything else."
Upon a careful review of these facts as they appear before me, I cannot perceive that Her Majesty's government has made itself in any way
cas de l'expedition de Terceire est cite comme un precedent. Mais il me semble que le
Gouvernement des Etats-Unis ne serait'guere dispose a reconnaltre le droit d'une puissance etrangere a r6gler des questions de justice dans sa juridiction sans sa connaissance ni son consentement.
Oh peut avancer que Favis des officiers des douanes, qu'il n'y avait eu aucune vio-.
lation de la loi dans l'expedition de FAlar, 6quivalaiit a une negligence " des dues diligences."
A quoi on peut faire remarquer, qu'a tort ou k droit, a la date oh il fut donne et aveo
les renseignements qui etaient alors eu possession du gouvernement, il n'y a nulle
probabilite raisonnable que FAlar efit pu etre saisi, si ce n'est peut-etre dans les eaux
de la France.
Le 15 avril, M. Adams adressa au Comte Russell une note renfermant certains documents qui tendaient a prouver comment des hommes avaient ete enr61es en violation
des lois du royaume pax des personnes de Liverpool en cooperation avec les agents
insurges.
En consequence de ces documents et d'autres qui les suivirent, le gouvernement de
sa Majeste etait mis a meme de prendre des mesures n6cessair.es pour livrer les princi-
paux coupables de Liverpool k la justice. Les comptes-rendus des proces jug6s devant
la cour que preside notre coliegue distingue se trouvent parmi les documents places
devant nous, et ils satisfont entierement mon esprit sous le rapport de la justice-et de
l'impartialite avec lesquelles ces affaires furent conduites. Les parties furent toutes
condamu6es, et quoique les peiues iuflig6es fussent beaucoup trop 16geres, elles semblent
avoir ete jug6es suffisantes pour etablir l'efficacite de la loi. C'est a propos de proc6des
tels que ceux-ci que M. Dudley, dans une de ses lettres a M. Seward, ecrivait'ces mots:
"La poursuite de ces personnes, si elle est men6e vigoureusement en vue de les con-
damner, fera plus que toute autre chose pour faire avorter ces expeditions et Fequipement de vaisseaux dans ce pays."
Dans une revue soigneuse de ces faits, tels qu'ils apparaissent devant moi, je ne puis
trouver que le gouvernement de sa Majeste se soit rendu responsable en aucune maniere
13B194
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
I
liable for the failure to use diligence in this case, under the first rule
prescribed in the treaty of Washington.
The Japan had now changed her name and become the Georgia. The
fraud had been most successfully perpetrated. An insurgent officer, by
the name of Maury, had taken the command of her, and the next thing
we learn is of her depredations on the commerce of the United States.
It is not essential to the present purpose to go into any details of her
cruise outside of the possible limits of liability on the part of Her Majesty's government.
In a report made by Bear\Admiral Sir Baldwin Walker to the secretary of the admiralty, dated 19th August, 1863, appears the following
paragraph:
On the 16th instant, the Confederate States steamer Georgia, Commander Maury,
anchored in this (Simon's) bay.   She requires coals, provisions, and calking.
In a letter addressed by the governor at Cape Town to the duke of
Newcastle, bearing the same date, is the following paragraph:
On the 16th at noon, the Georgia, another confederate war-steamer, arrived' at
Simon's Bay in need of repairs, and is still there.
It may perhaps be my fault, but after a careful search I have been
unable to discover any official report other than these as to the arrivals
the tune of stay, and the treatment of the Georgia during this visit.
Inasmuch as this event was cotemporaneous with the arrival of the
Alabama and her tender the Tuscaloosa, both of which were engrossing the attention of the authorities of the place, it is possible that the
customary detailed report in regard to her may have been omitted.
The fact is at any rate certain that, notwithstanding her fraudulent
escape in defiance of the laws of Great Britain, this vessel was duly
recognized at Capetown as a legitimate vessel belonging to a recognized
belligerent.
In the cases of the Florida and of the Alabama I have already expressed my deep regret that this mode of proceeding should have been
de negligence a exercer diligence, dans ce cas, selon la premiere regie prescrite par lis
traite de Washington.
Le Japan avait change de nom et etait devenu le Georgia.   La fraude avait ete ac-
complie avec le plus grand succes.    Un officier insurge, du nom de Maury, eu avaifS
pris le commandement, et la premiere chose que nous en apprenons, ce sont ses depreg
dations sur le commerce des Etats-Unis.
II n'est pas essentiel pour le but present d'entrsr dans les details de sa croisiere en
dehors des limites possibles de la responsabilite de la part du gouvernement de sa
Majeste.
Dans un rapport _»fc par le vice-amiral, Sir Baldwin Walker, au secretaire de Fami-
raute, date du 19 aoftt 1863, se trouve le paragraphe suivant:
" Le 16 courant, le steamer des etats-confederes, le Georgia, commandant Maury, a
jete l'ancre dans cette baie, (Simon's Bay.) II demande du charbon, des provisions et
de pouvoir etre calfate."
Dans une lettre adressee par le gouverneur de Cape Town au due de Newcastle^!
portant la meme date, se trouve le paragraphe suivant:
"Le 16, a midi, le Georgia, autre vaisseau de guerre confedere, est arrive a Simon's
Bay, ayant besoin de reparations, et il est encore ici."
C'est peut-etre ma faute, mais apres une recherche soigneuse je n'ai pu decouvrir
aucun'autre rapport officiel britannique que ceux-ci sur l'arrivee, le temps de sejour et
le traitement dSGeorgia pendant cette visite.   En tant que ce fait se passait en memo
temps que l'arrivee de l'Alabama et de son tender, le Tuscaloosa, qui tous deux absos|
berent Fattention des autorites de Fendroit, il est possible que le rapport detaillf':
accoutume ait pu etre omis a son egard.
Le fait-est en tout cas certain que malgre son evasion frauduleuse, en depit des lois
de la Grande-Bretagne, ce vaisseau fut dhment reconnu k Cape To wn comme vaisseau
legitime appartenant a un belligeraut reconnu.
Dans les cas du Florida et de l'Alabama, j'ai deja exprime mon profond regret que
etteligne de conduite eut ete adoptee a l'egard de vaisseaux qui s'eiaient rendusOPINIONS   OF  ME.   ADAMS.
1
Qt
O
adopted in regard to vessels which had been guilty of a flagrant violation of the laws of the kingdom.
The right to exclude them is dis
tinctly recognized by Sir Boundell Balmer in a speech made by him in
the House of Commons on the 13th of May, 1864,1 while he assigned as
a chief reason for not exercising it the danger that such a decision
might have an effect of appearing to favor too strongly one side in the
contest. The fear of doing a thing demanded by what appears to be a
paramount duty of upholding the majesty of their laws because it
might possibly appear to lean too much against one party and in favor
of the other, seems to have been the guiding motive to the policy actually adopted. But the question immediately arises whether that party
had, in its extraordinary course of conduct within Her Majesty's dominions, earned any right to such consideration.
Be this as it may, Her Majesty's government decided otherwise, and
admitted the Georgia into the port of Simon's Bay, where she appears
to have remained a fortnight, repairing her decks and receiving supplies and provisions on the footing of a recognized belligerent. It has
been argued that in thus deciding, Her Majesty's government made
itself liable under the second rule, as permitting one of its ports to be
made a base of operations against the United States by a vessel which
had issued from the kingdom in defiance of its laws as a hostile cruiser.
I have given to this view of the matter the most careful consideration; but I regret that I cannot bring myself to concur in it. The vessel escaped from the kingdom, under circumstances which have already
been detailed in this paper, involving no neglect or failure of duty on
behalf of the government. If, on arriving at an English port furnished
with a regular commission as a vessel of a recognized belligerent, Her
Majesty's government determines to recognize her in that character,
however much I may regret it, I cannot call in question her right to do
so on her responsibility as a sovereign power. This is a right I should
not consent to have drawn into question in any case so decided by
coupables d'une violation flagrante des lois du royaume. Le droit de les exclure est
nettement reconnu par Sir Roundell Palmer dans un discours qu'il fit k la Chambre
des communes le 13 mai 1864, tandis qu'il indiquait comme un motif principal pour ne
pas Fexercer le danger qu'une decision semblable pht avoir pour effet de paraltre
favoriser trop fortement une des parties en lutte. La peur de faire une chose exigee
par ce qui semble etre le supreme devoir de maintenir la majeste de ses lois, parce
qu'elle pouvait paraltre incliner trop contre une des parties et en favour de l'autre,
semble avoir ete le mobile dirigeant de sa conduite effectivement adoptee. Mais la
question s'eieve immediatement de savoir si ce parti avait par sa ligne de conduite
extraordinaire dans les etats de sa Majeste merite aucun droit a une semblable consideration. Quoi qu'il en soit, le gouvernement de sa Majeste dedda autrement et
admit le Georgia dans le port de Simon's Bay, ou il semble etre reste une quinzaine,
reparant ses ponts et recevant des subsides et des provisions sur le pied d'un belligerant reconnu.
On a avancequ'en prenant cette decision le gouvernement de sa Majeste s'etait rendu
_ responsable, d'apres la seconde regie, en permettant qu'un de ses ports tut employe
comme base d'operations contre les Etats-Unis par un vaisseau qui etait sorti du
royaume en bravant ses lois comme croiseur ennemi.
J'ai consacre l'examen le plus soigneux a cette maniere d'envisager la question, mais
je regrette de ne pouvoir m'y rattacher. Le vaisseau s'echappa du royaume dans, des
circonstances qui ont ete &6jk developpees dans ce memoire, ne renfermant ni negligence ni omission de devoir de la part du gouvernement. Si, a son arrivee dans un
port anglais, pourvu d'une, commission reguliere comme vaisseau d'un belligerant
reconnu, le gouvernement de sa Majeste dedda de lui reconnaltre ce caractere, quels
que pttissent etre mes regrets, je ne puis mettre en question son droit d'en agir ainsi
sons sa responsabilite comme puissance souveraine. Ceci est un droit que.je ne con-
sentirais pas a laisser mettre en question dans aucun des cas oh les Etats-Unjs auraient
'American Appendix, 10)  5 p. 583.196
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
the United States. It appears to me on the same footing with the
original recognition of belligerency, the primal cause of all these unpleasant questions—a step which I always regretted to have been taken,
but which I never doubted the right of Her Majesty's government to
take whenever it should think proper.
The Georgia, after leaving Simon's Bay, had but a short career. She
proved utterly unsuitable to the service into which she had been forced,
and finally returned to Liverpool, where she was sold, and turned into
a merchant-ship. A question has been raised as to the course of Her
Majesty's government in permitting this to be done within her harbors.
I cannot myself perceive the importance of the question, provided that
she recognized the right of the belligerent to dispute the validity of
such operations. That she did so is certain; for the Georgia, after her
transfer into private hands, was taken on the high seas by the United
States steamer Niagara, and sent to America as a prize, to be disposed
of in regular course of law. A reclamation attempted by the owner, in
a note addressed to Earl Bussell, was met by a reply decisive of the
merits of the case.
In view of all the facts attending this case, and of the considerations
attending them, I am brought to the conclusion that it does not show
any such course on the part of Her Majesty's government as will suffice to impose any responsibility for damages under the terms of the
three rules prescribed by the treaty of Washington.
Vin.—THE SHENANDOAH.
We have now reached the last vessel, in the order of events, which is
saenandqah. presented to this tribunal for its consideration.
It appears clearly, from the papers before us, that the steadily growing energy manifested by Her Majesty's government in preventing the
departure of vessels obviously intended to carry on war had not been
without its effect upon the parties engaged in procuring them.    The seiz-
dedde de meme. II me paralt qu'il en est de m.rae de la premiere reconnaissance de
belligerance, la cause premiere de toutes ces _ questions malheureuses, demarche que.
j'ai toujours regrette que l'on eftt prise, mais que le gouvernement de sa Majeste avait-
le droit de prendre, je n'en ai jamais doute, quand il le jugeait convenable.
Le Georgia, apres avoir quitte Simon's Bay n'etlt qu'une courte carriere. II se
montra tout a fait impropre au service qu'il avait ete force de faire, et revint enfin a
Liverpool, oh il fut vendu et transforme en vaisseau marchand. On a souleve une
question a l'egard de la conduite du gouvernement de sa Majeste, en permettant que
ceci fht fait dans ses ports. Je ne puis comprendre Fimportance de la question,
pourvu qu'il reconnht le droit du belligerant de contester la validite d'operations
semblables. 11 est certain qu'il le fit, car le Georgia, apres son transfert en mains par-
ticulieres, fut pris en haute mer par le steamer des Etats-Unis le Niagara, et envoye
en Amerique comme prise pour en disposer suivant la loi. Une reclamation tentee par
le proprietaire dans une note adressee au Comte Russell recut une reponse qui trancha
la question.
En considerant tous les faits qui se rapportent a ce cas et tout ce qui s'y rattache, je
suis amene a la conclusion qu'il ne temoigne pas de la part du gouvernement de sa
Majeste d'une conduite qui suffise pour imposer aucune responsabilite en dommages
d'apres les termes. des trois regies prescrites par le traite de Washington.
LE SHENANDOAH.
Nous sommes maintenant arrives au dernier vaisseau, dans l'ordre des evenements,
presente k l'examen de ce tribunal.
II ressort. clairemeut des documents places devant nous que l'energie toujours
eroissante manifestee par le gouvernement de sa Majeste, pour emp&cher le depart de
vaisseaux evidemment destines k faire la guerre, n'avait pas ete sans effet sur les personnes qui s'etaient engagees a les fournir.   La saisie des beiiers a vapeur blindesOPINIONS  OF  MR.   ADAMS.
197
ure of the iron clad steam rams, built by Messrs. Laird, seems to have dispelled all further idea of attempting open operations of that description.
Efforts were now directed to the prosecution of schemes that would
elude observation. In the execution of this policy, swift vessels, constructed for commercial purposes, were looked up. And when found
reasonably adapted for conversion into privateers, measures were taken
to procure the control of them so suddenly as to effect their escape from
the British jurisdiction before any means of prevention could be put
into operation.
A skillful combination of the means of supplying au armament and a
crew at some pre-arranged point on the high seas far beyond the British jurisdiction, in a vessel so quickly and secretly pushed out of a
British port as to baffle pursuit, completed .the adventure.
This plan had been attended with complete success in the case of the
Georgia. It was now resorted to with a few variations in the case of
the Shenandoah.
The British steamer Sea-King had been built for a merchant-vessel
and employed in the China trade, during which period she had gained
much reputation for her speed and her sailing qualities. In the year
1864 she appears to have attracted the attention of the insurgent agents
in England, and they proceeded through their customary British affiliations to get her into their hands. On the 20th of September the
purchase and transfer were effected in the port of London. A person by the name of Wright, a British subject, appeared as the owner.
On the 8th of October this vessel cleared from that port in the usual
way for Bombay, without exciting observation. The crew had been
hired for that voyage.
Simultaneously with this movement, a screw-steamer, called the Laurel,
issued from the port of Liverpool, having a considerable number of
passengers on board, and a cargo composed of an armament and ammunition suitable for a vessel of war. Her nominal destination was Mata-
moras, via Nassau.
construits par MM. Laird semble avoir fait evanouir toute idee ulterieure de nouvelle
tentative d'operations de cette nature.
Des lors, on s'efforca de poursuivre des plans qui permissent d'echapper aux observations. Dans la realisation de ce dessein, on chercha des vaisseaux rapides construits
pour des entreprises commerciales. Et quand on les trouvait assez bien adaptes pour
etre eonvertis en corsaires, on prenait des mesures pour les obtenir assez subitement
pour effectuer leur evasion de la juridiction britannique avant qu'aucune mesure
preventive pftt etre mise a execution.
Une habile combinaison des moyens de pourvoir a l'armement et a Fequipement, sur
quelque point fixe d'avance eu haute mer, bien loin de la juridiction anglaise, par un
vaisseau mis hors d'un port anglais assez rapidement et secretement pour dejouer
toute poursuite, compietait Faventure.
Ce plan avait reussi compietement dans le cas du Georgia. On y eut recours, avec
quelques variations, dans le cas du Shenandoah.
Le steamer anglais Sea King avait ete construit pour etre un vaisseau marchand, et
employe au commerce de la Chine, epoque oh il avait acquis une grande reputation
pour sa vitesse et pour ses qnalites comme voilier. Daus l'annee 1864, il paralt'avoir
attire Fattention des agents insurges en Angleterre, et ils chercherent, par leurs affiliations anglaises ordinaires, k l'acquerir. Le 20 septembre, Fachat et le transfert furent
effectues dans le port de Londres. Une personne du nom de Wright, sujet anglais,
apparalt comme le proprietaire. Le 8 octobre, ce vaisseau s'acquitta de ce port en la
maniere ordinaire pour Bombay, sans provoquer d'observations. L'equipage avait ete".
engage pour ce voyage.
Simultanement avec ce mouvement, un steamer k heiice, nomme le Laurel, sortit du
portde Liverpool, ayant un nombre considerable de passagers a bord et une cargaison
composee d'un armement et de muuitious propres a un vaisseau de guerre. Sa destination etait Matamoras, via Nassau.198
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
The true destination of both ships was the vicinity of the island of
Madeira. There they actually met, on or about the 21st of October;
and there the process of transfer of the armament and the men was
effected on the high sea.
This operation had been conducted with a degree of success exceeding that of the Georgia. Even the vigilance of the consul of the United
States at Liverpool had resulted only in the formation of conjectures,
reasonable in themselves, and partially well founded in fact, but unsus-
tained by any positive evidence. That was not obtained until the
return of many of the crew of the Sea-King, who had refused to take
the new departure, when it was disclosed to them by the true commander of the vessel, now called the Shenandoah.
Thus far I have only to repeat the observations I made in the case of
the Georgia. Blacing myself in the position of any neutral power possessing an extensive commercial marine and a large number of ports,
it seems to me that no ordinary degree of diligence could be likely to
avail to prevent the execution of such skillfully-contrived enterprises.
Her Majesty's consul at theport of Teneriffe appears to have done all
that it was in his power to do in the premises. On the arrival of the
Laurel at that place, and learning the state of the facts as given to him
by the parties on board, he prepared a careful report of the same, and
addressed it to Earl Bussell. He also assumed the respoipfibility of
seizing the master of the Sea-King, B. J. Corbett, and sending him home
for trial as having, even though at sea, violated the provisions of the
foreign-enlistment act.
On the 26th of January, 1865, Commander King, of Her Majesty's
ship Bombay, writes to Commodore Sir W. Wiseman.
I copy the essential parts of his letter:
1. I conceive it to be my duty to report to you that a vessel of war
of the Confederate States of America arrived and anchored in Hobson's
Bay yesterday, the 25th instant.
3. Her name is the Shenandoah, a screw-vessel, &c.
La vraie destination des deux navires etait les parages de File de Madere. lis s'y
rencontrerent effectivement vers le 21 octobre, et ils procederent au transfert de l'armement et des hommes en haute mer.
Cette operation avait ete conduite avec un degre de succes qui depassait meme celui
du Georgia. Meme la vigilance du consul des Etats-Unis a Liverpool n'avait abouti
qu'a des conjectures, raisonnables en elles-memes, et en partie bien fondees en fait,
mais non appuyees d'aucune preuve positive. Une preuve de cette nature ne fut
obtenue qu'au retour de plusieurs des hommes de 1'equipage du Sea King, qui avaient
refuse de signer le nouvel engagement quand celui-ci leur avait ete reveie par le vrai
commandant du vaisseau nomme des lors le Shenandoah.
Jusqu'ici, je n'ai qu'a repeter les observations que j'ai faites dans le cas du Georgia.
En me placant dans la position d'une puissance neutre, possedant une marine com-
merciale etendue et un grand nombre de ports, il me semble^^^Mbune diligence ordinaire n'aurait probablement suffi pour empecher l'execution d'entrepri^s si habilement
conduites.
Le consul de sa Majeste du port de Teneriffe semble avoir fait tout ce qu'il etait en
son pouvoir de faire dans ces circonstances. A l'arrivee du Laurel dans ce lieu, et en
apprenant l'etat des faits, comme les lui dirent les personnes a bord, non-seulernent il
en prepara un rapport soigneux adresse au Comte Russell; il assuma aussi la responsabilite de saisir le capitaine du Sea King, P. I. Corbett, et de Fenvoyer en Angleterre
pour y etre juge comme ayant vioie, quoique eu pleine mer, le foreign-enlistment act.
Le 26 Janvier 1865, le commandant King, du vaisseau de sa Majeste le Bombay, a
Hobson's Bay, ecrit au commandant Sir W. Wiseman. Je copie les parties essen-
tielles de sa lettre:
" 1. Je crois qu'il est de mon devoir de vous rapporter qu'un vswseau de guerre des
etats-confederes d'Amerique arriva et jeta l'ancre a Hobson's Bay hier, le 25 courant.
" 3. Son nom est le Shenandoah, vaisseau k heiice, etc.OPINIONS  OF  MR.  ADAMS.
199
4. Her armament consists of eight guns, viz, four 8-inch, (English,)
two 32-pounders, (Whitworth,) and two 12-pounders, intended more
especially for boat service.
5. The crew at present consists only of seventy men, though her
proper complement is one hundred and forty; the men almost entirely
are stated to be either English or Irish.
8. The ship appears to be in good order, her officers a gentlemanly
set of men, in a uniform of gray and gold; but, from the paucity of her
crew at present, she cannot be very efficient for fighting purposes.
9. Leave had been asked by the commander for permission to coal
and repair machinery, &c.
It is to be noted here that, from the statements made by this officer,
it appears he had an opinion clearly formed that, in the condition
this vessel was in at the time she arrived in port, and with such a limited
crew, she could not be efficient as a fighting ship.
The application mad« by the master of the Shenandoah to the governor of the colony, Sir C. H. Darling, was in these words:
I have the honor to announce to your excellency the arrival of the Confederate States
"steamer Shenandoah, under my command, in Port Philip this afternoon, and also to
communicate that the stealer's machinery requires repairs, aud that I am in want of
coals.
I desire your excellency to grant permission that I may make the necessary repairs
and supply of coals, to enable me to get to sea as quickly as possible.
It is to be noted that the object here mentioned was to get to sea,
without the specification of any port of destination.
On the 26th of January, Mr. Francis, commissioner of trade and customs, by direction of the governor, Sir Charles Darling, addressed a letter
to the commander, Waddell, of which the essential part is as follows:
In reply, I have received the instructions of Sir Charles Darling to "state that he is
willing to allow the necessary repairs to the Shenandoah, and the coaling of the ves
14. Son armement consiste en huit canons, savoir, quatre de huit pouees anglais
deux de trente-deux Whitworth, et deux de douze, destines plus sp6cialement au service des embarcations.
" 5. L'equipage n'est maintenant que de soixante-dix hommes, quoique son total
doive etre de cent quarante; les hommes sont presque tous, (fit-on, anglais ou
irlandais.
" 8. Le vaisseau bon paralt en etre etat; les officiers sont un corps de messieurs
commeil faut, en uniforme gris et or; mais a cause du petit nombre de ses hommes
d'equipage en ce moment, il ne peut pas etre bien capable de se battre.
" 9. Permission a ete demandee par le commandant de faire du charbon et de reparer
sa machine," etc.
H faut remarquer ici que, d'apres les renseignements donnes par cet. officier, il paralt
que son opinion etait nettement formee que, dans l'etat oh etait ce vaisseau a l'epoque
ou il arriva dans le port, et avec un equipage si peu nombreux, il n'etait pas capable
de jouer le r61e d'un vaisseau de combat.
La demande faite par le capitaine du Shenandoah au gouverneur de la colonie, Sir
C. H. Darling, etait con9ue dans ces termes:
" J'ai l'honneur d'annoncer avotre excellence l'arrivee du steamer des etats-conf_der6s
le Shenandoah, sous mon commandement, a Port Philip, cette apres-midi, et aussi de
communiquer que sa machine exige des reparations et que j'ai besoin de charbon.
" Je desire que votre excellence m'accorde la permission de faire les reparations
necessaires et les provisions de charbon pour que je puisse prendre la mer le plus t6t
possible."
H faut remarquer que le but ici mehtionne etait de prendre la mer, sans indiquer
aucun port de destination.
Le26 Janvier M. Francis, commissaire du commerce et des douanes, sur l'ordre du
gouverneur, Sir Charles Darling, adressa une lettre au commandant Waddell, dont la
partie essentielle est comme il suit:
"En reponse, j'ai recu pour instructions, de Sir Charles Darling, de vous dire qu'il
est dispose a accorder les reparations necessaires au Shenandoah, et Fapprovisionne-200
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
sel being at once proceeded with, and that the necessary directions have been given
accordingly.
At the satne time Mr. Francis communicated to this officer a copy of
the general orders of the Duke of Newcastle, in regard to what is called
the twenty-four hours rule, and likewise those embraced in a letter
of Earl Bussell to the Duke of Newcastle, of the 31st January, 1862,
covering regulations applicable to all questions ordinarily arising out of
the arrival of similar vessels.
On the 26th, the 27th, and 28th of January, Mr. Blanchard, the consul
of the United States at Melbourne, addressed to Sir Charles Darling
three successive letters, protesting against the recognition of this vessel
as belonging to a belligerent, on the ground of her origin, her eonver-
O O O 7 O C_> 7
sion at sea, and her actual condition.
On the 30th of January, his excellency states to the council of the
colony:
That he had replied to the United States consul to the effect that, having given au
attentive consideration to his letter, and having consulted with the law-officers of the
Crown, he had come to the decisionjthat the government of this colony were bound to
treat the Shenandoah as a ship of war belonging to a belligerent power.
His excellency then consults the council on the only point upon which he thought
any doubt could arise, viz, whether it would be expedient to call upon the lieutenant
commanding the Shenandoah to show his commission from the government of the Con.
federate States, authorizing him to take command of that vessel for warlike purposes.
After a brief consultation, a majority of his advisers tender their opinion thati..;
would not be expedient to do so.
I do not find, on the part of Her Majesty's government, any notice of
this decision among the papers before us. Thus, it appears that
once more it had been determined to sanction a proceeding known to
under circumstances which could not fail, and did not fail, to entail upon
its supporters the heaviest kind of responsibilities.
ment de charbon du vaisseau, auquel on peut proceder de suite, et que les ordres neees-1
saires ont ete donnes en consequence."
En meme temps,,K Francis communiquait a cet officier un exemplaire des ordres
generaux du due de Newcastle sur ce qu'on appelle la regie des vingt-qnatre heures, et
aussi ceux contenus dans une lettre du Comte Russell au due de Newcastle, du 31 Janvier 1862, renfermant des regies applicables k toutes les questions que soulevait ordi-
nairement l'arrivee de vaisseaux semblables.
Le 26, le 27 et le 28 Janvier, M. Blanchard, consul des __itats-Unis a Melbourne,
adressa a Sir Charles Darling trfe lettres successives, protestaut contre la reconnaissance de ce vaisseau comme appartenant a un belligerant, a cause de son origine, de sa
transformation en mer et de sa condition actuelle.
Le 30 Janvier, son excellence expose au conseil de la colonie:
" Qu'il avait repondu au consul des Etats-Unis en substance, qu'ayant donne une
attention serieuse a ces lettres, et ayant consulte les 'law-officers' de la couronne, il
avait decide que le gouvernement de cette colonie etait oblige de traiter le Shenandoah
comme vaisseau de guerre appartenant a un pouvoir belligerant.
I Son excellence consulte alors le conseil sur le seul point sur lequel il pensait qu'un
doute pht s'eiever, a savoir, s'il serait convenable d'inviter le lieutenant commandant
le Shenandoah k montrer sa commission du gouvernement des etats-confederes Fau-.
torisant a prendre le commandement de son vaisseau pour des projets guerriers.
"Apres une breve deliberation, une majorite de son conseil donna son avis qu'il ne
serait pas a propos de le faire."
II ne se trouve de la part du gouvernement de sa Majeste aucune trace de cetto
decision dans les documents qui sont devant nous. Ainsi il paralt qu'une fois de plus ou
dedda de sanctionner un acte connu pour avoir ete execute en defi des lois de la Grande-
Bretagne, et des promesses du gouvernement de maintenir une stricte neutralite dans le
conflit. Le principe que le succes sanetionne une fraude avait ete de nouveau ratifie, dans-
des circonstances qui ne pouvaient pas manquer et qui ne manquerent pas d'attirer
sur ses partisans la responsabilite la plus lourde.OPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
201
Eor, in the series of consequences that happened at Melbourne, it
was no more than natural to expect that the parties guilty of the first
offense should be likely to resort to others of the same nature whenever
there should appear that any advantages were to be gained by it. The
authorities at Melbourne seem at first to have acted as if the baptism
of the vessel into a new name had, in their eyes, washed it white of all
its past sins. They were destined to learn a different lesson, but nobody
seems to have repented, with the exception, perhaps, of the governor
himself, whose latest significant declaration on that subject I shall have-
occasion to notice hereafter.1
The application of the insurgent officer Waddell for leave to make-
repairs and get supplies was made on the 25 th of January. Five
days passed, and he had just discovered, from an examination made by
a diver, that repairs were necessary under the water-line, which would
require that the vessel should be placed on the government slip, thereto continue not more than ten days. Meanwhile he had not yet bethought himself to give to the authorities, who had requested it, any
report as to the quantity and the nature of the supplies which he-
desired.
Thus delays were interposed, for one reason or other, until the 18th of
February, when the vessel sailed.
The commander had in this way managed to secure a period of twenty-
three days, during which time he could set in operation the means of
starting on his projected expedition in an effective manner.
It should here be observed that, in all his movements, he was much;
favored by the almost universal sympathy of the residents at Melbourne
and the colony. Whatever he could ask that was permissible they
would enthusiastically furnish. Whatever he dared to do that was not,
they were indisposed to perceive or to disclose.
Under these circumstances, there cannot be a. doubt that, during all
Car, dans la serie des effets qui se produisaient a Melbourne, il n'etait que natureL
d'attendre que les personnes coupables de cette offense a Forigine recourraient probablement k d'autres moyens de la meme nature toutes les fois qu'il paraltrait qu'un but
utile pourrait etre atteint de cette maniere. Les autorites de Melbourne semblent'
d'abord avoir agi comme si le bapteme de ce vaisseau d'un nouveau nom Favait purifie-
de tous ses peches passes a leurs yeux. Le destin avait uue autre legon a leur appren-
dre, mais personne ne semble s'etre repenti, k l'exception peut-etre du gouverneur lui-
meme, dont j'aurai occasion de mentionner ci-apres la derniere declaration significative.
La demande de Fofficier insttrge, Waddell, qu'il lui fut permis de faire des reparations-
et d'obtenir des provisions, fut faite le 25 Janvier. Cinq jours se passerent, et il venait
de decouvrir, par un examen fait par un plongeur, que des reparations etaient necessaires sous la ligne de flottaison, ce qui exigerait que le vaisseau fht place sur le ber du
gouvernement pour n'y rester que dix joufs. En attendant, il n'avait pas encore songe
a donner aux autorites, qui l'avaient demande, un rapport sur la quantite et la nature
des subsides qu'il desirait.
Ainsi des dllais intervinrent, pour une raison ou pour une autre, jusqu'au 18 fevrier,
ou le vaisseau partit.
Le commandant avait manoeuvre de cette fagon pour s'assurer une periode de vingt-
trois jours, pendant laquelle il put mettre a execution les moyens de partir pour son
expedition projetee d'une maniere effective.
II faut remarquer ici que dans tous ces mouvements il fut extremement favoxise par
la sympathie presque universelle des habitants de Melbourne et de la colonie. Quoi
qu'il'demandat de choses permises, ils voulaient bien les lui fournir avec enthousiasme..
Quoi qu'il osat faire d'injusto, ils n'etaient pas disposes a le voir ni a le decouvrir.
Dans ces circonstances, on ne peut doubter que, pendant tout cet intervalle de temps,
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 722.202
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
this interval of time, he was constantly busy in secretly obtaining additions to his crew.   This was indispensable to his ulterior operations.
Had the matter depended on the energy of the authorities and population of Melbourne alone to prevent this, he would have had all he
wanted without a word of notice. UnlucMly for him, he found the
consul of the United States, Mr. Blanchard, on the watch to check and
expose his proceedings by all the means in his power. On the 10th of
February, that officer addressed a letter to the governor inclosing the
deposition of John Wlpams. In it, this witness affirmed that, on the
Monday previous, there had, been fifteen or twenty men concealed in
different parts of the ship, who had gone on board since her arrival
sixteen days before.
This statement it is material to connect with a part of the report made
by Captain Bayne to the authorities on that same day. He had been
instructed to make a careful examination of the vessel. In his report
he has this passage:
There appears to be a mystery about her forehold, for the foreman of the patent slip,-
when asked to go down to that spot to measure her for the cradle, was informed he
could not get to the skin at that place. The hatches were always kept on, and the
foreman states that he was informed they had all their stuff there.1.
Another witness, obtained by Mr. Blanchard, named Walter J. Madden, testified that, when he left the vessel on the 7th of February,
"there were men hid in the forecastle of the ship and two working in
the galley, all of whom came on board of said vessel since her arrival
in that port; that the officers pretend they do not know that said men
are so hid."
On the 14th of February Mr. Blanchard sent another deposition, of a
man named Herman Wicke, specifically naming one person as having
come on board.   These are his words :
The rations in Hobson's Bay are sent out by the master-at-arms, who gives them to
Quartermaster Vickiugs, and this latter brings them to the galley to be cooked, by
il ne fat constamment a Foeuvre pour obtenir secretement une augmentation considerable de son equipage.    Ceci etait indispensable pour ses operations ulterieures.
S'il eht dependu de l'energie des autorites et de la population de Melbourne seuleJ|
ment de Fempecher, il aurait eu tout ce dont il avait besoin sans un mot de critique-
Malheureusement pour lui, il trouva le consul des Etats-Unis, M. Blanchard, aux
aguets, pour reprimer et pour devoiler-, par tous les moyens en son pouvoir, ses pro-
cedes illegaux. Le 10 fevrier, il adressa une lettre au gouverneur, renfermant la
deposition de John Williams. Dans celle-ci, ce temoin affirmait que le lundi precedent il y avait eu quinze ou vingt hommes caches dans differentes parties du vaisseau,
qui etaient aliees a bord depuis son arrivee, seize jours auparavant.
11 est essentiel de rapprocher cette affirmation d'un paragraphe d'un rapport fait ce
meme jour par le capitaine Payne aux autorites. H avait recu l'ordre d'exaininer
soigneusement le vHsseatt.   Dans son rapport se trouve ce passage:
| II semble qu'il y a un mystere a l'egard de sa cale d'avant, car le contre-maltre du
ber patente, lorsqu'on lui demanda d'y descendre pour le mesurer en vue de le mettre
sur le berceau, fut informe tt'il ne pouvait pas arriver jusqu'a la coque en cet endroit.
Les panneaux de Fecoutille etaient toujours fermes, et le contre-maltre depose qu'on
lui a dit qu'ils y avaient toutes leurs affaires."
Un autre temoin, trouve par M. Blanchard, nomme Walter G. Madden, deposa que
lorsqu'il quitta le vaisseau, le 7 fevrier, il y avait des hommes caches dans le gaillard
d'avant du vaisseau, et deux quSravaillaient dans la cuisine; tous ils etaient venus k
bord du dit vaisseau depuis son arrivee dans ce .port; que les officiers pretendent ne
pas savoir que ces dits hommes soient ainsi caches.
Le 14 fevrier, M. Blanchard envoya une autre deposition d'un homme nomme Herman
Wicke, indiquant, par son nom specialement, une personne comme etant venue a bord.
Voici ses paroles:
I Les rations a Hobson's Bay sont servies par le capitaine d'armes qui les donne au
quartier-maitre Vicking, et ce dernier les porte a la cuisine pour y etre cuites par un
1 British Appendix, vol. 1, p. 557.OPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
203
cook known by the name of Charley; that said cook Charley was not on board the
Shenandoah on her arrival in the bay; he went on board since her arrival, and he
told me he would join the ship as cook; that he dared not to do it in port, but that he
would do it when proceeding outwards; that I also saw said cook take rations to a
number of men concealed iu the forecastle, who went on board since her arrival in
Hobson's Bay.
This testimony was laid before the law-officers, who deemed the first
deposition by itself sufficient evidence to lay informations against the
man enlisted, and this appears to have prompted the council, not to
take any proceedings against the commander, but to direct an inquiry
to be made when he would be ready to go away.1
It was the tempted on which indignation was to be expended. The
true cause of the violation of law was to go his way in peace.
On the heels of this information came a report from the police department that twenty men had been discharged from the vessel since her
arrival in port.
If this report was correct, then her crew, according to the report of
Captain Bayne, must have been reduced to fifty men.
On such a basis she could scarcely have ventured on any hostile
cruise. It seems tolerably plain that the object of supplying this deficiency was kept in view from the first.
The detective proceeded to state that the captain intended to ship
forty hands, to be taken ou during the night, and to sign articles when
outside the Heads. He wanted foreign seamen only; but, if English
were to be taken, they must assume a foreign name.
Further information from other sources given on the same day raised
the number of men actually engaged to sixty.
It thus appears that the authorities at Melbourne were, as early as
the 13th, fully apprised of what was the movement of the commander,
and in a situation to adopt energetic measures of prevention, if they
should think proper.
cuisinier connu sous le nom de'Charley'; le dit cuisinier 'Charley' n'etait pas a
bord du Shenandoah a son arrivee dans la baie; il vint a bord depuis son arrivee et me
dit qu'il voulait prendre du service sur le vaisseau comme cuisinier; qu'il n'osait pas le
faire dans le port, mais qu'il le ferait lorsque le vaisseau sortirait. J'ai vu aussi le dit
cuisinier porter des rations a des hommes caches dans le gaillard d'avant, qui'vinrent
a bord depuis son arrivee a Hobson's Bay."
Ce temoignage fut soumis aux "law-officers," qui jugerent la premiere deposition
preuve suffisante par elle-meme pour decerner un mandat d'arret contre les hommes
enrdies, et ceci paralt avoir engage le conseil, non pas k prendre aucune mesure contre
le commandant, mais a ordoner qu'une enquete fht faite pour savoir quand il serait
pret a partir.
Ce fut sur ceux qui avaient ete seduits que Findignation devait se deverser; le veritable auteur de la violation de la loi devait s'en aller en paix.
• Immediatement apres ce mandat d'arret, vint un rapport du departement de police,
que vingt hommes avaient quitte le vaisseau depuis son arrivee dans le port.
Si ce rapport etait exact, son equipage alors, d'apres le rapport du capitaine Payne,
doit avoir ete reduit a cinquante hommes.
Sur une telle base, il pouvait a peine s'aventurer dans aucune croisiere hostile.
L'agent de police dit ensuite que le capitaine se proposa de recruter quarante
hommes, qui devaient monter a bord de nuit et signer les engagements quand ils sorai-
ent hors des " Heads." n ne voulait que des marins etrangers, mais, s'il fallait prendre
des Anglais, ceux-ci devaient adopter un nom etranger.
Des renseignements ulterieurs, d'autres sources, donnes le meme jour, elevaient le
nombre des hommes effectivement engages k soixante.
II paralt ainsi que les autorites de Melbourne etaient, des le 13, pleinement informees
de ce que faisait le commandant, et en etat d'adopter des mesures de prevention, si elles
le jugeaient convenable.
1 British Appeddix, vol. 1, p. 521.204
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
The only measure which appears actually to have been taken was to
•issue a warrant against the man Charley.
The officer charged with the warrant proceeded to the steamer in
which the man was supposed to be. The commander was not on board.
The officer next in charge at once refused to give him any assistance,
and forbid his going over the ship.
The next day he returned, and applied to the commander himself.
That officer is reported to have used these words: 11 pledge you my
word of honor, as an officer and a gentleman, that I have not any one
on board, nor have I engaged any one, nor will I while I am here."
How is this evidence to be reconciled to all the previous testimony,
and the suspicious circumstance mentioned by Captain Bayne ?
The rest of the evidence of the boarding-officer is quite important,
though not essential to transfer to this paper. The whole is accessible
in the first volume of the Appendix to the British Case. The issue of
the application was, that the commander absolutely refused to let the
officer look over the ship for himself. On a second demand of a more
pressing kind, he again refused, and added that | he would fight his
ship rather than allow it"—a threat as absurd in his then situation as
it was offensive to the authorities of the colony.
The governor in council, on receiving the news of this open defiance of
all recognized authority, at once took notice of it by issuing a prohibition to all the subjects of the colony of giving further aid or assistance
to the vessel then on the slip, which practically exemplified in an instant
the folly of the insurgent officer's proceeding.
Had the authorities persevered in this course, it is altogether likely
that the commander, Waddell, would have ultimately been compelled to
abandon all his schemes of illegal outfit, and with it perhaps the enterprise he was meditating.
Unfortunately, they listened to weaker counsels. They appealed
to the officer to reconsider his determination. The letter containing
this appeal was delivered to him on the evening of the 14th.   He an-
La seule mesure qui semble avoir ete prise effectivement fut de decerner un mandat
d'arret contre " Charley."
L'officier charge du mandat se rendit au steamer oh Fhomme etait suppose etre.    Le
commandant n'etait pas a bord.   L'officier eu charge au-dessous de lui refusa de suite 1
de lui aider en aucune maniere, et lui defendit de monter sur le vaisseau.
Le lendemain, il revint et s'adressa au commandant lui-mSme. On rapporte que cet
officier dit ces mots : " Je vous donne ma parole d'honneur d'officier et de gentilhomme
que je n'ai personne a. bord, que je n'ai engage personne et que je n'engagerai personne
pendant que je serai ici."
Comment accorder cette preuve avec tout le temoignage precedent, et avec les circonstances suspectes mentionnees par le capitaine Payne ?
Le reste dn temoignage de Fofficier qui alta a bord est tres-important, quoiqu'il ne soit
pas essentiel de Fintroduire ici. On peut trouver le tout dans le premier volume de l'appendice du "British case." Le resultat de la demande fut que le commandant refusal
absolument de permettre k l'agent de chercher sur le vaisseau par lui-meme. A une
seconde demande, d'une nature plus instante, il refusa de nouveau et ajouta: "Qu'il
livrerait bataille plutot que de le permettre ;" menace aussi absurde, dans sa situation;::
qu'offensante envers les autorites de la colonie.
Le gouverneur, en conseil, en recevant la nouvelle de ce defi ouvert de toute autorite
reconnue, en prit note de suite, en emettant une defense a tous les sujets de la colonie
de donner aucune aide ou assistance ulterieure au vaisseau, alors sur le ber, ce qui
montra d'une maniere pratique, en un instant, la folie de la conduite de l'officier insurge.
Si les autorites aptient persevere dans cette maniere d'agir, il est probable que le
commandant Waddell aurait ete enfin force d'abandonner tous ses plans d'equipement
illegal, et avec cela, peut-etre, Fentreprise qu'il meditait.
Malheureusement, ils pr6ti_rent Foreille k des conseils plus faibles. Ils en appeierent
a Fofficier pour qu'il reflechlt sur sa determination. La lettre contenant cette invitation lui fut remise le soir du 14.   II y repondit eu protestant contre les obstacles misOPINIONS  OF  MR.   ADAMS.
205
: swered it, protesting against the obstruction thus put in his way.   The
! first sentence is all that is nlaterial in this connection.   It is in these
words:
" I have to inform his excellency the governor that the execution of the warrant was
not refused, as no such person as the one therein specified was on board."
There were two falsehoods in this sentence. The reason assigned
could not explain the fact of the refusal. Scarcely was the letter
placed in the hands of the messenger, when the attention of the water-
police was attracted to the fact that four men were leaving the Shenandoah in a boat pulled by two watermen. They were headed off and
arrested. And then it was discovered that the man Charley, so positively alleged not to have been on board, was one of the four.
Yet, strange as it may seem, the fact of this discovery of a clear violation of the foreign-enlistment act was communicated to the perpetrator in a letter which, by way of compensation, announced to him that
the injunction upon British subjects to withhold all aid to his vessel was
thenceforth taken off.
The reason assigned for this change of policy was that, in the situation
of the vessel on the slip, a sudden storm might endanger its safety, and
in that event the authorities would be made responsible for the consequences of their order.
It was a suggestion skillfully made to attain its purpose, and it
alarmed the governor enough to induce him to withdraw his prohibition.
The reply of the commander is at once fawning, insolent, and untruthful. He thanks the governor for his observance of the rights of belligerents, to which he had done everthing to forfeit a claim. He disavows
a knowledge of the fact that the men were there, though it is clearly to
my mind the true reason accounting for his absurd threat to fight
rather than to show the interior of the ship ; and, lastly, he vapors about
the disrespectful and insulting tone used towards him, which he should
take an early opportunity of bringing to the notice of the Bichmond
government.
ainsi sur son chemin. Le premier paragraphe est tout ce qui est utile sous ce rapport.
11 est concu en ces termes:
"J'ai a informer son excellence le gouverneur que l'execution du mandat d'arret n'i_
pas ete refusee, parce qu'aucune personne semblable a celle qui y etait specifi.ee n'etait
k bord."
II y avait deux mensonges dans cette phrase. La raison indiquee ne pouvait pas
expliquer le fait du refus. A peine la lettre etait-elle remise en mains du -messager que
Fattention de la police des eaux etait attiree sur le fait que quatre hommes quittaient
le Shenandoah dans uu bateau conduit par deux bateliers. Ils furent devances et
arretes, puis on decouvrit que " Charley," si positivement declare n'avoir pas ete k bord,
etait un des quatre.
Mais, quelqu'etrange que cela puisse paraltre, le fait de cette decouverte d'une violation manifesto du foreign-enlistment act fut communique au coupable dans une lettre
qui, comme compensation, lui annonca que Finjouction faite aux sujets anglais de
s'abstenir de donner aide a son vaisseau Itait desormais retiree. La raison indiquee
pour ce changement de politique etait que, dans la situation du vaisseau sur le ber-
ceau, un orage subit pourrait le mettre en danger. Et dans ce cas, les autorites seraient
rendues responsables des consequences- de leur ordre.
C'etait une suggestion habilement presentee pour atteindre son but, et elle alarma
le gouverneur assez pour l'engager a retirer sa defense.
La reponse du commandant est a la fois basse, insolente et mensongere. II remercie
le gouverneur de son observation des droits des belligerants, apres avoir tout fait pour
perdre le droit d'y pretendre. H desavoue toute connaissance du fait que les hommes
y fussent, quoiqu'il soit clair pour moi que c'est la vraie raison qui peut expliquer son
absurde menace de livrer bataille plutdt que de montrer l'interieur du vaisseau, et enfin il fait le fanfaron sur le ton irrespectueux et insul-tant employe a, son 6gard, qu'il
saisira la premiere occasion de porter a la connaissance du gouvernement de Richmond206
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Simultaneously with the dispatch of this letter, this officer addresses
to the attorney-general of the colony the following inquiry:
" Be pleased to inform me if the Crown claims the sea to be British waters three miles
from the Port Philip Head-lights, or from a straight line drawn from Point Lonsdale
and Schanch."
The audacity of this application to that particular officer is its most
marked characteristic. The purpose of it could scarcely fail to have
been penetrated. It could only have had reference to the possibility of
taking on board of his ship at the nearest point outside of British waters
such men as he had already engaged to enlist with him. Tet the attorney-general seems not to hafe been stimulated by it to take any new
precautions. He contented himself with sending an evasive answer
that yet clearly betrays his own sense of the nature of the inquiry.
At this moment the captain of the Shenandoah had forfeited all possible right to respect from the authorities, whether as an officer or as a
man. They were fully informed of the fraud which had entered into
the origin of his undertaking. They were enlightened in regard to his
continuous efforts to violate Her Majesty's laws in their port, and they
were warned that detection in one instance had not availed to deter
him from meditating more. Tet, so far as the papers before us are concerned, these considerations do not seem to have produced any other
effect than a desire to get rid of him as soon as possible by supplying!
him with all he asked.
The consequences were no other than could have naturally been expected. Ko vigilance had been exercised in preventing the commander's
operations, and the boats which took out the people who had been
enlisted beforehand had it all their own way. There is not a reasonable
doubt that he carried away from Melbourne at least twenty-eight of
these men.
An attempt has been made to draw a parallel between this enlistment
and that supposed to have been made by the commander of the Kear-
sarge at Cork.   But it appears to fail in many respects, the most impor-.
Simultanement avec l'expedition -de cette lettre, cet officier adresse a l'attorney-
general de la colonie la question suivante:.
" Ayez la bonte de m'infbrmer si la couronne envisage que la mer soit eaux anglaises1]
a trois milles du phare de Port Philip Head, ou d'une ligne droite tiree de Point Lonsdale et de Schanch."
L'audace de' cette demande, k cet officier en particnlier, est son trait caracteristique
le plus marque. Le but pouvait k peine manquer d'en etre compris. Elle ne pouvait
se rapporter qa'k la possibilite de prendre a bord de son vaisseau, au point le plus
proche, hors des eaux anglaises, autant d'hommes qu'il en avait engage a s'enrdler avec
lui. Et cependant, l'attorney-general ne semble pas avoir ete pousse par cela k prendre aucune nouvelle precaution. II' se contenta d'envoyer une reponse evasive qui
Kiahit pourtant clairement son propre sentiment sur la nature de la demande.
A ce moment, le capitaine du Shenandoah avait perdu tout droit possible au respect
des autorites, soit comme officier, soit comme homme. Elles etaient pleinement •
informees de la fraude qui s'etait introduite dans l'origine de son entreprise. Elles. 1
etaient edairees sur ses efforts continus pour violer les lois de sa Majeste dans leur
port, et elles etaient averties que, surpris une fois, il ne s'etait pas abstenu d'en
mediter davantage. Mais, autant que les documents places devant nous s'y rapportent,
ces considerations ne semblent pas avoir produit d'autre effet qu'un desir d'etre
debarrasse" de lui le plus t6t possible, en lui fournissant tout ce qu'il demandait. Les
consequences ne furent pas autres que celles que l'on aurait pu naturellement attendre.
Aucune vigilance n'avait ete exercee pour emp£cher les operations du commandant, et
les bateaux qui emmenerent les hommes enrdies auparavant eurent le chemin libre. II
n'y a pas de doute raisonnable qu'ils emmenerent de Melbourne au moins vingt-huit
de ces hommes.
On a essaye de tirer un paralieie entre cet enr61ement et celui que l'on suppose avoir
ete fait par le commandant du Kearsarge a Cork.   Mais il semble pecher sur plusieurs-OPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
207
tant of which is this, that Captain Winslow, after he got out of British
waters, discovered the men,"and took the trouble to bring them back
to Cork.   The other never thought of reparation for his offense.
His vessel was one of the swiftest in sailing known in the records of
seamanship, and therefore stood in little need of coal. The supply she
had brought unexhausted to the port was large. Yet she obtained as
much more as she could carry. No questions seem to have been asked
as to the nearest port of destination. So far as I can gather from the
evidence, it appears that, this vessel was completely supplied at Mel-,
bourne with all she wanted for a cruise of depredation continued for
many months. And, worst of all, she obtained at this port a complement of her crew, without which she could have done nothing.
An attempt has been made to weaken the force of the testimony given
by Temple on this matter. It does not seem to have materially shaken
the belief in it of Sir C. H. Darling, the governor, whose only fault, so
far as I have been able to observe, was that of listening too much to
the weak counsels of parties sympathizing more than was becoming
with the cause of these malefactors. When the deposition was submitted by Her Majesty's government to his consideration in I860, lie
explained some of the incidents referred to, without contesting the truth
of any. But his most significant comment was the last, which is in
these words:
"Having expressed to you in my dispatches, to which you refer, my belief that Captain Waddell .had, notwithstanding his honorable protestations, flagrantly violated the
neutrality he was bound to observe in respect to the shipment of British citizens to
serve on board his vessel, I have read without surprise, though with deep regret, the
long list of names furnished by Mr. Temple, which completely proves that this belief
was justly founded."
The dispatches referred to in this extract I have not been able to
discover among the papers presented to us on the part of G-reat Britain.
They are not necessary, however, to prove how utterly fruitless were
the attempts, steadily persevered in to the last, to bolster up the
points, dont le plus important est que le capitaine Winslow, apres etre sorti des eaux
anglaises, decouvrit les hommes et p'rit la peine de les reconduire a Cork. L'autre ne
pensa jamais k faire reparation pour son offense.
Son vaisseau etait un des plus rapides voiliers connus dans les annales de la marine,
et par consequent n'avait besoin que de peu de charbon. La provision qu'il avait
apportee inepuisee dans le port etait grande, et cependant il en obtint autant qu'il
pouvait eu porter. Nulle question ne semble lui avoir ete faite sur le plus prochain
port de destination. Autant que je puis en juger par les preuves, il paralt que ce vaisseau fut compietement approvisionne a Melbourne de tout ce dont il avait besoin pour
une croisiere de depredations continued pendant plusieurs mois. Et, le pire de tout, il
obtint de ce port un complement de son equipage, sans lequel il n'aurait rien pu fake-
On a fait une tentative pour affaiblir la force de ce temoignage. Elle ne paralt pas
avoir beaucoup ebranie la confiance qu'y ajoutait Sir Charles H. Darling, le gouverneur,
dont la seule faute, autant que j'ai ete a meme de le remarquer, fut de preter trop
Foreille aux faibles conseils de personnes sympathisant plus qu'il n'etait convenable
avec la cause de ces malfaiteurs. Lorsque la deposition de Temple fut soumise k son
examen, en 1866, il expliqua quelques-uns des incidents qui s'y rapportaient, sans con-
tester la verite d'aucun d'eux. Mais sa remarque la plus significative fut la derniere,
qui est congue en ces termes:
"Vous ayant exprime, dans les depeches auxquelles vous faites allusion, ma conviction que le capitaine Waddell avait, malgre ses honorables protestations, vioie d'une-
maniere flagrante la neutralite qu'il etait tenu d'observer, par Fenr61ement de citoyens
anglais pour servir a bord de son vaisseau, j'ai lu sans surprise, mais avec un profbnd
regret, la longue liste de noms fournie par M. Temple, qui prouve pleinement que cette
conviction etait bien fondee."
Je n'ai pas pu decouvrir, parmi les documents qui nous sont presentes de la part de
a Grande-Bretagne, les depeches auxquelles il est fait allusion dans ce passage. Elles
ne sont cependant pas necessaires pour prouver combien les tentatives faites avec une-208-
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
•character of the insurgent commander for veracity.    Ou the other hand/
tbe effort was great, and successful at the time, to destroy the credit
of Temple's deposition.   Tet, on a calm comparison of the evidence of
the two, with testimony received from without, I am convinced that
Temple was far the most worthy of belief.
In truth, Her Majesty's government had entered upon a wrong path
at the outset, in recognizing the original fraud, and their adherence te'
it only complicated the obstacles to extrication. For the depredations'
on the hardy and innocent seamen earning an honest living in the
most hazardous of all enterprises on the ocean continued long after the-
last spark of belligerent pretensions had been extinguished in America.-
It seems to me that Her Majesty's government and their authorities!
of Melbourne are clearly to be held responsible. No such cruise could
have been made without the assistance derived from Melbourne as af
base of operations. Instead of attempting to counteract the strong cur-i
reut of popular sympathy prevailing in all classes in that settlement,
the authorities either weakly yielded to it, or themselves co-operatedl
with it, at least so far as could be done by sluggish indifference.
Hence, it is my conclusion that, from the time of the departure of the-'
Shenandoah from Melbourne, the government of Great Britain, having*
failed to fulfill the obligations of the second rule specified for the gov-?
vernment of the arbitrators under the provisions of the YIth article of the*
treaty of Washington, has rendered itself liable for all the damages to
the United States subsequently incurred thereby.
IX.—THE SUMTER.
In the second part of the volume called the Case, submitted to us on
the part of Her Majesty's government, on the seventh page •
I find a paragraph in the following words:
I In and soon after the month of May, 1861, a number of armed ships, mostly of small
Sumter.
perseverance contihkelle jusqu'a. la fin, d'appnyer le caractere du commandant insurge-.
quant k la veracite, etaient tout k fait sans succes. De l'autre cdte, Feffort pour
detruire le credit de la deposition de Temple fut grand, et reussit pour le moment.
■Cependant une comparaison calme des preuves fournies par ces deux hommes avec la
temoignage regu du dehors me convainc que Temple etait de beaucoup le plus digne de
foi.
En verite, le gouvernement de sa Majeste avait pris un mauvais chemin a Forigine;
en reconnaissant la fraude premiere, et Fadhesion qu'il y donna ne fit que compliquer
les obstacles qu'il rencontra pour en sortir. Pour les depredations commises a l'egard
des hardis et innocents marins, gagnant honneteraent leur vie dans la plus hasardeuse'
de toutes les entreprises sur l'ocean, et continuees longtemps apres que la dernie're
etincelle du droit de belligerant avait ete eteinte eu Am.eri.que, il me semble que le
gouvernement desa Majeste et ses autorites de Melbourne doivent etre tenus nettement
responsables. Nulle course semblable n'eut pu etre faite sans le secours tire de Mel-
■ bourne comme base d'operations. Au lieu d'essayer de reagir contre le fort courant de
sympathie populaire dominant dans toutes les classes de cette colonie, les autorites, ou
bien y cederent faiblement, ou bien y coopererent, au moius autant qu'on pouvait le
faire, par une molle indifference.
Des lors, ma conclusion est que, depuis l'epoque du depart du Shenandoah de Melbourne, le gouvernement de la Grande-Bretagne, ayant neglige de remplir l'obligation
-de la seconde regie specifi.ee pour la conduite des arbitres selon l'artiele 6 du traite de
Washington, s'est rendu responsable de tous les dommages encourus snbsequemment a
cause de cette negligence par le commerce des _5tats-Unis.
LE SUMTER.
Dans la seconde partie du volume appeie le "Case," qui nous est sounds de la part
du gouvernement de sa Majeste, a la page 7, je trouve un paragraphe congu dans les
termes suivants:
" Pendant et peu de temps apres le mois de mai 1861, plusieurs batiments armes,OPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAM;
209
i tonnage, were fitted out in and sent to sea from, ports in the Confederate States, and a
i considerable number of captures were made by them. Some of these •were commissioned as public ships of war of the Confederate States, and commanded by officers in the
naval service of the confederacy; others as private ships of war or privateers. Among
the armed vessels which were so fitted out and made prizes were the Calhoun, a steamer
of 1,000 tons, sent to sea in May, 1861, the Jeff. Davis, Savannah, Saint Nicholas, Winslow, and York. More than twenty prizes were made by these vessels. The Sumter
(to which reference will be made hereafter) weut to sea in June, 1861; the Sallie and
Nashville.in October, 1861; the Echo in 1862; the Retribution and Boston in 1863; the
Chickamauga, Olustee, and Tallahassee iu 1864. These vessels are stated to have
taken from sixty to seventy prizes."
If by this grave report it was intended to establish that the insurgent
Americans were in 1801 entitled in any way to be considered as a belligerent on the ocean, the motive can only be explained by presuming
either an absence of all acquaintance with the actual condition of the
insurgent States at that time or deliberate misrepresentation. I prefer to adopt the earlier construction.
In point of fact, it is clearly shown in these papers, as well as
from the past condition of that region of coast ever since the time
of its first settlement, that it has never possessed any commerce or navigation of its own. Whatever might have been the list presented, it
could contain only such vessels as might accidentally have been found
in its ports at the moment of the insurrection, belonging to owners
outside of the jurisdiction. That all such vessels were at once seized,
and made for a short period to play a part for which they were utterly
unfitted, is strictly true. Tet, so far from presenting any just ground
for recognizing these people as a maritime belligerent, all the facts tend
the more to convince me that to all intents and purposes Her Majesty's
government might, with quite as much justice, recognize in any similar
emergency these cantons of Switzerland as such. Be this as it may, I
am ready to admit there was for a short time a slight appearance of a
naval force that might deceive strangers.   Out of the number of vessels
dont la plupart etaient de faible tonnage, furent eqnipes et mis hors des ports situes
dans les etats-confederes ; ils firent uu nombre considerable de captures. De ces ba\ti-
ments, les uns, commandos par des officiers au service naval de la confederation,
regurent la commission de vaisseaux de guerre des etats-confederes, les autres celle de
vaisseaux de guerre prives ou de corsaires. Au nombre des vaisseaux armes en guerre
qui furent equip6s de la sorte et qui fireut des prises, se trouvaient le Calhoun, steamer
jaugeant plus de inille tonneaux, qui prit la mer au mois de mai 1861, le Jefferson
Davis, le Savannah, le Saint Nicholas, le Winslow et le York., Plus de viugt prises
echurent a, ces navires. Le Sumter (dont il sera fait meution plus loin) prit la mer en
juin 1861; le Sallie et le Nashville, en octobre 1861; FEcho, en 1862; la Retribution et
le Boston, en 1864; le Chickamauga, l'Olustee et le Tallahassee, eu 1864. Ces vaisseaux
auraient fait, dit-on, de soixante a soixante-dix prises."
Si par ce rapport grave on avait l'ititention d'etahlir que les insurges am6rieains
avaient droit en 1861, en aucune maniere, a etre cousidere.. comme belligerants sur
l'ocean, la raison n'en peut etre expliqnee qu'en supposaut reelle une abseuce de toute
connaissance de la condition actuelle des etats iusurges a cette epoque, soit un faux
rapport refiechi. Je preiere adopter la premiere interpretation. En effet. il est claire-
meut demontre dans c'es documents, aussi bien que par la condition anterieure de cette
region maritime, qu'elle n'a jamais pQSs6de, depuis l'epoqne de sa premiere colonisation,
aucun commerce ni aucune navigation propre. Quel qtt'ait pu ecre le role des navires
"presentes, il ne pouvait contenir que des vaisseaux que l'on pouvait avoir trouves acei-
dentellement dans les ports an moment de Finsurrection, appartenant ii des proprietaires eu dehors de sa juridiction. Que tous ces vaisseaux fureut saisis en memo,
temps et qu'on leur fit pendant une courte ptSriodejouer un role pour lequel ils etaient
tout-ii-fait impropres, est un fait stiicteinetit viai. Mais loin do fournir aucun motif
raisonuable pour recounaltre ces gens coiuuie belligerants maritimes, ces faits teudent
stirtout k me couvaincre qu'a tous dgarda le gouveruemeut de sa Majeste aurait pu,
avec tout autant de justice, recounaltre cotnute tels, daus des circonstances analogues,
les cantons de la Suisse. Quoi qu'il eu suit, je snis prfit a adinettre qu'il y eut
pendant quelque temps une ldgi'ie apparence d'nne force navale qui pouvait i romper
des dtraneers mai informes.   An nombre d<svaisseai\ indiqnfe tin lis le pass.geque
14 b
jtt||210
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
arrayed in the passage I have quoted is the steamer Sumter, a case now
presented to our consideration as founding a claim for damages from
Her Majesty's government by that of* the United States.
This was a steamer built in no sense for a war-vessel. She had been
employed as a packet between _STew Orleans and the Havana, and though
most likely to have belonged to private proprietors in JSTew York, may
possibly have had some in "New Orleans. I am willing to concede the
benefit of the doubt. At all events, she was seized by the insurgent
government, fitted up in haste with the few guns that she could bear,
and pushed through the blodkade at the mouth of the Mississippi to the
high sea. This was on tbe 30th of June, 1861. After making some
prizes, and touching at various ports belonging to other powers, she at
last made her appearance in a harbor of Her Majesty's island of Trinidad. This was on the 30th of July. Here she was recognized in due
form, was supplied with a new main-yard, provisions, and eighty tons
of coal. She next appeared at Baramaribo, in Dutch. G-uiana, nineteen
days after sailing from Trinidad, and there received an additional supply
of coals. From thence she proceeded to various ports of other sov- *
ereign powers, until at last she found her way to Her Majesty's port of
Gibraltar.
This experience had completely established the fact that in her then
condition she was utterly unfitted for her undertaking. The efforts to
get her refitted had failed; aud although there was a long delay permitted at Gibraltar—much longer, indeed, than seems altogether justifiable—the end of it was that she was disarmed, dismantled, sent to
Liverpool, and never afterward tried as a cruiser. The truth probably
was that it was found cheaper to build efficient vessels in Great Britain,
which this one never could have been.
It appears that eleven of her prizes were made before reaching Trinidad, where she coaled. JSTone were made between Triuidad and Baramaribo, and only five afterward.
If Her Majesty's government had been called to exercise due vigilance
I
j'ai transcrit, le steamer Sumter est un cas presente actuellement a notre examen
comme servant de base a une reclamation en dommages aupres du gouvernement de
sa Majeste par celui des Etats-Unis.
Le Sumter n'etait en aucun sens un steamer construit pour etre vaisseau de guerre.
II avait ete employe comme paquebot entre la Nouvelle-Orieans et la Havane, et quoiqu'il
ait appartenu tres-vraisemblablement a des proprietaires prives k New York, il est possible qu'il en ait eu a la Nouvelle-Orieans. Je suis dispose a accorder le benefice du
doute. Quoi qu'il en soit, il fut saisi par le soi-disant gouvernement insurge, equipe a.
la hate du peu de canons qu'il pouvait porter et forca le blocus a Fembouchure du
Mississippi pour se reudre en haute mer. C'etait le ;i0 juin 1861. Apres avoir fait
quelques prises et touche divers ports appartenant a d'autres puissances, il fit enfin son
apparition dans uu port de File de sa Majeste la Trinite. C'etait le 30 juillet. II y fut
reconnu en dhe forme, fut pourvu d'une nouvelle grande vergue, de provisions et de
quatre-vingts tonnes de charbon. It apparut ensuite a Paramaribo, dans la Guyane
hollandaise, dix-neuf jours apres avoir quitte la Triuite, et la il recut un nouveau subside de charbon. D'ici il se rendit k differents ports d'autres puissances souveraines-
jusqu'a ce qu'enfin il arriva k Gibraltar, port de sa Majeste.
Cette experience avait compietement etabli le fait que dans sa condition d'alors il
etait entierement impropre a son entreprise. Les efforts pour le radouber avaient
echoue, et quoique un long delai lui ettt ete accorde a Gibraltar, beancoup plus long
en effet qu'il nesembl.lt necessaire, il fut enfin desarme, demauteie, envoye k Liverpool,
et ne fut pas employe plus tard comme croiseur. La verite etait probablement que
l'on trouva meilleur marche de construire des vaisseaux plus efficaces en Angleterre.
11 semble que onze de ses prises furent faites avaut d'atteindre la Trinite, ott il fit du
charbon. II n'en fit aucune entre la Trinite' et Paramaribo, et seulemeut cinq plus
tard.
Si le gouvernement de sa Majeste avait ete appelc h exercer due vigilance pour em-OPINIONS   OF   MR.   ADAMS.
211
to prevent the fitting-out, arming, or equipping this vessel, it might
perhaps have been liable, but it is clear it had no opportunity. Such
as it was, the fact is well established that the entire work was done at
New Orleans.
Neither was it in a way to permit this vessel to make use of its ports
or waters as the base of naval operations, for the plain reason, if there
were no other, that its career so soon terminated in the second of the
only two ports she visited.
The only resemblance to such a thing was the supply of coals received
at Trinidad. But that was exhausted, without an opportunity of doing
damage, before reaching the port of another sovereign, and nothing was
ever received from British sources afterwards All the supplies obtained with that exception came from ports belonging to other powers.
I fail, therefore, to see wherein Her Majesty's government has omitted
to fulfill any duty presented in this case, for I cannot discover what duty
she was called to fulfill.
It is very true that, at the moment, this proceeding of the recognition of the Sumter at Trinidad was regarded by the Government of the
United States as an unfriendly act, and much remonstrance was made
against it. Whether this was made with or without just foundation, it
does not seem necessary here to consider. The question now is solely
of damages incurred by failure to fulfill certain specified duties. I can
discover no damages, and very trifling duty.
But there is one more question in connection with the history of this
vessel that demands consideration. It is alleged that she was suffered
to remain an undue length of time in the port of Gibraltar, and that a
fraudulent sale was recognized which enabled the insurgents to transfer the vessel to Liverpool, and use her again, under a British register, as
a transport for their cause.
The answer to this is, that her detention at Gibraltar, however it may
be considered, was certainly productive of no damage, while her presence on the ocean might have been,   And as to the fraudulent sale,
pecher 1'arrangement, l'armement ou Fequipement de ce vaisseau, il pourrait peut-etre
avoir ete responsable, mais il est clair qu'il n'en eut pas l'occastou. Tel qu'il fut, il est
bien etabli que Fouvrage entier fut fait k la Nouvelle-Orieans.
II ne fut pas non plus en position de permettre a ce vaisseau de faire usage de ses
ports on de ses eaux comme base d'operations navales, par la raison evidente, s'il n'y
en eut pas d'autres, que sa carriere se termina si t6t dans le second des deux seuls ports
qu'il visita.
Le seul fait qui ressemble k une semblable permission fut le subside de charbon
recu a la Trinite. Mais celui-ci fut epuise sans qu'il ait euune occasion de nuire avant
d'atteindre le port d'un autre souverain, et ensuite il ne recut plus jamais rien de
sources anglaises. Tous les autres subsides qu'il obtint, a l'exception de celui-la, pro-
venaient de ports appartenant a d'autres puissances.
Je ne puis done voir en qttoile gouvernement desa Majeste a neglige de remplir aucun
devoir prescrit dans ce cas, car je ne puis decouvrir quel devoir il etait appeie a remplir.
II est bien vrai qu'att moment meme ce procede de la reconnaissance du Sumter k la
Trinite fut regarde par le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis comme un acte peu amical, et
qu'ils y firent beaucoup de remontrances. Si ceci a ete fait avec de justes raisons ou
non, il ne me semble pas necessaire de l'examiner ici. La question actuelle est unique-
ment de dommages encourus par la negligence a remplir certains devoirs specifies. Je
nepuis decouvrir aucun dommage et qu'un tres-ieger devoir.
Mais il y a une autre question en rapport avec l'histoire de ce vaisseau, qui demande
a 6tre examinee. On allegue qu'on lui permit de demeurer dans le port de Gibraltar
au-dela du temps legal et qu'une veute' frauduleuse fut reconnue qui permit aux insurges de transferer le vaisseau a Liverpool et de Femployer de nouveau sous registre
anglais comme transport pour la cause des insurges.
La reponse k ceci est que son sejour a Gibraltar, de quelque fa§on que l'on puisse le
considerer, ne fut certainement la cause d'aucun dommage, tandis que sa presence sur
l'ocean aurait pu Fetre.   Et quant a la vente frauduleuse, le vaisseau etait expose a212
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
the vessel was open to capture in her defenceless state, aud it was conceded that no reclamation could have been made for it. . So likewise
she was open to capture in her latest capacity as a transport. In
neither case does Her Majesty's government appear to me to have incurred any responsibility under the three rulers of the treaty which can
be estimated in damages.
Of just such a character as this one are other vessels presented so
gravely in the extract which I have made from the British case at the
outset. These are the wretched rags over which Her Majesty's ministers condescended to throw the mantle .of a belligerent. This they had
an unquestionable right to do. Having done so, it is not possible for
me to reach any other decision- in the present case. At the same time, it
may be remarked that it is made clear from these papers that at no time
did this belligerent ever send to sea during the struggle a single war-
vessel built within the limits of the territory it temporarily controlled.
X.—THE NASHVILLE.
This appears to be another instance of a seizure of a steamer constructed for apacket to run between New York and Charleston,
in South Carolina, and an attempt to turn her into a vessel
of war by putting two light guns upon her, and the necessary anynuni-
tion to frighten unarmed merchant-ships.
In this state she received the requisite officers, and on the 26th of August, having run the blockade of Charleston, made her way to the port
of Saint George, in the island of Bermuda, on the 30th, in the guise of
a war-vessel. In order to get safely out of Charleston Harbor, she had
been constrained to go light, in consequence of which she stood in need
of considerable supplies of coal at Saint George, to enable her to effect
her contemplated passage to Southampton. She obtained between 400
and 500 tons from private sources.
Her stay at this place must have been from the 30th of August to the
4th of November, when she started for Southampton.   A stay of sixty-
etre pris, daus l'impossibilite ou il etait de se defendre, et l'on reconunt qu'il n'y avait
point de reclamation a faire a cet egard. II etait egalement expose a etre pris dans sa
derniere condition de transport. Ni dans un cas ni dans l'autre le gouvernement de sa
Majeste ne me semble avoir encourq aucune responsabilite, suivant les trois regies du
traite, qui puisse etre estimee en dommages.
Du meme caractere que celui-ci sont les autres vaisseaux presentes si serieusement
dans Fextralt que j'ai fait du | British case" au commencement. Ce sont les miserables
haillons sur lesquels les ministres de sa Majeste ont bien voulu jeter le manteau de
belligerant. Ils avaient un droit incontestable ale faire. L'ayant fait, il ne m'est pas
possible de decider autrement dans le cas present. En mfime temps, on pourrait bien
remarquer qu'il ressort clairement de ces documents qu'a aucune epoque ce belligerant
ne mit en mer pendant le conflit uu seul vaisseau de guerre construit dans les limites
du territoire snr lequel il exerja pour le coup son contrOle.
LE NASHVILLE.
Ceci paralt etre un autre exemple d'une saisie d'un steamer construit pour servir
comme paquebot entre New York et Charleston dans la Caroline du Sud, et une autre
tentative de le transformer en vaisseau de guerre, en y mettant deux legers canons et
les munitions necessaires pour epouvauter les vaisseaux marchands non-arn_.es.
Dans cet etat il recut les officers requis, et le 26 avril, ayant force le blocus de Charleston, se rendit au port de St.-Georges, dans File de Bermude, le 30, comme vaisseau de
guerre. Ann de sortir.en s6curit6 du port de Charleston, il avait ete oblige d'aller sans
charge, et en consequence il eut besoin de subsides considerables de charbon a St.-
George pour etre en etat d'effectner son passage projete a Southampton. II eu obtint
entre quatre et cinq cents tonnes.
Sou sejour dans ce port doit avoir ete du 30 aotit au 4 noventbre, ou il partit pour
Southampton.    lTn sejour de soixautosix jours accordo a cet endroit. ajoute ii ce grandOPINIONS   OF   MR.   ADAMS.
213
six days permitted at this place, in counectiou with the large supply of
coal, indicate an extremely liberal construction of the civility due to
such a vessel at the outset of a struggle like that in America.
At the same time it should be observed that Her Majesty's government had not yet found time to mature the necessary regulations to be
observed in her. remoter dominions, in regard to the stay of, and the supplies to be furnished to, the vessels of the contending parties when touching at her ports.
In her trip across the ocean the Nashville met and destroyed one
merchant-vessel of the United States—the Harvey Birch. After leaving Southampton, she stopped again at Bermuda, where she received 150
tons of coal, which enabled her to return home. On her way she seems
to have destroyed one schooner. It is to be inferred that her utter unfitness for the business to which she had been put had been clearly
proved, and she was laid aside.
It is contended that the reception which this vessel met with at various ports of Her Majesty's kingdom, and the abundant supplies of coal
received by her, are sufficiently proved to bring her within the purview
of the second rule specified in the treaty of Washington for the guidance of the arbitrators.
But, in order to establish this claim, it seems to me necessary to consider the question of intent on the part of the authorities, as well as
that of negligence.
From the evidence furnished in the papers before us iu regard to these
two points, I confess that I cannot gather sufficient materials to enable
me. to decide against Her Majesty's Government on either of them. At
the outset of the struggle, and before the receipt of clear directions to
regulate their conduct, it might very well happen that the authorities
in the remote dependencies would make mistakes of judgment in permitting supplies, without meaning to be partial to one side more than
to another. I have no reason to suspect that just the same measure
would not then have been granted to any vessel of the United States.
A few tons more or less of coal can scarcely be called convincing proof
subside de charbon, indique une interpretation extrfimernent liberate de la civilite due a
un tel vaisseau, au commencement d'un conflit tel que celui qui avait eclat.e en Amerique.
En meme temps, il faut remarquer que le gouvernement de sa Majeste n'avait pas
encore trouve le temps de mhrir les rfegles necessaires'a observer dans ces etats 61oignes,
quant au sejour et aux subsides a accorder aux vaisseaux des deux parties en conflit
qui toucheraient leurs ports.
Dans sa course a travers Focdan, le Nashville rencoutra et detruisit un vaisseau
marchand des Etats-Unis, le Harvey Birch. Aprfes avoir quitte Southampton, il toucha
de nouveau a Bermude, oh il recut cent cinquante tonnes de charbon, ce qui lui permit
de retourner chez lui. Dans sa route, il semble avoir detruit un schooner. On peut
croire que son incapacite complete, pour le r61e qu'on lui avait fait jouer, avait ete
clairement prouvee, et il fut mis de cote.
On allegue que Faceueil que recut ce vaisseau daus differents ports du royaume de sa
Majeste et les subsides abondants de charbon qu'il obtint sont demontres suffisants
pour le placer sous la seconde regie specifi.ee dans le traite de Washington comme
guide pour les arbitres.
Mais afin d'etablir cette pretention, il me semble necessaire d'examiner la question
de mauvaise intention de la part des autorites aussi bien que celle de negligence.
Par les preuves fournies dans les documents places devant nous quant a ces deux
points, j'avoue que je ne puis rassembler des materiaux suffisants pour me permettre
de decider contre le gouvernement de sa Majeste sur aucun des deux. Au commencement du conflit, et avant la reception de directions claires pour regler leur conduite, il
pouvait tres-bien arriver que dans les possessions eioignees les autorites Assent des
erreurs de jugement, en accordant des subsides sans penser a 6tre partiales pour un
parti plutot que pour l'autre. Je n'ai nulle raison de soupconner qu'on n'eut pas alors
accorde exactement la meme mesure a un vaisseau des Etats-Unis. Quelques tonnes
■  de charbon de plus on de moins peu vent a peine etre appelees des preuves convain-
■JEUll214
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
of malicious intent. From my observation of the general course of
Governor Ord, I fail to gather any clear traces of a disposition to be
otherwise than impartial in that officer.
With respect to the stay of the Nashville at Southampton, and her
supplies received there, I do not find that the case was essentially different from that of the United States steamer the Tuscarora, which was?
at that port at the same time.
Last of all, I entertain very serious doubts whether this vessel was
ever intended, by those who fitted her out, for the purpose of cruising
as a depredator on the ocean. Certainly, her long period of utter inaction at the only port whefe she stopped, and her straight course to
Southampton and back, do not at all indicate it. Even the two captures which she actually made seem to have been vessels she chanced!
to meet on her track, which she could destroy without the slightest deviation. The governor of St. George's seems to have been convinced
that the object of the voyage was connected with the establishment of
diplomatic relations in Europe, and procuring naval supplies and stores.
At one time it was intended to bring out Messrs. Mason and Slidell,
and it actually did have on board Colonel Beyton, supposed to be charged
with a mission of the same kind.
However this may be, I fail to find solid ground upon which to basea
in this case, any charge either of intention or negligence against Her
Majesty's Government under the terms of the treaty pf Washington.
XI.—THE   CHICKAMAUGA.
On or about the first week in March, 1864, a steamer called the Edith,
which had been built within the kingdom of Great Britain
for the purpose of running the blockade of the insurgent
ports in the United States, sailed from London.   She appears to have
been one of a number constructed under a joint ownership of the insurgent authorities in the United States and certain commercial houses in
cantes d'intention m'alicieuse.   Dans mon examen de la conduite generale du gouver-I
neur Ord, je ne puis recueillir aucune trace claire d'une disposition qui ait ete autre
chose que d'etre impartial chez cet officier.
Quant au sejour du Nashville a Southampton et aux subsides qu'il y recut, je ne
trouve pas que le cas fdt essentiellement different de celui du steamer des Etats-Unis
Tuscarora, que etait dans ce port a la m.me epoque.
Enfin, j'ai de tres-grauds doutes si ce vaisseau fht jamais destine par ceux qui
l'equiperent a croiser comme corsaire sur l'ocean. Certainement, sa longue periode de
complete inaction dans le senl port ou il s'arreta et sa course directe aller et retour ne
l'indiquent pas du tout. Meme les deux prises qu'il fit effectivement semblent avoir
ete des vaisseaux qu'il rencontra par hasard sur sa route, et qu'il put detruire sans la
plus legere deviation. Le gouverneur de St.-George semble avoir ete convaincu que le
but du voyage etait en rapport avec l'etablissement de relations diplomatiques en
Europe et de procurer des subsides navals et des fonrnitures militaires. Pendant un
moment on eut Fintention de conduire MM. Mason et Slidell en Europe, et, effectivement, il y avait a bord le colonel Peyton, que l'on supposait etre charge d'une mission
de la m6me nature.
Quoi qu'il en soit, je ne puis trouver de raisons solides sur lesquelles baser dans ce
cas aucune accusation d'intention ou de negligence contre le gouvernement de sa
Majeste, d'apres les termes du traite de Washington.
LE  CHICKAMAUGA.
La premiere semaine de mars 1864, ou a peu pres, un steamer appelo FEdith, qui
avait ete construit dans le royaume de la Grande-Bretagne dans le but de forcer le
blocus des ports insurges aux Etats-Unis, partit de Londres. II semble avoir ete un
des vaisseaux construits comme propriete commune des autorites insurgees aux Etats-
Unis et de quelques maisons do commerce de la Grande-Bretagne.   Comme tel ilOPINIONS   OF   MR.   ADAMS.
215
Great Britain. As such, she made her way successfully into the port
of Wilmington, in North Carolina. It being ascertained by experiment,
that she w as a fast and stanch vessel, it was then determined by the
insurgent authorities to put three guns upon her, with the necessary
equipment, and transform her into a regular cruiser. As such she
claimed to be recognized at Bermuda on the 7th November. Here her
commander applied for leave to coal and repair machinery, which was
granted. She was supplied by the authorities with twenty-five tons, and
permitted to remain for repairs eight days. If it was proper to recognize her at all, in no instance have I perceived a firmer tone in dealing
with a vessel of the kind, or a clearer execution of the orders given by
Her Majesty's government.!! If it happened that the commander succeeded in getting a larger supply from private sources, it must have
been done surreptitiously and_in defiance of their will. On her outward
trip from Wilmington, she seems to have destroyed some merchant-
vessels. But when she got back, the experiment appears to have been
considered unsatisfactory, for it was not continued. She was again reduced to a transport. Not long afterward Wilmington was taken by
the United States, and the last traces of spurious belligerency on the
American coast were expunged.
Here I fail to see any reason for charging Her Majesty's ,government
with any default under either of the three rules prescribed for the guidance of the arbitrators by the terms of the treaty of Washington.
XII.—THE TALLAHASSEE.
This is one of the number of vessels constructed in Great Britain, of
evhich the Chickamauga, whose case has been already considered, is another example. About the first week of April,
1861, she left London, under the name of tbe Atlanta. On the 20th she
|arrived in Bermuda. Here she seems to have remained until the 24th
of May, when she started to run the blockade at Wilmington, in which
she appears to have succeeded. For the next month she was running in
the same busiuess between Bermuda and Wilmington.
reussit a entrer dans le port do Wilmington, dans la Caroline du Nord. L'experience
ayant d6montre que c'etait un vaisseau rapide et fort, les autorites insurgees deciderent
d'y mettre trois canons avec Fequipement necessaire et de le transformer en croiseur
Tegulier. II pretendit etre reconnu comme tel a Bermude le 7 novembre. Son commandant y demanda la permission de faire du charbon et de reparer sa machine, ce qui
lui fut accorde. II recut des autorites vingt-cinq tonnes et la permission de rester
huit jours pour reparations. S'il etait convenable de le reconnaltre du tout, je n'ai
trouve en aucun cas uu ton plus ferme en traitaut avec un vaisseau de cette sorte, ni
une execution plus nette des ordres donnes par le gouvernement de sa Majeste. S'il
arriva que le commandant reussit a obtenfr uu plus grand subside de sources privees,
ceci doit avoir ete fait snbrepticemeut et en bravant sa volonte. Dans sa course apres
■etre sorti de Wilmington, il semble avoir detruit quatre vaisseaux-marchands. Mais
quand il revint, l'experience semble avoir ete envisagee comme peu satisfaisante, car
elle ne fut pas continuee. II fut de nouveau reduit a Fetat de transport. Peu de temps
apres, Wilmington fut pris par les" Etats-Unis, et les dernieres traces de guerre maritime sur la c6te americaine furent 6teintes.
Je ne puis voir ici aucune raison d'accuser le gouvernement de sa Majeste de faute,
d'apres aucune des trois regies prescrites pour gttider les abitres suivant les termes du
traite de Washington.
LE TALLAHASSEE.
C'est un vaisseau du nombre de ceux qui ont ete construits en Angleterre, dont le
Chickamauga (ce cas a deja ete examine) etait un autre exemple. La premiere seinaine
d'avril 1864, k peu pres, il quitta Londres sous le nom de FAtlanta. Le 20 il arriva a
Bermuda. II semble y etre reste jusqu'au 24 mai, ou il partit pour forcer le blocus de
n, ce a quoi il parait avoir reussi, car le mois suivant il semble avoir ete
Wilmington
•employe dc
le la meme maniere entre Bermuda et Wilmington.216
ARBITRATION   AT   G
EVA.
Being found swift and strong, it appears to have been decided at
Wilmington to make an experiment of turning this vessel into a cruiser.
The equipment and manning were all done there, and on the 6th of
August, the commander, Wood, succeeded in running the blockade, and
entereji upon his career of depredation.
In this case it is fortunate that we have before us the whole story of
this short cruise narrated by the commander himself, under circumstances which render the truth of it probable. Commander Wood, in a
letter purporting to be official, reports these facts: 1. That he sailed five
days to the northward without finding any vessels not European. 2.
That on the 11th, having approached New York, as he pursued the line
of the coast northward, until the 20th, he captured thirty-three vessels,
twenty-six of which he destroyed. Most of them were of small size.
By this time he had reached the British provinces, and had consumed
nearly all his coal. So he decided to put into Halifax on the 18th, and
try his luck for new supplies.
It appears very clearly from his confession that Sir James Hope, the
admiral then in command at the station, like most of the officers in Her
Majesty's naval service, had no fancy for this fraudulent species of belligerency, and no disposition to be blind to the tricks, by which it was
carried on. The lieutenant-governor also gave no hopes of any relaxation of the rules laid down by the government, whether in regard to his
stay or his suppl'es. After all, he boasts that he did succeed in cheating him a little, but it wns not enough to do any good; so he was compelled to abandon his cruise for the want of coals, and make the best of
his way back to his starting-point. He succeeded in forcing the blockade at Wilmington on the 26th.    This made a cruise of twenty days.
There is some evidence to show that this vessel issued forth once more
as a cruiser from Wilmington, in the early part of November, and made
a few captures. If so, it was under another name, that of the Olustee.
Like other rogues, after having once more exhausted her reputation, she
changed her name a third time, laid down her armament, and presented
Comme on le trouvait rapide et fort il paralt que l'on dedda a Wilmington d'essayer #
de transformer ce vaisseau en croiseur.   L'equipement et le recrutement de 1'equipage
semblent y avoir ete faits entierement, et, le 6 aoftt, le commandant Wood r6ussit a
forcer le blocus et commenca sa carriere de depredations.
Dans ce cas il est heureux que nous ayons devant nous toute l'histoire de cette courte
croisiere, racontee par le commandant du vaisseau lui-meme, dans des circonstances qui
en rendent la verite probable. Ce monsieur Wood, dans une lettre qu'on peut envisa-
ger comme officielle, rappelle ces faits : 1. Qu'il fit voile cinq jours vers le nord sans
jfcrbnver aucun vaisseau qui ne f_tt eur^opeeu. 2. Que le 11, s'etant approche de New
York, et comme il suivait la ligne des cdtes les jours suivants jusqu'au 20, il captura
trente-trois vaisseaux, dont il detruisit vingt-six. La plupart etait de petits navires^
Pendant ce temps il avait atteint les provinces anglaises, et avait consume a peu pres-1
' tout son charbon. II dedda done d'entrer a Halifax le 18, et de teuter la fortune pour
obtenir de nouveaux- subsides.
11 ressort tres-clairement de sa confession que Sir James Hope, Famiral qui com-
mandait alors dans la station, comme la plupart -des officiers au service naval de sa .
Majeste, n'avait aucun gout pour cette espfece de belligerant frauduleux et nulle disposition a former les yeux sur les ruses dont il se servait. Le lieutenant gouverneur ne
donna non plus aucun espoir de se relacher des regies etablies par le gouvernement,.
soit k l'egard de sou sejour soit pour ses subsides. Aprts tout cependant il se vante-
d'avoir r6ussi a le tricher un peu, mais ce n'etait pas assez pour rien faire de bon. II
fut done oblige d'abandonner sa course faute de charbon et de faire de son mieux pour
revenir a son point de depart. II r6ussit a forcer le blocus de Wilmington le 26. Cela
faisait une course de vingt jours.
II y a des prenves que ce vaisseau sortit de nouveau comme croiseur de Wilmington
tout au commencement de novembre et fit quelques prises. Si cela est, ce fut sous un
autre nom, celui de FOlustee. Comme d'autres fourbes, apres avoir encore une fois use
sa reputation, il changea de nom une troisieme fois, deposa son armement et se presentaOPINIONS   OP  MR.   ADAMS.
21
herself at Bermuda as a merchantman, with a cargo of cotton, which
she had run out of Wilmington. She was now called, not inappropri-
i'ately, the Chameleon. But when, on the 9th April, 1865, all American
ports being finally closed, she reached Liverpool, she was reported at
that place as the Amelia, consigned to Messrs. Fraser, Trenholm =& Co.,
the sole remaining representatives of an extinguished fraudulent belligerent.
The conclusion to which I have come is, that there is no evidence adduced in this case to show that Her Majesty's government has failed to
observe the rules laid down for the regulation of neutrals, as prescribed
by the treaty of Washington.
XIII.—THE RETRIBUTION.
Of all the spots made memorable in Her Majesty's dominions by the
extent of fraudulent transactions of every description connected with navigation, during the struggle in the United
States, the little island of Nassau appears, from the papers before us, to
have earned a right to bear away the palm.
The most flagrant instance seems to be now presented to our consideration in the case of this vessel, the Betribution. So thoroughly is the
truth interwoven with and covered up in a web as well of simulation as
of dissimulation, that I confess it to be a labor of extreme difficulty even
to reach any statement of the facts which I can rely upon as absolutely correct.
It may, however, be assumed as true that, in the year 1856, a steam-
propeller was constructed at Buffalo, in the State of New York, which
was taken to New York, and employed for several years as a tug in that
port.
In the month of April, 1861, being the precise period of the breaking
out of the conflict iu America, this tug appears to have been sent by
the proprietors to the southern coast. No reason for this proceeding is
given, and no port of destination is mentioned.   Berhaps the object
tl Bermuda comme vaisseau marchand charge d'une cargaison de cotou avec laquelle il
etait sorti de Wilmington. II s'appelait alors d'une maniere convenable le Camdeon.
Mais lorsque, le 9 avril 1865, tous les ports americains furent enfin fermes, il atteignit
Liverpool, fut enregistre en cet endroit sous le nom de FAmelia, consigne a MM. Frazer,
Trenholm et Cie, les seuls representants restants d'un belligerant frauduleux eteint.
La conclusion a laquelle je suis arrive dans ce cas est qu'il n'y a pas de preuves pro-
duites pour demontrer que le gouvernement de sa Majeste a neglig6 d'observer les-
regies etablies pour la conduite des neutres pres^rites par le traite do Washington.
LA RETRIBUTION.
De tons les lieux reudus memorables dans les etats de sa Majeste par Fetendue des
transactions frauduleuses de toute espece, qui se rattachent a la navigation pendant le
conflit des Etat-Unis, la petite ville de Nassau semble, d'apres les documents deposes devant nous, avoir conquis le droit de remporter la palme.
L'example le plus flagrant semble etre maintenant presente a notre examen dans le
cas du vaisseau la Retribution. La verite est tellement entrelacee et couverte d'un
tissu de feintes et de dissimulations, que j'avone que c'est un travail d'une extreme
difficulte d'arriver a aucun expose des faits sur lequel je puisse m'appuyer comme abso-
lument correct.
On peut cependant admettre comme vrai que, dans Fannee 1856, un steamer a heiice
fut construit k Buffalo, dans Fetat de New York, amene a New York et employe pendant
plusieurs ann6es comme remorqueur dans ce port.
Au mois d'avril 1861, l'epoque precise oil edata le conflit en Amdrique, ce remorqueur
semble avoir ete" envoy6 par les proprietaires sur la cote sud. Nulle raison de ce pro-
cede n'est donnde, et aucun port de destination n'est mentionne\   Peut-etre le but218
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
might have been to find a market. If so, the owners must have been
disappointed. The tug was driven by stress of weather into Cape Bear
Biver, where it was seized, after the fashion of that day in that region,
without the trouble ol
md her crew were made pris-
paymg anything
oners.
Her machinery seems to have been transferred to some other purpose,
for the next thing we learn is that she had become a sailing-vessel, and
her name was the Betribution.
Meanwhile one year and a half had elapsed. On the 21st of November, 1862, only, she re-appears at Charleston, in South Carolina, and is
there registered as the private property of one Thomas B. Bower, a
citizen of that place. Here it is recorded that a man named John Barker
is the master. He was neither a citizen of South Carolina, nor of any
of the insurgent States.
It is thus made quite plain that this Mr. Barker, whom we shall soon
find under several other names, was at that time known only as the
master of a private vessel belonging to a"citizen of Charleston. There
was no pretense of a public commission either of the vessel or of its
commander. I can nowhere discover that anything of the sort was ever
produced throughout all the subsequent proceedings.
Nevertheless, it is reasonable to believe that this vessel was armedfe
equipped, and manned at Charleston for the purpose of carrying on a
system of depredation. Her first appearance in this capacity on the
high sea was on the 28th of January, 1863, when she pounced upon the
schooner Hanover, belonging to Brovincetown, a small fishing town on
the coast of Massachusetts, and well on its way to its destination of Aux
Cayes, in the island of San Domingo.
The captain of the Betribution now laid down his name of Barker.
Ou reaching the Hanover, he at once recognized the master, Washing-
ton Case, as a per son he had seen at Brovincetown, when he was there
engaged in a fishing voyage from that port, a few years before. He now
announced himself as Yernon Locke, belonging to the British province
of Nova^ Scotia.
pourrait avoir ete de trouver un marche. Si c'est la le cas, les proprietaires doivent).
avoir manque leur attente. Le remorqueur fut pousse par le mauvais temps dans le
Cape Fear River, oh il fut saisi, d'apres la mode d'alors dans ce pays, saus s'inquieter
de rien payer, et 1'equipage fut fait prisonnier.
Sa machine semble avoir ete consacree a un autre usage, car ce que nous apprenons
ensuite, c'est qu'il etait devenu un voiiier et que son nom etait la Retributiou.
Pendant ce temps, un an et demi s'etait ecouie. Le 21 novemhre 1862, seulement, il
reparait a Charleston, dans la Caroline, du Sud, et il y est euregistre comme propriete
part-cuff ere d'un Thomas B. Power, citoyen de cette ville. Ici les registres portent
qu'un homme nomm6 John Parker en est le capitaine.
II est parfaitement clair que ce M. Parker, que nous trouverons bieut6t sous plusieurs autres noms, n'etait a cette epoque connu que comme capitaine d'un vaisseau
particulier appartenant k un citoyen de Charleston; il n'etait pas citoyen de la Caroline du Sud, ni d'aupun etat insurge. II n'y eut pas de'pretexte d'une commission
publique, ni du vaisseau ni de son commandant. Je ne puis decouvrir nulle part
qu'aucune piece de cette nature ait jamais ete produite pendant toutes les transactions
subsequentes.
Neanmoins il est raisonnable de croire que ce vaisseau fut arme, 6quipe et recrut6 a.
Charleston dans le but. de se livrer a un systeme de depredations. Sa premiere apparition dans ce r61e en haute mer eut lieu le 28 Janvier 1863, ou il pinca le schooner Hanover, de Provincetown, petite ville de p6cheurs sur la c6te du Massachusetts, et sur le
point d'arriver a sa destination, Aux Cayes, dans File de St.-Domingue.
Le capitaine de la Betribution deposa alors son nom de Parker. En arrivant a bord
du Hanover il reconnut immediatement le capitaine Washington Case comme une personne qu'il avait vue a Provincetown, lorsqu'il y avait 6t6, quelques annees auparavant,
occupe d'un voyage de p6che de ce port. II s'annonca alors comme Vernon Locke, de
la province anglaise la Nouvelle-Ecosse.   Si l'on admet ceci, il s'ensuit qu'un citoyen
_____OPINIONS   OP   MP.   ADAMS.
219
If this be admitted, it follows that a citizen of one of Her Majesty's
dependencies, acting as an officer of a vessel pretending to a belligerent
jlpmniission, took possession of the Hanover as his lawful prize, turned
adrift the true captain and his crew in an open boat to make their way
to the nearest land as they best could, and then bore off with his prey
toward the island of Long Cay.
A question naturally arises here, whether this Nova Scotia man Locke,
in coming to this region, had been moved to it by any previous familiarity
with its facilities for such enterprises as he was about. The evidence on
this point is not conclusive. Thomas Sampson, a person sent out as a
detective by the United States Government to watch what was going
on at Nassau, affirms that he knew by good report that Locke had been
•clerk for Adderly & Co., which fact, if it were true, would go far to explain the cause of the success of all his operations. But it will not explain how he, a Nova Scotia man, should have been recognized as a
<pgitimate commander of a belligerent vessel of the insurgent States by
the authorities of Nassau.   But of this I shall have more to say presently.
On the 5th of February, 1863, that is, eight days after the capture of
the Hanover, this vessel arrived at Long Cay. But there came at the
same time another vessel in company, called the Two Brothers, which
Captain Locke had succeeded in the interval in hunting up, as well as
her owner, a person of the name of Farrington, apparently not unaccustomed to the business of buying up shipwrecked property. But it was
not as Locke that the captain now appeared. This time he had the assurance to personate Washington Case, the true master of the Hanover,
whom he had sent off with his crew several days before. He told a
story that the vessel had been ashore and consequently sprang a leak,
which would make transshipment necessary. The end of it all was, that
he desired to sell more or less of the cargo. Farrington doubted the
truth of this account from the first, but he did not see why that should
preveut his buying the cargo. So the two proceeded to the office of the
collector, in order to get the necessary permit to land.   That officer ex-
d'une des possessions de sa Majeste, agissant comme officier d'un vaisseau pretendant
avoir une commission de belligerant, s'empara du Hanover comme prise legale, jeta le
vrai capitaine et son equipage dans un petit bateau, pour qu'ils gagnassent la terre la
plus proche comme ils le pourraient, puis cingla avec sa prise vers File de Long Cay.
Ici s'eieve naturellemeut la question' de savoir si cet homme de la Nouvelle-Ecosse,
Locke, en venant dans ces parages, y avait ete pousse par une certaiue familiarite avec
les facilites qu'il y avait trouvees auparavant, pour des enterprises comme celle qu'il
projetait. Les preuves sur ce point ne sont point concluantes. Thomas Sampson,
envoye comme agent de police par le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis, pour surv'eiller ce
qui se passait a Nassau, affirnie qu'il savait de bonne source que Locke avait etc
eommis chez Adderley et Cie, fait qui, s'il etait vrai, tendrait fortement a expliquer la
cause du succes de toutes ses operations. Mais cela n'expliquerait pas comment lui, un
homme de la Nouvelle-Ecosse, aurait ete reconnu comme commandant legitime d'un
vaisseau belligerant des etats insurges par les autorites de Nassau. Mais j'aurai a en
dire da-vantage tout a l'heure.
Le 5 fevrier 1863—c'est-a-dire, huit jours apres la capture du Hanover—ce vaisseau
arriva a Long Cay. Mais il y arriva en meme temps uu -autre vaisseau appelc les
Two Brothers, que le capitaine Locke, dans Fintervalle, avait roussi a decouvrir,
aussi bien que son proprietaire, du nom de Farrington, qui avait apparemment l'habi-
tude d'acheter des proprietes naufragees. Mais ce ne fut pas comme Locke qu'apparut
alors le capitaine. Cette fois il eut Faudace de jouer le r61e de Washington Case, le
vrai capitaine du Hanover, qu'il avait envoye promener avec son equipage quelques
jours auparavant. 11 fit une histoire, disant que le vaisseau avait touche terre et qu'en
consequence il avait une voie d'eau, ce qui reudrait un transbordement necessaire. La
fin de tout cela etait qu'il desirait vendre plus on moins de la cargaison. Farrington
douta de la verite de cette histoire des Fabord, mais il ne vit pas pourquoi cela Faurait
empeche d'acheter la cargaision. lis se rendirent done tous les deux au bureau du
receveur pour obtenir la permission de ddbarquer.   Cet officier examina les papiers
■a____0 ARBITRATION  AT   CENEVA.
amined the papers offered in the usual manner, asked the customary
questions, and, being satisfied, gave the requisite authority.
Thus every part of Locke's scheme had completely succeeded. He
received his money. Farrington sold the goods, doubtless at a good
profit. The captured vessel was sent to Nassau, there loaded with salt
and provisions to go to one of the insurgent ports, after which there is
no further trace of her.
It should, however, be particularly noted that the manifests of the
cargo presented to the collector, upon which the transfer of the property
was authorized, were two. They bore dates on different days, the 5th
and 6th February, and both purported to have been signed by the
true captain, Washington Case. But inasmuch as he had been sent on
his way over the sea on the 25th of January, it is clear that the dates
were appended by Locke. Moreover, the two manifests were not identical either in regard to the articles of the cargo nor to the quantities of
each. Furthermore, the signatures were by no means in the same handwriting. It is not unlikely that one of them may have been genuine,
and found on board of the vessel after it was taken. But the other was
so signed that no one at sight of it could avoid seeing it was not by the
same hand.
Mr. John Burnside, the resident magistrate of Inagua, subsequently^
reported to the governor the facts which he happened to witness. He
affirms that both Farrington and he doubted the truth of Locke's story
at the time. A day or two afterward, by reason of some words dropped
from an intoxicated sailor in the Hanover, the collector was led to suspect some falsehood, which induced them all to examine the papers
more closely. The truth became apparent, on inspection, that a palpable
forgery had been committed, and an individual falsely personated.
Here were the collector, the resident magistrate of the district, and
one other person, all of them convinced that a grave offense had been
committed against the law—an offense, too, involving a question of
property, which it would seem to have been the duty of the officers at
qui lui etaient presentos, dans laforme ordinaire, fit les questions usuelles, et, satisfaitj
donna Fautorisation demaudee.
Ainsi le plan de Locke avait reussi compietement dans toutes ses parties. II recut
son argent. Farrington vendit la merchandise, sans doute avec gra»nd profit. Le vaisseau capture fut envoye a. Nassau; la, charge de sel et de provisions pour se rendre a.
Fun des ports insurges, apres quoi on ne trouve plus de lui aucune trace.
II faut cependant remarquer particulierement que les "manifests" de la cargaison
presentes au receveur, sur lesquels le transfert de la"propriet6 fut autorise, etaient au
nombre de deux. Ils portaient des dates de jours differents, le 5 et le 6 fevrier, et tous
les-deux pretendaient avoir ete signes par le vrai capitaine Washington Case. Mais
comme il avait ete envoye sur mer le 25 Janvier, il est clair que les dates avaient ete
ajoutees par Locke. De plus, les deux "manifests" n'etaient identiques, ni quant aux
articles de la cargaison, ni quant k la quantite de chacun d'eux. En outre, les signatures n'etaient pas le moins du monde de la m.me ecriture. II n'est pas invraisembla-
ble que Fune d'clles ait pu etre authentique et trouvee a bord apres sa capture. Mais
l'autre etait 6ctite de telle sorte que personne, en la voyant, ne pouvait manquer de
reconnaltre qu'elle n'etait pas de la meme main.
M. John Burnside, magistrat d'Inagua, rapporta plus tard au gouverneur les faits
dont il lui etait arrive d'etre temoin. II affirme que tous les deux, Farrington et lui,
eurent des doutes sur la verite de l'histoire de Locke k cette epoque. Un jour ou deux
plus' tard, en suite de quelques mots echappes a uu matelot ivre du Hanover, le receveur fut amene | souppouner quelque mensonge, ce qui les conduisit a examiner
tons deux les papiers de plus pros. La verite devint manifesto k l'examen : qu'un faux
paly.able avait ete eomniis, et qu'on avait faussement pris le titre d'un autre individu.
Voila. done le receveur, le magistrat du district ot une autre personne convaincus
tous trois qu'une grave offense avait etc commise contre la loi, offense eutralnant de
plus une question de propridte qu'il aurait ete, setnble-t-il, du devoir des officiers duOPINIONS. OF  MR.   ADAMS.
221
least to mention officially to the authorities at Nassau. It was for them
i to lead the way, in warning them in season of an abuse which might
possibly, and even probably, come to their notice in connection with
both these vessels at Nassau. In point of fact, both of them, as well as
a part of the cargo, went to Nassau and remained some time.
Three weeks elapsed, and, so far as appears by the papers, not a whisper regarding this extraordinary transaction seems to have been communicated to the governor or anybody in authority at Nassau. The
Retribution was there and the Hanover was there. Nassau is a very
small place,-where every event of this kind naturally would attract some
attention. The officers of the Betribution, including Locke himself, had
come there. A single line from the collector would have served to point
attention to the subject, and to fix the eyes of the authorities on the
vessels at least, if not on the men. It is not unreasonable to infer from
the character of the place that the substantial facts attending the capture were more or less known to many persons, from the moment of the
arrival of the vessels and the men. The collector was dumb. The resident magistrate was dumb. As to Farrington, nothing could be expected from him, as he had become more or less a party in interest in
concealing the fraud which he could not doubt had been committed.
Neither is it at all likely that anything more would have ever been
disclosed by these parties, had it not been that the agent of the underwriters of the vessel, having learned something of the case, on the 20th
of April addressed to the governor a remonstrauce against the unlawful
proceeding, and a desire for au investigation. The allegations were distinctly made—
That the American schooner Hanover was taken to Fortuue Island by a person calling himself the master, who communicated to R. W. Farrington, of the above island;
his desire to dispose of the cargo of said schooner, and to purchase a cargo of salt;
' That the cargo of the Hanover was transferred to the Brothers, owned by the said Farrington, and all, or a part thereof, conveyed to the port of Nassau, and there placed in
■charge of James I. Farrington, also one of the magistrates of Fortune Island :
moins de luentionner offieiellement aux autorites de Nassau. C'etait a eux de prendre
les devants en les avertissant a temps d'un abns qui pouvait peut-6tre, et meme probablement, venir a leur connaissance en rapport avec ces deux vaisseaux a Nassau. En
fait, tous les deux, aussi bien qu'une partie de la cargaison, allerent a Nassau et y reste-
rent quelque temps.
Trois semaines s'ecouierent, et, autant qu'il ressort des documents, pas un mot concernant cette transaction extraordinaire ne semble avoir etc communique an gouverneur ni a personne en autorite a Nassau. La Retribution y etait et le Hanover y etait.
Nassau est un endroit tres-petit, ou tout evenement de cette nature attirerait naturelle-
ment quelque attention. Les officiers de la Retribution, y compris Locke lui-meme,
y etaient venus. Une seule ligne du receveur aurait servi a attirer Fattention sur ce
sujet et a fixer les yeux des autorites sur les vaisseaux au moins, sinou sur les hommes.
II n'est pas deraisonnable d'inferer du caractere de Fendroit que les faits substantiels
concernant la capture etaient plus ou moins conuus de beaucoup de monde, depuis le moment de l'arrivee des vaisseaux et des hommes. Le receveur fut rnuet. Le magistrat
fut muet. Quant a Farrington, on ne pouvait rien attendre de lui, puisqu'il etait
devenu plus ou moins partie interessee a cacher la fraude, qu'il ne pouvait douter qu'on
eut conimise.
H n'est pas non plus vraisemblable du tout que rien de plus eht jamais ete devoile
par ces personnes, si l'agent des assureurs du vaisseau, ayant appris quelque chose de
ce cas, n'avait pas adresse, le 20 avril, au gouverneur, une remontrance contre le pro-
cede illegal, et une demande d'mvestigation.   Ses allegations etaient nettement faites :
| Que le schooner americain, le Hanover, avait etc pris a Fortuue Island par un indi-
vidu s'en disant le capitaine, qui communiqua a R. W. Farrington, de File ci-dessus,
son desir de disposer de la cargaison du dit schooner et d'acheter une cargaison de sel.
" Que la cargaison du Hanover avait ete transbordee sur le Two Brothers, proprietc
du dit Farrington, et que tout ou partie en avait ete transporte au port do Nassau, et
la, livro a Jam_s I. Farrinston. aussi un des magistrats de Fortune Island.
iilii999
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
That the Hanover was loaded with salt, and sailed for one of the southern ports of
the United States;
That the party who represented himself as Washington Case, master of the Hanover,
proved to be the first officer of the armed schooner Retribution ;
That the Retribution was then at Nassau, as were also the officers.
The Betribution was then at Nassau, and had been there received as
a vessel of war of the insurgent States, without a word of remonstrance
or even of notice by the authorities.
But on the 31st of January, 1862, the Duke of Newcastle had dispatched to the governor of Nassau a paper of instructions to guide
his course in regard to such!, vessels, one of which was to this effect:
During the continuance of the present hostilities between the Government of the
United States and the States calling themselves the Confederate States of America, or
until Her Majesty shall otherwise order, no ship of war or privateer belonging to
either of the belligerents shall be permitted to enter or remain in the port of Nassau;
or in any other port, or roadstead, or water of the Bahama Islands, except by special
leave of the lieutenant-governor of the Bahama Islands, or in case of stress of weather.
On the 11th of March following, Governor Bayley appears to have
issued a proclamation to the people of the Bahama Islands, communicating these instructions, and directing obedience to this provision.
The governor of Nassau had not taken any action whatever, so far?I
as it appears, in prohibiting the entrance or remaining of the Betribution in the port of Nassau, though he must have known she was there.
On receiving the letter of Mr. Jackson, he contented himself with a
reference to the attorney-general in these words, 11 wish to know
what steps ought to be taken. It is suggested that a confederate officer
has made Fortune Island a depot for prizes."
Such was the only point of view in which the governor thought fit to
consider the statement of Mr. Jackson, communicating to him other
facts of which it might have been supposed it was his duty to take notice.
" Que le Hanover avait ete charge de sel, et qu'il etait parti pour Fun des ports du
sud des Etats-Unis.
I Qu'il avait ete prouve que Fiudividu se donnant pour Washington'Case, capitaine'!
du Hanover, etait le premier officier du schooner arme la Retribution.
| Que la Retribution etait alors a Nassau, aussi bien que les officiers."
La Retribution etait alors k Nassau, et y avait ete regue comme vaisseau de
guerre des etats insurges, sans un mot de remontrance ni une remarque de la part des
autorites.
Mais le 31 Janvier 1862, le due de Newcastle avait expetiie an gouverneur de Nassau
des instructions pour guider sa conduite a l'egard de vaisseaux semblables, dont Fune
etait concue comme suit:
" Pendant la duree des hostilites presentes entre le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis et
les soi-disants etats-confederes d'Amerique, ou jusqu'a ce que sa Majeste en ordonue
autrement, il ne sera permis k aucun vaisseau de guerre ni _i aucun corsaire appartenant. a Fun on k l'autre des belligerants d'entrer ou de rester dans le port de Nassau,
ou dans quelque autre port, ou rade ou dans les eaux des lies Bahamas, a moins d'une
permission speciale du lieutenant gouverneur des lies Bahamas, ou en cas de mauvais
temps."
Le 11 mars suivant, le gouverneur Bayley paralt avoir publie une proclamation aux
habitants des lies Bahamas, leur communiquaut ces instructions et leur ordonnant de
les suivre.
Le gouverneur do Nassau n'avait pris aucune mesure, autant qu'il le semble, pour
empecher Fentree ou le sejour de la Retribution dans le port de Nassau, quoiqn'il eut
dh savoir qu'elle y etait.
Eu recevant la lettre de M. Jackson, il se contenta de'l'envoyer a l'attorney-general
avec ces mots: "Jevoudrais savoir quelles mesures il faut prendre. On dit qu'un
offider confedere a fait de Fortune Island un dep6t de prises."
Tel etait le seul point de vue auqnel le gouverneur crftt convenable de considerer
l'expose de M. Jackson, qui lui avait fait connaltre d'autres (aits dont on pouvait sup-
poser qu'il etait de son devoir de prendre connaissance.OPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
223
The Betributiou had been received in Nassau as a confederate vessel
of war, contrary to the terms of his own proclamation.
The Hanover had been received in Nassau as a prize, and had been
fitted out from there to go to the Southern States of America.
The officers of the vessel were at the time stopping at Nassau, enjoying the fruits of their violation of the waters of the Bahamas.
Nobody residing in so small a place, where events of this peculiar
kind were passing before their eyes, could long remain ignorant of these
facts.
Tet the governor confines his inquiry of the attorney-general to the
mere fact that Fortune Island had been made a depot for prizes by a
confederate officer.
The attorney-general was Mr. G. V. Anderson, with whom we have
already been made acquainted in the transactions connected with the
steamer Oreto, alias the Florida, which took place in Nassau just one
year before. This gentleman does not appear to have been roused into
more activity in the interval. The opinion which he gave in answer to
the governor is iu these words:
I have given my best consideration to the accompanying letter of Mr. Jackson, in
the hope of being able to advise his excellency to some course of proceeding which
would lead to a judicial investigation into the circumstances complained of, but I regret to say that I have been unable to arrive at any other conclusion tending to such
a result.
The conveying of the Hanover int» the port of Long Cay, and there transshipping
the cargo, assuming her to have been a prize of war, was a violation of Her Majesty's
interdict on the subject of prizes, and the collector of revenue, if he had any cause to
suspect the character of the vessel and. cargo, should at once have arrested both ; but
as this was not done, and the vessel has left the colony, aud the cargo been disposed
of, no proceeding in rem can now be instituted.
The next question is, whether any parties connected with the transaction have rendered themselves criminally liable; and on this point I am clearly of opinion in the
negative.
merre confed6r6 con-
te equipe pour se
iruits de leur
La Retribution avait ete regue a Nassau comme vaisseau dt
trairement aux termes de sa propre proclamation.
Le Hanover avait ete regn a Nassau comme prise, et y avait
rendre aux 6tats du sud de l'Amerique.
Les officiers de ce vaisseau demeui aient alors a. Nassau, jouissant d<
violation des eaux des Bahamas.
Personne residant dans un si petit endroit. oil des faits de cette nature particuliere
se passaient sous les yeux de tons, ne pouvait les ignorer longtemps.
Et cependant le gouverneur borne sa question a l'attorney-general au simple fait
qu'un officier confedere a fait un depot de prises de Fortune Island.
L'attorney-general etait M.- G. C. Anderson, dont nous avons deja fait la connaissance dans les transactions qui se rattachent an steamer l'Oreto, antrement le Florida,
qui eurent lieu a Nassau juste une annee auparavant. Ce monsieur ne paralt pas etre
devenu plus actif dans Fintervalle. L'avis qu'il donna en reponse au gouverneur est
congu en ces termes:
" J'ai examine de mon mieux la lettre incluse de M. Jackson, dans l'espoir de
pouvoir indiquer a son excellence quelque ligne de conduite qui pfit mener k une
enquete judiciaire dans les circonstances dont on se plaint; mais je regrette de
dire, que je n'ai pu arriver a aucune autre conclusion tendant a un semblable
resultat.
"Le fait d'amener le Hanover dans le port de Long Cay et d'y transborder la
cargaison en Fenvisageant comme une prise de guerre etait une violation de la
defense de sa Majeste au sujet des prises, et le receveur des douanes, s'il avait une
cause qnelconque de suspecter le caractere du vaisseau et de sa cargaison, aurait du. les
arreter tous les deux: mais comme ceci n'a pas ete fait, que le vaisseau a quitte la
colonie, et qu'on a dispose de la cargaison, on ne peut maintenant entamer aucun
proces in rem.
" La premiere question qui vient eusuite est de savoir si qnelqu'une des parties
melees-dans cette affaire s'est rendue passible d'un proces criminel; et sur ce point je
suis nettement d'avis que non.224
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
I, however, thiuk that the charge is one which calls for some investigation, and I
therefore recommend that the magistrate of the district be directed, on his next visit
to Long Cay, to institute inquiries with the view of ascertaining the exact facts of
the case, and that the collector of revenue be instructed to be vigilant in preventing
any occurrence of similar acts.
In the first place it should be noted that this opinion at once condemns the course of the collector of revenue, who is proved to have had
cause to suspect the character of the vessel and cargo. He says that it
was his positive duty not merely to notify the government of the facts,
but to arrest both vessel and cargo. In point of fact, he did neither,
and gave no notice whatever at the time to the authorities at Nassau.
Yet I do not perceive in the course of these papers the smallest attempt to have been subsequently made to call the collector to any re-.
sponsibility.   Not a word was said to him of his failure to perform this
positive duty.
In the second place, the attorney-general gives it as his deliberate
opinion that none of the parties to this transaction had rendered themselves criminally liable.
It would have been perhaps desirable had that officer given a single
reason for giving such an opinion prior to any attempt to investigate
the facts attending the case. There was plenty of evidence to be found
at Nassau if there were real energy present to seek it. If he had
sought it, it seems impossible that the attorney-general's statement
could have been made in good faith. Ag a clear proof to the contrary,
in point of fact, he himself was the party employed in prosecuting at a
later period an indictment against the principal etfgaged in these transactions both for conspiracy aud forgery.
It is impossible for me to explain this singular action of the attorney-general in any other way than this : He meant to say that in a
population so entirely in sympathy with the insurgent cause at that
moment, there was no chance, in his opinion, of procuring a verdict
against any one engaged in it.   And in this he was probably right.
But this view of the subject does not relieve Her Majesty's govern-
" Je pense cependant que Faccnsation est de nature a exiger quelque examen et je
recommande en consequence que le magistrat du district regoive pour instruction.
dans sa prochaine visite a Long Cay de faire des enquetes pour constater les faits
exacts du cas, et que le receveur soit invite a etre vigilant pour empecher tout retour
d'actes semblables."
Tout d'abord, on doit remarquer que cet avis condamne du coup la conduite du
receveur, qui est prouve avoir eu des motifs de suspecter le caractere du vaisseau et de
la cargaison. II dit que son devoir positif etait non-seulement de notifier les faits
au gouvernement, mais encore d'arrdter le vaisseau et la cargaison. En fait, il ne fit
ni Fun ni l'autre, et ne donna aucun renseignement, a cette epoque, anx autorites de'
Nassau.
Et pourtant je n'apergois pas dans tous ces documents que la plus petite tentative"
ait ete faite plus tard pour rendre le receveur responsable.
En second lieu, l'attorney-general donne comme son avis refiechi qu'aucune des_,
parties meiees dans cette affaire ne s'est rendue passible d'un proces criminel.
II aurait ete peut-6tre desirable que cet officier eht donne une seule raison d'un tel
avis, avant toute tentative d'enqufite sur les faits se rapportant a ce cas. On devait
trouver une abondance de preuves a Nassau, s'il y avait eu une volonte ferme de les
•chercher. S'il les avait cherchees, il semble impossible que l'expose de l'attorney-
general pht avoir 6te fait de bonne foi. En effet, comme preuve convaincante du con-'
traire, il fut la personne employee pour dinger plus tard une poursuite contre le me-,
neur de ces affaires pour conspiration et faux.
II m'est impossible   d'expliquer   cette singulifere   conduite  de  l'attorney-general.
d'aucune autre maniere que de celle-ci: II voulait dire que, dans une population si
eutierement sympathique a la cause insurgee a cette epoque, il n'y avait point de
-chance, dans son opinion, d'obtenir un verdict contre qui que ce fut qui y etait engage..
Et en ceci il avait probablement raison.
Mais cette maniere d'envisager le sujet ne dlcharge  pas le gouvernement de saOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
225
ment from the obligations towards the innocent and injured party, incurred by the neglect of her servants to use due diligence in their vocation to protect it from wrong.
But I must now go back in my relation of the operations of this
man, named Captain Barker, alias Case, alias Locke, to the point where
I left him, having accomplished his end at Long Cay of converting into
money the plunder he had obtained from the cargo of the Hanover.
He seems to have left Long Cay in the vessel called the Two Brothers,
into which that part of the cargo was transferred which was destined
to be sold at Nassau. But this was done only to evade observation.
He stopped at a place called Bum Cay, where he landed, and not.long
after the Retribution appeared, and took him off.
This must have been about the middle of Februa^. Locke then resumed his cruise, and, on the 19th, being somewhere in the neighborhood of a place called Castle Island, he came acAs an American brig
called the Emily Fisher, on a voyage from the jp_tnd of Cuba to New
York, laden with sugar. Whether intentionally or otherwise is not absolutely clear, five or six Br^sh wrecking-schooners were lying at anchor under the land, whilst the master of another one, called the Emily
Adderley, which was cruising about, bethought himself of boarding
the Emily Fisher, and entering into some conversation with the captain
touching the safety of the navigation, &c. This being over, a signal appears to have been given from the Adderley, the effect of which was at
once visible by the approach of another vessel. The ^jisult was that
the Emily Fisher was seized as a prize by the confederate schooner
Retribution.
And now Captain Locke seems to have realty put into execution the
scheme which he had only pretended in the case of the Hanover. He
consulted with the captains of the five British wreckers, the effect of
which was that they took the brig, and, at about 5 p. m., ran her clean
on shore. The next day the wreckers had so far unloaded the brig of
her sugar that she was again afloat.   The master of the brig,-who, with
Majeste des obligations envers la partie innocente et lesee, encourues par la negligence
de ses officiers a exercer "due diligence" dans leur mission de la proteger contre tout
dommage.
Mais je dois maintenant revenir dans mon redt des operations de cet homme nomme
le capitaine Parker, alias Case, alias Locke, au point oh je Fai laisse, apres avoir
accompli son dessein k Long Cay de convertir en argent le butin qu'il avait obtenu de
la cargaison du Hanover.
II semble avoir quitte Long Cay sur le vaisseau appehS les Two Brotfiscs, dans lequel
avait ete transportee cette partie de la cargaison qui etait destin6e a etre vendue a
Nassau. Mais c'etait seulement pour eviter les observations. En effet il s'arreta en
un endroit nomme Rum Cay, oh il debarqua, et, peu de temps apres, la Retributionparut
et le prit a bord.
Ceci doit s'etre passe a peu pres au milieu de fevrier. Locke reprit alors sa course,
et le 19, se trouvaut quelque part dans le voisinage d'un endroit appeie Castle Island,
il rencontra un brick americain nomme FEmily Fisher, en route de File de Cuba pour
New York, charge de sucre. Soit avec intention, soit autrement, cela n'est pas tres-
clair, cinq ou six schooners anglais de sauvetage etaient a l'ancre pres de terre, pendant
que le capitaine d'un autre, nomme FEmily Adderley, qui croisait la autour, imagina
d'aborder le Fisher, et d'entrer en conversation avec le capitaine au sujet de la securite
de la navigation, etc. Apres ce bout de conversation, un signal paralt avoir ete donne
du Adderley, dont l'effet devint bientdt visible par l'approache d'un autre vaisseau.
Le resultat fut que FEmily Fisher fut saisi comme prise du schooner confedere la Retribution.
Et maintenant le capitaine Locke semble avoir reellement mis k execution le plan
qu'il avait seulement feint dans le cas du Hanover. H tint conseil avec les capitaines
des cinq schooners anglais, et le resultat fut qu'ils prirent le brick et que, vers cinn
heures apres-midi, ils le jetterent k la cdte. Le lendemain les sauveteurs avaient assez
decharge le brick de son sucre pour qu'il fut remis a flot.   Le capitaine du brick, qui,
15 B226
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
his crew, had been put ashore close by, seeing these operations going
on, made some effort to reclaim the property. He applied to the authorities for assistance, but they declined to give him any prior to his
securing a release from the claims of the wreckers for salvage. The
consequence was that, by paying one-half of the value of the cargo,
and one-third of that of the vessel, she was finally returned, divested
of almost everything movable on and under deok. All this time the
brig was lying under the guns of the Betribution, and the authorities
to whom he appealed declared themselves wholly unable to protect him.
From this narra tive, it seems tolerably plain that the master of the Retribution, after seizing this vessel, entered into an agreement with these
wreckers to cause her to be driven ashore, and then to divide the proceeds
which might be collected in one way or another from false claims of salvage ; and inasmuch as the master offered more money than they could reasonably expect to realize by any other disposition they could make of it,
with less trouble to themselves, they accepted the terms. The authorities at Long Cay, fully aware of the transaction, the nature of which
they could not misconceive, gave it their sanction. Neither does the
collector appear to have ever given any report of the transaction.
A more thorough prostitution of the powers of the Government to
the most flagrant purposes of plunder, under pretenses which could deceive no one, it has not been my lot to witness, even in the long record
of frauds submitted in the volumes before us.
It may be alleged, on the part of Her Majesty's government, that
these were the results of the offenses of irresponsible parties, for which
it is not the custom of governments to be held liable to other nations.
The answer to this is, that when the Retribution made her appearance
in the port of Nassau, after having executed the outrages described,
the collector declares that she did not enter as a trader; she was treated
as a confederate vessel of war.
avec son equipage avait ete mis a terre tout pres, voyant ces operations en train, fit
quelque tentative pour redamer sa propriety. II demanda du s'ecours aux autorites,
mais elles refuserent de lui en donner aucun, avant qu'il eht obtenu un acquittement
«r,   .......   „„.-,.,„+„.,.„       T„   „„-.„_:.- _. .eu*    .„_. -.__. i_
Gil itu^)ei«) ec u*^v;a_i_i__.cj_._ uuuu-_______u iuhhii.-cuulo __ _t; jJiuiA-gajL. .
Par ce r6cit il semble assez clair que le capitaine de la Retribution, apres avoir saisi
> vaisseau, entra en arrangement avec ces sauveteurs pour qu'il fat jete a la c6te, et
)ur partager ensuite les benefices qui pourraient etre retires, de maniere ou d'autre,
$ fausses demandes de sauvetasre.   Et, vu que le canitaine offrit nlus d'arsrent au'ils
-j — sr ~-—-   - _sn_ -~" - ~~) ~~ —"—*.'-" w« _. .
ananues ue sauvet age. Et, vu que le capitaine offrit plus d'argent qu'ils
raisonnablement esperer en realiser, par n'importe quelle fagon d'en dis-
loins de peine pour eux, ils accepterent les conditions.   Et les autorites
pour pa
de fausses demandes
ne pouvaient ri
poser avec moins de peine pou± l-u.y, _„_. an.i-|»u-L.uu _c_ luiluhurns.   __._ _t_s __m .nu .■»
de Long Cay, bien renseignees a l'egard de l'affaire, sur la nature de laquelle elles ne
pouvaient pas se tromper, y dounerent leur sanction.   Le receveur non plus ne semble
avoir fai _ aucun rapport sur cette transaction.
Une plus complete prostitution des ponvoirs du gouvernement pour les desseins les
plus flagrants de pillage, sous des prltextes qui ne pouvaient tromper personne, il ne
m'est pas arrive d'en rencontrer, meme dans de long recueil des fraudes rassembiees
dans les volumes devant nous.
On peut alieguer de la part du gouvernement de sa Majeste que oelles-ci furent le
resultat des offenses de parties irresponsables, pour lesquelles ce n'est pas l'habitude
/._._  ff_nv_rnAmfint_ f.'£.".VA tonno T\/.-m. v.._iw.n ci 1.1.. _ finvofo Too oiifroo nrttinnoOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
227
On the 3d of March this vessel had been dismantled, and her hull was
sold at public auction by Messrs. Adderley & Co. She brought the sum
of £250. But it nowhere appears to whom the proceeds were credited.
Messrs. Adderley & Co., who probably knew the whole story of this
vessel from its origin to its sale, were never called upon to disclose it.
Neither does it appear that the governor took the smallest notice of
so material a transaction.
Nor yet is it likely that any more inquiries would have been made in
any quarter had it not been for a reminder which the authorities were
not at liberty to neglect. On the 4th of April Mr. Seward, the Secretary of State of the United States, addressed a note to Lord Lyons,
then the British minister at Washington, stating the facts attending
the capture of the Hanover in British waters, and demanding reparation. Lord Lyons sent a copy of this note not only to Earl Russell but
directly to the governor of Nassau.
The governor, on receipt of this dispatch, addressed a reply directly
to Lord Lyons, transmitting the report received from Mr. Burnside,
when expressly called upon the 20th April previous, which is found
among the papers before us, and concluding with the following paragraph :
Whatever the character of the Retribution, or whoever the ostensible master may
have been, I am convinced that no suspicions of either were entertained by any officials of this government qntil it was too late to act on them.
I have directed further inquiries to be made.
I cannot suppress my surprise at the calmness of such an affirmation,
when the report which he sent, and to which he alludes, seems to my
eyes distinctly to admit the fact that all three persons, the collector,
Mr. Farrington, and himself, entertained so gre^b doubts of the truth of
the statements made to them by Locke, that it seems to me to have been
a positive duty in the two officers, at least, to have pursuj&cl an invtpfe'
gation certainly so far as to penetrate the reasons for the falsehood, the
fraud, and the forgery by which the business was accompanied.
The unsatisfactory nature of this report was plainly intimated by Mr.
Le 3 mars, ce vaisseau ay^S ete demanteie, et sa coque fut vendue en vente publicum
par Messieurs Henry Adderley et Cie. Elle rapporta la somme de £250. Mais on ne
trouve nulle part qui fut credite de ce benefice. Messieurs Adderley et Cie, qui probablement connaissaient toute l'histoire de ce vaisseau, depuis son origine jusqu'a sa
vente, ne furent jamais appeles k la mettre au jour. Le gouverneur ne semble pas non
plus avoir fait la moindre remarque sur une transaction aussi grave.
II n'est pas probable non plus qu'aucune enquete eut et6 faite nulle part, s'il n'y
avait pas eu un rappel que les autorites i&vaient pas la liberte de negliger. Le 4 avril,
M. Seward, Secretaire d'etat des Etats-Unis, adressa une note a Lord Lyons, alors ministre d'Angleterre a Washington, exposant les faits concernant la capture du Hanover
dans les eaux anglaises, et demandant reparation. Lord Lyons envoya une copie de
cette note, non-seulement au Comte Russell, mais directement au gouverneur de Nassau
Le gouverneur, a la reception de cette depeche, repondit directement a Lord Lyons,
en lui transmettant le rapport regu de M. Burnside, quand il y fut expressement invite,
le 20 avril precedent, qui se trouve parmi les documents devant nous et se terminant
par le paragraphe suivant:
" Quel qu'ait pu etre le caractere de la Retribution, on son capitaine ostensible, je suis
convaincu qu'aucun soupgon a l'egard de l'un ou de l'autre n'a ete congu par aucun
officier de ce gouvernement jusqu'E ce qu'il ait. ete trop tard pour agir contre eux.
"J'ai donne des instructions pour que l'on fit des enquetes ulterieures."
Je ne puis taire ma surprise da calme d'une telle affirmation, quand le rapport qu'il
envoyait, et auquel il est fait allusion, semble a. mes yeux admettre distfpetement le fait
que tons les trois, le receveur, M. Farrington et lui, congurent de si grands doutes sur
la verite des exposes que leur fit Locke, qu'il me semble avoir ete un devoir positif
pour les deux officiers au ■ moins de faire une enquete, assez loin certainement pour
penetrer les motifs du mensouge, de la fraude et du faux dont ils etaient accompagnes.
M. Seward fit as3ez clairement entrevoir la nature peu satisfaisante de ce rapport228
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Seward when he received it, and was also signified to the governor by the
Duke of Newcastle, on behalf of the government at home. This stimulated the authorities to efforts to seize and to prosecute the chief
offenders still hanging about the place. It was clear they were British
subjects, guilty of something very like piracy, as well as of forgery and
fraud. Of the judicial proceedings that followed I desire to speak
with the moderation due to the courts of a foreign nation. But I could
only repeat the remarks which I made in regard to this matter in my
review of the case of the Florida. The arbitrators appear to me at
least to have a duty to the'parties before the tribunal to state their
■convictions of the exact truth, without fear or favor. In the performance of my share of it, I cannot omit to point out—(1,) the evasion of
the important witnesses when they were wanted, and their re-appearance in perfect security afterward; (2,) the refusal of the collector at
Long Cay, the most important and responsible agent of the government in the transaction, to appear at first; and (3,) the absence of all
testimony as to the facts within his knowledge when he actually appeared; (4,) the avoidance of .all testimony of the same kind on the
part of Burnside, the magistrate of Inagua, whose first report, made to
the governor, showing his knowledge of them, is among the papers be_i
fore us 5 (5,) the straw-bail required of the principal culprit by the
court, and his ready forfeiture of it when he pleased; (6,) the intimation of Governor Bawson, that if it had been £1,000 instead of £100,
it would have been equally supplied to him, if required to save him;
and, lastly, the acquittal of the criminal by reason of the disappearance of the most important witness for his condemnation ; all together
present a more melancholy and scandalous spectacle of the paralysis of
a judicial tribunal than has ever before been met with, at least in my
experience.
The fact is too plain that the population of Nassau and its vicinity
quand il le regut, et le due de Newcastle donna k entendre la meme' chose au gouverneur de la part du gouvernement de l'Angleterre. Ceci poussa les autoritelgp. faire
leurs efforts pour saisir et pour poursuivre les principaux coupables qui r6daient toujours autour de File. II 6tait clair qu'ils etaient sujets anglais, coupables de quelque
chose qui ressemblait beaucoup a de la piraterie, aussi bien que do faux et de fraude.
Je desire parler des poursuites judiciaires qui suivirent avec la moderation dfte aux'
cours d'une nation etrangfere. Mais je ne pourrais que r6peter les remarques que j'ai
faites a l'6gard de cette matiere dans ma revue du cas du Florida. Les arbitres me
semblent avoir, envers les parties qui sont devant ce tribunal, au moins le devoir d'ex-
poser leurs convictions de l'exacte v6rite sans peur ni partialite. Dans Faccomplisse-
ntent de ma tache, je ne puis omettre d'indiquer :
1. L'evasion des temoins importants quand on eut besoin d'eux, et leur reapparition
en parfaite securite plus tard.
2. Le refus du receveur de Long Cay, l'agent le plus important et le plus responsa-
ble du gouvernement dans cette transaction, de paraltre d'abord.
3. L'absence de tout temoignage, quant aux faits a sa connaissance, lorsqu'il parut
effectivement.
4. Le silence de Burnside, le magistrat d'Inagua, sur tout temoignage de la meme
nature, et pourtant son premier rapport au gouverneur, attestant sa connaissance des
faits, est parmi les documents devant nous.
5. La caution insignifiante exigee du principal coupable par la cour, et la facilite
avec laquelle il y manqua quand il le jugea bon.
6. Le sentiment du gouverneur Rawson que, s'il s'etait agi de £1,000 au lieu de
£100. on les lui aurait egalement accordees, si cela avait ete necessaire pour le sauver
et enfin, l'acquittement du criminel a cause de la disparition du temoin le plus important pour sa condamnation.
Le tout ensemble presente un spectacle plus triste et plus scandaleux de la paralysie
d'un tribunal judiciaire qu'aucun de ceux qui se soient jamais preseutes, au moins k
ma connaissance.
Le fait est clair que la population de Nassau et de son voisinage, eta_|§t_evenue siOPINIONS   OF  MR.   ADAMS.
229
had become so completely demoralized by familiarity with the fraudulent
transactions constantly passing before their eyes, as well as the unusual profits accruing therefrom to themselves, that they were neither
in a condition nor in a disposition to visit with harshness any crime,
however flagrant, that could be associated, however remotely, with the
operations of the insurgents in their waters.
It appears to me to be clear that the collector of the port of Long
Cay failed in due diligence when he omitted to give any report whatever
to the governor of the flagrant acts committed by Locke in forging the
signature and attempting to represent the person of another man, as
well as in conspiring, in defiance of the authorities, to obtain false salvage, by force of arms, of an innocent party.
It appears to me that the magistrate of Inagua faile'difm due diligence
when he omitted to give immediate notice to the governor of the facts
which he only reported when specially called upon by him three weeks
afterward.
It appears to me that the governor failed in due diligence when he
omitted to take notice of the presence of a vessel of the insurgents, in
the port, which was expressly prohibited to enter it by the instructions
of the government at home.
By reason of that failure, he further failed in due diligence in informing himself of the reasons which had brought that vessel, as well as its
prize, the Hanover, into the port—facts which could not have failed to
become known to him had he instituted a faithful investigation.
It appears to me that the attorney-general failed in due diligence
when he gave his first opinion, declining to act against the men whom
he had reason to believe criminals, as well as in all the subsequent proceedings which he instituted against them in the court.
For these acts of omission and commission, the nation injured can look
for reparation only to the government holding the supreme authapip!
over the territory wherein they happened.   It clearly appears that no
energy existed in any official quarter to maintain neutrality.
iietemen. demoralisee par l'habitude des transactions frauduleuses qui so passaient
cesse devant ses yeux, et par les benefices inusites qu'elle en retirait, qu'elle n'etait
etat ni en disposition d'agir avec severite contre tout crime, quelque flagrant qu'il
mdme d'une maniere eioignee, aux operations des in-
conipl
sans cesse
ni en etat ni en disj:
ffit, que l'on pouvait rattacl
surges dans ses eaux.
II me paralt clair que le receveur du port d<
_ong Cay a manque aux " dues dili-
des actes
A_    _!!_>    IJ£___l__    Llilll     H_lO    l_l   lOUOVCUl   U U.   UULI. U.D    _Ji>ll_,    Vycfcy   _U l__dluyj_u.o  illl.v uu...   _il__-
gences" en omettant de donner au gouverneur aucune nouvelle quelconque des actes
flagrants commis par Locke, en contrefaisant la signature et en essayant de joner le
role d'une autre personne, aussi bien que du complot en d6fi des autorites pour obtenir
d'une partie innocente de faux droits de sauvetage par les armes.
II me semble que le magistrat d'Inagua a manque aux " dues diligences" en n€gligeant
de donner immediatement connaissance au gouverneur des faits qu'il ne rapporta que
lorsqu'il y fut spedalement invite par lui, trois semaines plus tard.
II me semble que le gouverneur a manque aux "dues diligences" en negligeant de
rei
'dues diligences" en dounant
port, l~a.it qi
tigation consciencieuse
II me semble que l'attorney-general a manque aux
son premier avis, refusant d'agir contre les hommes qu'il avait des raisons de croire
criminels, aussi bien que daus toates les mesures subsequeutes qu'il prit contre eux dans
les cours.
Pour ces actes d'omission et de commission, la nation Pesee ne peut demander
reparation qn'au gouvernement exergant Fautorite supreme sur le territoire oh ils se
sont passes. II ressort clairement qu'il n'y eut nulle energie dans aucune des regions
officielles pour maintenir la neutralite.230
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Hence my conclusion is, that a liability is clearly imposed upon Her
Majesty's government, in the case of the Betribution, under the terms
of the treaty of Washington.
Des lors ma conclusion est qu'une responsabilite est clairement imposee au gou-£
vernement de sa Majeste, dans le cas de la Retribution, d'apres les termes du traite de
Washington.
OPINIONS  OF  SIB  ALEXANDEB  COOKBHBN.
Causes o 1 com
plaint brought forward by the t'niteil
States.
The indirect claims at first insisted on by the Government of the United
States being now out of the question, we have to deal with the claims
for damages, " growing out of the acts'7 of certain specified vessels, as
to which it is alleged that, by reason of some default on the part of the
government of Her Majesty the Queen of England, these vessels were
enabled to take and destroy ships and cargoes belongiug to citizens of
the United States.
The causes of complaint put forward by the United States Govern-
r com. ernment may be classed under the following heads:
1. That by reason of want of due diligence on the part
of the British government, vessels were allowed to be fitted
out and equipped, in ports of the United Kingdom, in order to their
being employed in making war against the United States, and, having*
been so equipped, were allowed to quit such ports for that purpose.
2. That vessels fitted out and equipped for the before-mentioned purpose, in contravention of the foreign-enlistment act, and being therefore
liable to seizure under that act, having gone forth from British potts,
but having afterward returned to them, were not seized as they ought
to have been, but, having been allowed hospitality in such ports, were
suffered to go forth again, to resume their warfare against the commerce
of the United States.
3. That undue favor was shown in British ports to ships of war of the
Confederate States in respect of the time these ships were permitted
to remain in such ports, or of the amount of coal with which they were
permitted to be supplied.
4. That vessels of the Confederate States were allowed to make
British ports the base of naval operations against the ships and commerce of the United States.
Owing to all or some one or other of these causes, vessels of the
Confederate States were enabled, it is alleged, to do damage to the commerce of the United States $ and compensation is claimed iu respect of
the damage so done.
The treaty of Washington, from which our authority is derived, lays
The treaty of down, for our guidance in dealing with and deciding on
Washington. these claims, certain rules as to the obligations of Great
Britain as a neutral state, which for the purpose of this arbitration are
to be taken to have been binding on it.
Not, indeed, that the British government admits that these rules form
part of the law before existing between nations. On the contrary, it is
expressly stated that " Her Britannic Majesty has commanded her
high commissioners and plenipotentiaries to declare that Her Majesty's
government cannot assent to the foregoing rules as a statement of principles of international law which were in force at the time when the
claims mentioned in Article I arose, but that Her Majesty's govern-OPINIONS  OP  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
231
inent, in order to evince its desire of strengthening the friendly relations between the( two countries, and of making satisfactory provision
for the future, agrees that, in deciding the questions between the two
countries arising out of those claims, the arbitrators should assume that
Her Majesty's government had undertaken to act upon the principles
set forth iu these rules. And the high contracting parties agree to
observe these rules as between themselves in future, and to bring them'
to the knowledge of other maritime powers, and to invite them to accede
to them."l
The rules in question are as follows :
A neutral government is bound—
First. To use due.diligence to prevent the fitting out, arming, or equipping within
its jurisdiction, of any vessel which it has reasonable ground to believe is intended to
cruise or to carry on war against a power with which it is at peace; and also to use
like diligeuce to prevent the departure from its jurisdiction of any vessel intended to
cruise or carry on war as above, such vessel having been specially adapted, in whole or
in part, within such jurisdiction, to warlike use.
Secondly. Not to permit or suffer either belligerent to make use of its ports or waters
as the base of naval operations against the other, or for the purpose of the renewal or
augmentation of military supplies or arms, or the recruitment of men.
Thirdly. To exercise due diligence in its own ports and waters, and, as to all persons within its jurisdiction, to prevent any violation of the foregoing obligations and
duties.1 .
With these rules before it, the tribunal is directed to determine as to
each vessel, "whether Great Britain has, by any act or omission, failed
to fulfill any of the duties set forth in such rules, or recognized by the
principles of international law not inconsistent with such rules."
The effect of this part of the treaty is to place this tribunal in a position of some difficulty. Every obligation for the non-ful- Di_ic_ity arising
filhnent of which redress can be claimed presupposes a fron~thetre«y-
prior existing law, by which a right has been created on the one side
and a corresponding obligation on the other. But here we have to deal
with obligations assumed to have existed prior to the treaty, yet
arising out of a supposed law created for the first time by the treaty.
For we have the one party denying the prior existence of tbe rules to
which it now consents to submit as the measure of its past obligations,
while the other virtually admits the same thing; for it ''agrees to observe the rules as between itself and Great Britain in fpibure, and to
bring them to the knowledge of other maritime powers, and invite them
to accede to them "—all of which would plainly be superfluous and vain
if these rules already formed part of the existing law recognized as obtaining among nations.
It is, I cannot but think, to be regretted that the whole subject-matter of this great contest, in respect of law as well as of fact, was not left
open to us, to be decided according to the true principles and rules of international law in force and binding among nations, and the duties and
obligations arising out of them, at the time when these alleged causes
of complaint are said to have arisen.
Prom the history of the treaty of Washington we know that it was
proposed by the British commissioners to submit the entire question,
both as to law and fact, to arbitration; but the commissioners of the
United States refused to "consent to submit the question of the liability
of Great Britain to arbitration unless the principles which should govern the arbitrator in the consideration of the facts could be first agreed
upon." In vain the British commissioners replied that they | should be
willing to consider what principles should be adopted for observance in
Treaty of Washington, Article VI.232
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
future, but that they were of opinion that the best mode of conducting
an arbitration was to submit the facts to the arbitrator, and leave him
free to decide upon them after hearing such arguments as might be
necessary." The American commissioners replied that they should be
willing to consider what principles should be laid down for observance
in similar cases in future, but only with the understanding that " any
principles which should be agreed upon should be held to be applicable
to the facts in respect to the Alabama claims." The Brpish commis-
sioners and government gave way, possibly without fully appreciating
the extent to which the principles of which they were thus admitting
the application would be attempted to be carried in fixing them with
liability.
How this apparent anomaly arose is plain. Her Majesty's government, animated by a high sense of justice and by an earnest desire of
conciliation, were anxious to remove every possible cause of complaint
or sense of wrong which the Government and people of the United
States had, or believed themselves to have, against Great Britain as to
matters arising out of the civil war; they were willing that if, through
any errrors or shortcomings on the part of British authorities, injury
had been caused to American subjects, full redress should be afforded;
they were willing that the question should be determined by an independent and impartial tribunal; and though they would naturally have
preferred that the matters in dispute between the two countries should
be decided by what they believed to be the rules of international law
governing the case, rather than that, if the decision should be in
favor of Great Britain, the American people should feel that the contest had not been determined according to what, in their view, were the
principles applicable to it, Her Majesty's Government gave way to the
desire of that of the United States, and consented that the rules by
which it was agreed that the duties and obligations of the two nations
should be governed in any future case should be taken to be the measure
of the past obligations and duties of Great Britain with reference to the
subject-matters of the dispute.
It was a great and generous concession, and though the effect of it
might be a pecuniary sacrifice on the part of Great Britain, it was one
which was cheerfully made on the one side, and I trust will not fail to
be appreciated in the same generous spirit ou the other.
If, however, the differences which have unhappily arisen between the
United States and Great Britain were to be determined, not according
to the rules of international law which the arbitrators to be agreed on
should determine to be applicable to the case, but according to rules to
be settled by the contending parties themselves, then I cannot but wish
that the framers of this treaty had been able to accomplish the difficult
task, now left to us, of defining more precisely what is meant by the
vague and uncertain term "due diligence," and had also set forth the
further "principles of international law, not inconsistent with the rules
laid down," to which reference is made as possibly affecting the liability
of Great Britain.
To some of the heads of complaint hereinbefore referred to, this observation does not indeed apply. Whether vessels, which might originally have been seized, should have been so dealt with when they reentered British ports, or whether they were protected by the commis-^
sions they ha<i in the mean while received from the confederate government ; whether confederate ships of war were permitted to make British ports the base of naval operations against the United States'r
whether the accommodation afforded to them in British ports consti-OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
23a
tuted a violation of neutrality, for which Great Britain can be held liable, are questions which are left to be decided and must be decided according to the rules of international law alone.
But when we have to deal with the far more important question of
the liability of Great Britain by reason of the omission to use "due
diligence" to prevent the equipment of vessels of war in her ports, as
required by the treaty, we find nothing in the treaty to direct us as to
the meaning of that term, especially as regards the degree of diligence
which is to be understood to be required by it.
Left in this difficulty, we must endeavor to determine for ourselves
the extent and meaning of the "due diligence" by which we are to-
test the alleged shortcomings of the government of Great Britain. For,
it is plain that the standard of " due diligence" ought not to be left to
the unguided discretion of each individual arbitrator. The municipal
law of every country, wherever diligence is required by the law, whether
in respect of obligations arising out of contract, or in regard to the due
care which every one is bound to exercise to avoid doing harm to the
persons or property of others—ne alienum Iwdat—prescribes some
standard by which the necessary degree of diligence may be tested.
Dealing here with a matter appertaining to law, it is to juridical science that we must look for a solution of the difficulty* And since we
have to deal with a question of international law, although, it is true,
of an exceptional character, it seems to me that it will be highly useful
to endeavor to formi a clear view of the recip^cal righ^ and duties
between belligerents and neutrals, created by ipierna^nal law generally, and of the diligence necessary to satisfy the obligations which
that law imposes. I cannot concur with Jf. Staempfli, that, beeause-
the practice of nations has at times undergone great change^ and the
views of jurists on points of international law have often been and
still are conflicting, therefore there is' no s||eh thing as int^jtoatianal
law, and that, consequently, we are to proceed independently of any
such law—for such is the effect of his reasoning, if I understand it
rightly—according to some intuitive perception of right and wrong,
or speculative notions of what the rules as to the dutif|§ of nfptrals
ought to be. It seems to me that when we shall have ascertained the
extent to which a neutral state is responsible, according to tie general
law of nations, for breaches of neutrality committed by its 8~q$$fects,
and the degree of diligence it would be called upon to exercise under
that law, in order to avoid liability, we shall be better able to solve
the question of what constitutes due diligence in the terms of the treaty
of Washington. That treaty may have admitted a liability in the
respect of the equipment of ships where none existed by international
law before, as I certainly think it has: but the degree of diligence required of a neutral government to prevent breaches of neutrality by
its subjects must be determined by the same principles, whatever may
be the nature of the particular obligation.
Besides the necessity of thus considering the relation of belligerents
and neutrals with reference to the subject of " due diligence," we have
further, in order to satisfy the exigency of the articles of the treaty, to
consider whether, besides in the omission of "due diligence," Great
Britain has failed to fulfill any duty imposed by any principle of international law not inconsistent with the rules laid down. It is clear also
that, with reference to the other heads of complaint, our decision m~o$%
necessarily depend entirely on the rules of international law applicable*
thereto. It seems to me, therefore, desirable, in the first place, to endeavor to take an accurate survey of the law by which the relative-234
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Obligations of
neutral state.
rights of belligerents and neutrals are fixed and determined, as essential to the solution of the questions we are called on to decide.
I proceed, therefore, to consider the subject of neutral obligations in
time of war.
Neutrality may be said to be the status of a country pffliBvely to two
_3__>_nts of neu- othdtes which are at war with one another, while it remains
at peace with both, and gives assistance to neither.
The last-mentioned condition is plainly an essential element of that
which goes before it; for, to give assistance to either of the belligerents
would be indireclJy to tgjike a part in the war, and would afford a sufficient reason to the one whose enemy was thus assisted, for having recourse to force to prevent such assistance from being given.
It is obviously immaterial in what form the assistlfoce is rendered, so
long as its purpose and effed0 is to add to the means of thelj
belligerent for the purpose either of offense or defense.
Troops, men, horses, ships, arms, munitions of war dUevery kind, money,
supplies—in short, whatever can add to the strength of the belligerent-
for the purpose either of atteilk or defense—are things that cannot be
supplied by a neutral state to either belligerent without forfeiting the
character of neutrality and the rights incidental to it.
In like manner the neutral sovereign cannot allow the use of his territory for the passage of troops of either belligerent, still less allow it
to be used by either as a base of hostile operations. He cannot lend
his ships for the transport of troops, arms, or munitions of war, or even
for the transmission of dispatches. Whatever restrictions, in the exercise of his territorial rights, he imposes on the one belligerent, he must
impose on the other algb; for restraints—however lawful and proper in
themselves—enforced as against the one, dispensed with as regards the
other, are indirectly assistance given to the one so favored.
Whatever obligations attach by the general principles of the law of
obligations of the nations to the state or community, as a whole, are equally
suwecta of a neutral binding on its subjects or citizens. For the state or community is but the aggregate of its individual members, and
whatever is forbidden to the entire body by that law, is dually forbidden
to its component parts. In this sense, and in this sense only, can it be said
that international law—in other words, the common law of nations—
forms part of the common law of England; for the greater part of the
rules of international law, by which nations now dSksent to be bound,
are posterior in date by many centuries to the formation of the common
law of England. Nevertheless, Great Britain forming part of the great
fraternity of nations, the common law adopts the fundamental principles of international law, and the obligations and duties they impose,
so that it becomes, by force of the municipal law, the duty of every man,
so far as in him lies, to observe them; by reason of which any act done
in contravention of such obligations becomes an offense against the law
of his own country.
But the subject who thus "^fringes the law of his own conn try by
violating the neutrality which that law enjoius him to maintain, is amenable for his offense to the law of his own
country alone, except when actually taking part in the
war as a combatant, when, of course, he is liable to be dealt with according to the laws of war. The offended belligerent has otherwise no hold
on him. International law knows of no relations between a state and
the subjects of another state, but only of those which exist between
state and state. But this being so, the bellijjjerent, against whom a
breach of neutrality has been committed by the subject of a neutral
Liability or the
fitate fur aits ot its
(.libit-.1 s.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN
235
state, as distinguished from the state itself, may have a right to hold
the state responsible, and to look to it for redress. For the state, that
is, the community as a whole, is bound to restrain its individual members from violating obligations which, as a whole, it is bound to fulfill.
Not, however, that the responsibility of the state for the acts of its
subjects is absolute and unlimited. Beason has set bounds to a responsibility which would otherwise be intolerable. For it must be remembered that the consequence of a violation of neutrality is the right of
the offended belligerent to treat the offending neutral as an enemy, and
declare war against him. He is not bound to accept pecuniary amends
as an alternative.
Now, reason points out that the government of a country can only be
held responsible for breaches of neutrality committed by its subjects,
when it can reasonably be expected to prevent them.
There are things which a government can prevent, and others which
it cannot. It can prevent things that are done openly and in defiance of
law. The open levying of men, and expeditions departing from its
territory by land or water, are things which a government would
properly be expected to prevent, and for which, if not prevented, it
would be answerable.
But a government could not be so held in respect of things it caunot
prevent; such as the conduct of individual subjects in enlisting or
serving in the land or sea force of a belligerent, or things done clandestinely or surreptitiously, so as to elude observatioh or detection, notwithstanding the exercise of proper diligence to prevent the law from being
broken. But then the exercise of such diligence is part of the duty of
a government, and the condition of its immunity. If this diligence has
been wanting, a belligerent has just cause to hold the neutral state responsible for wrongful acts done by its subjects, in violation of neutrality, and from which he, the belligerent, has suffered. We are thus
brought face to face with the all-important question of what is this
"diligence" which a government is thus bound to exercise to prevent
breaches of neutrality by its subjects. I shall endeavor presently to
grapple with that question; but I prefer first to complete my survey of
the relative rights and obligations of belligerents and neutrals.
And as the principal complaint against the British government relates to vessels of war furnished by its subjects to the Confederate
States, I shall, in the first place, apply myself to the question how far
the subjects of a neutral state can, consistently with the obligations of
neutrality, supply a belligerent with articles of warlike use in the way
of trade and business.
For, thus far, we have been dealing with assistance rendered to one
belligerent against another, animo adjuvandi, for the direct
o C5 7 « '        \ Rights  of neutral
purpose of enabling him to overcome or resist his opponent, suwecu inre»p_ct ot
Very different considerations present themselves when we
have  to deal with assistance furnished to a. belligerent, not animo
adjuvandi, with the object of enabling him to overcome his enemy,
but animo commercandi—in the way of trade and commerce.
Here a broad and important distinction between the state and its subjects presents itself. The former, generally speaking, can- Difference be-
not, consistently with neutrality, under auy circumstances, _|_^ __*£_£$'__
supply to one of two belligerents articles which may be trade-
of use to hirn in carrying on war. For, as governments do not engage
in trade, save in exceptional cases of very rare occurrence—as, for instance, when a government disposes of ships for which it has no use—
nothing supplied by a government to a belligerent can be supplied
f236
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
otherwise than animo adjuvandi; that is, for a pnrpose inconsistent with
neutrality. But its subjects stand, in this respee|§ on a very different
footing. The subject, indifferent to both the belligerent parties, may be
willing to sell to either articles of warlike use in which he is iu the habit
of dealing. Assistance, and sometimes very material assistance, is thus
afforded to a belligerent, who, by this means, is enabled to carry on
war. Is assistance thus afforded, not animo adjuvandi, but animo cotn-
mercandi, a breach of neutrality, or is it to be considered as within the
right of the neutral subject!
J_Tow, the subjects of a nejatral state having in time of peace the right
of carrying on trade with a belligerent, on what ground of reason or
justice, it may be asked, should their right of peaceful trade be taken
away, and their interests thus be damaged by reason of a war wh i<-h
they nave had no share in bringing about, and in which they have
ip^iconcern? The condition of neutrality, in not supplying anything to
either belligerent with the object of assisting him against the other, q§
which would not be as readily supplied to the other, being observed,
what reason can be suggested why the rights of the nentral in his relations with either belligerent, as they .existed before war broke out.
should be disturbed or altered ?
An Italian jurist thus writes :
II fatto della venditadegli oggetti di contrabbando awennta in territorio neutrale i
opera dello stato stesso nella sna quality di persona pubblica, o invece b l'operato, di
suoi privati cittadiui, che i'anno di Old la loro abituale professions. Nel primo caso
b t'uor di dnbbio che vi safebbe mot i vo di lagnanza per parte di nno dei belligeranti,
poiche non entra negli officii dello stato l'attendere a privati meroimonii, ed ogni
sud atto ba un valoreinternazionale o in senso di nn diritto o in senso di una obbliga-
zionc. clic non si pod mai diseimnlare. Malo stesso non si pod dire ove la'fSodita degli
oggetti, e quandosia il caso la fabbrica degli stessi, fosse il fatto partioolare di j>ri\ ati
cittadinidl quello stesso stato. In esso non potrebbe ravvisarsi un line politico come
n<-11' azione pubblica del governo, non essendo lo scopo di tali oittadini ohe commereiale
od imlust riale. epperb non lesivo in modo alcuno degli altrni diritti.
Se gli autori che hauno discnsso la presente qnestione avessero ritenota la capitals
differenza che passa tra gli atti pubblici del governo e quel 1 i dei privati oittadini, non,
avrebbero al certo classincato come atti contrari alia condizione neutrale la vendite
t'atta in tei ritorio neutro da privati oittadini di armi e inuuizioni da gnerra.'
Nevertheless, it is certain that the rights of a nation, as regards trade
Effect of war on with, another nation, do undergo very considerable modifications, when such second nation engages in war "with a
third ; and when it is said by some writers that neutrality is only t he
prolongation of the state of peace between the neutral ami the belligerent, this language must be taken with considerable allowance. For. it
is certain that, as regards trade and commerce, the rights of the peaceful neutral undergo very serious diminution. By the admitted rules of
international law, a belligerent may seize articles contraband of warift
transit by sea from the nentral to his enemy. By blockading his enemy's port he may shut the commerce of the neutral even in articles not
capable of being applied to warlike use. True, say those writers who
advocate the rights of neutrals against belligerents; but if the rights of
the neutral subject in respect of trade had been regulated according to
natural law, or, to speak more philosophically, according to the \&vt
which reason points out as for the common benefit of all. those rights
would have remained undisturbed and unaffected by the wattlof othenf
with whom his own country remained at peace. JBnt between distant
nations trade can be carried on only by sea. The nations most powerful at sea have generally been those who have waged war on the ocean.
■*•^jjgHo' uNnova teoria dei rapporti ginridici interuazionali," cited in Gola,'* Corso
di diritto interna /.iotialc." vol. 3, p. 30.OPINIONS   OP   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
237
In such wars they have sought to weaken their adversaries by crippling
their commerce, and to effect that object have imposed restraints on
peaceful states less powerful than themselves. Some countries have
even gone so far, in early times, as to interdict all commerce whatever
with nations with which they were at war. The sense of mankind, it is
true, revolted against pretensions so extravagant, and after a time the
restraints which belligerents were entitled to impose on neutral commerce were rendered less oppressive. But they still bear the impress of
their origin, as having been imposed by the strong upon the weak. They
are manifestly m derogation of the common right of peaceful trade which
all maritime nations enjoy in time of peace, but which is thus made to
submit to restraint in order to serve the purposes of those by whom the
peace of the world is disturbed.
. Let us see how these restraints on neutral commerce became settled
in time. As they existed till a very recent period, according to the
general practice of nations, they were as follows:
1. Though the belligerent might resort to the neutral territory to purchase such articles as he required, even for his use in war, and the neutral' in selling him such articles would be guilty of no infraction of
neutrality, yet, in regard to things capable of being used in war, and
which thenceforth received the appellation of " contraband of war," if,
instead of the belligerent himself conveying them, the neutral undertook to convey them, such articles, if intercepted by the adversary,
though the property of the neutral in them had not been transferred to
the belligerent, were liable to be seized and became forfeited to the
captor. If the article was of a doubtful character, ancipitis usus, that is,
one that might be applied to purposes of peace or of war, the liability of
seizure depended on whether the surrounding circumstances showed
that it was intended for the one use or the other.
2. If either belligerent possessed sufficient force at sea to bar the
access to a port belonging to his enemy, he was entitled to forbid the
neutral all access to such port for the purpose of trade, however innocent and harmless the cargo with which his ship might be charged,
under the penalty of forfeiting both ship and cargo.
3. The neutral was prohibited from carrying the goods of a belligerent, such goods not being protected by the neutral flag, but being subject to seizure.
4. Besides this, according to the practice of France, the neutral was
prohibited from having his goods carried in the enemy's ship, and if the
ship was taken the goods became prize.
Lastly, to enforce the rights thus assumed by powerful belligerents,
the neutral had further to submit to what was called the right of search,
in order that the belligerent might satisfy himself whether goods of the
enemy, or goods contraband of war intended for the enemy, were being
conveyed iu the neutral ships.
By the wise and liberal provisions of the declaration of Paris of 1856,
the last two oppressive restraints on the trade of neutrals, mentioned
under heads 3 and 4, have, as between most of the leading nations of
the world, been done away with. The others remain. America has
not as yet formally assented to the declaration of Paris. The two rules
in question do not, however, come into play on this occasion.
But the two first of the restraints put on neutral commerce occupy a
prominent place iu the discussions which have occurred in the course of
this inquiry.   Both of them are manifestly restraints," and   Bi_cka_._n_ con-
restraints of a very serious character, on the natural free- tr*band °r war-
dom of neutral commerce.   The advantage thus acquired of preventing238
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
the trade of the neutral in articles of warlike use, at a time when that
trade is the most likely to be profitable to him, and still more that of
preventing it in any shape by the blockading of an enemy's port, is
obviously obtained only at the expense of the peaceful rights of neutral
commerce.
The right of blockading a port, and thereby excluding from it neutral
commerce of every sort, has been j ustified by assimilating it to that exercised by the besieger of a city or fortress, in investing it and debarring
all access to it. But the analogy is not complete, for the immediate
purpose of the besieger is to take the city or fortress, while that of the
blockade is, not to capture the blockaded port, but to enfeeblethe enemy
and diminish his means by the gradual destruction of his commerce,
which of course necessarily involves a corresponding loss inflicted on
the commerce of the neutral. And though it may be said that, just as
the besieger of a city or fortress is in occupation of the territory which
surrounds it, and is, therefore, by the law of war, master of such territory and entitled to give laws to all within its ambit, and has thus full
right as well as power to forbid access to it, so the blockading force has
occupation of the territorial waters and can exercise a similar right iu
respect of them; yet for the most part such occupation is constructive
only, and the blockading force is generally in the habit of sending cruisers far beyond the limits of the territorial waters, to intercept vessels
intending to enter the blockaded port.
On whatever ground the right of blockade thus conceded to belligerents
may be placed, it is obvious that it is a very serious encroachment on
the freedom of the neutral in the peaceful pursuit of commerce.
In M. Calvo's work, " Le droit international," blockade is spoken of
as |i la plus grave atteinte qui puisse etre portee par la guerre au droit
des neutres.1 ?
Fiore says : '' Le blocus est odieux et contraire a. l'independance des
peuples neutres; parcequ'il n'empesche pas seulement le commerce de
certaines matieres d6terinin£es, comme la contrebande de guerre; mais
il d6truit toute espeGe de commerce de quelque nature que ce soit avec
les lieux assieg6s et bloqu£s."2
_STor must it be forgotten, with respect to the trade carried on in defiance of a blockade, that the neutral owes nothing to the blockading
belligerent, who, for his own purposes, thus seeks to shut out the innocuous commerce of the neutral with his enemy, regardless of the loss
and injury he is thereby inflicting on him.
The right to intercept articles of warlike use has been for the most
contraband of war. part treated by earlier, writers on international law as an
admitted encroachment on the neutral in respect of freedom of trade.
It has been justified on the score of the necessity in which the belligerent
captor is placed, of preventingthat which will be used to his own hurtfrom
reaching his adversary; or as arising from the law of self-defense, which
gives to the belligerent the right of stopping things which may be used
against him, while on their way to his enemy, and, furthermore, of confiscating them to his own use as a penalty on the neutral for having intended to convey them to the enemy.
Looked at from this point of view, it is said that the right of the belligerent to intercept this species of commerce, and the liability of the
neutral to have his property captured and confiscated under such circumstances, do not arise out of obligations iuherent in the nature of
neutrality.   They are purely conventional, and, as it were, a compromise
1 Vol. ii, p. 521.
"Vol. ii, p. 446.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
239
between the power of belligerents and the rights of neutrals; and, if
this species of trade can be said to be unlawful, it is only so sub modo,
it being left free to the neutral to pursue it, subject always to the right
of the belligerent to seize it during its transit to his enemy, if he can.
| The right of the neutral to transport," says that great jurist Chancellor
Kent, "and of the hostile power to seize, are conflicting rights, and
neither party can charge the other with a criminal act."1
A different view respecting the trade of the neutral in articles of contraband of war has, however, been maintained in our day.
M. Hautefeuille, and the writers of his school, look upon
the supplying of articles of contraband of war by the nerifral in the way
of trade as inconsistent with the duty of neutrality, whi|jl|!
prohibits the rendering of assistance to a belligerent for the
purpose of a war in which he is engaged, extending the rule to articles
of warlike use supplied in the way of trade as much as to those furnished gratuitously.
According to this view, the neutral thus guilty of a breach of the first
principle of neutrality justly incurs the penalty of his transgression in
the confiscation and loss of his property.
This doctrine is open, however, to the objection that it is inconsistent
with the practice of nations, according to which this species of trade
has never been treated as a breach of neutrality in the full sense of the
term.   It wholly fails to account for or justify the right of blockade.
But the importance of this difference in the views of publicists will be
more sensibly felt when we proceed to deal with the subject of the trade
of the neutral with the belligerent in the country of the neutral.
One thing is quite clear, and must not be lost sight of: Neither the
trade in contraband of war nor that carried on in defi- No obligation ....
ance of a blockade constitute, practically, any violation of ™up^eKv_rad_ei_
neutrality, so far as the government of the neutral trader is ™nt^nd_i_._____
concerned. Scarce any neutral government has ever at- porta-
tempted to prevent its subjects from carrying on such trade; no neutral
government was ever held responsible, as for a breach of nentralitjj|£$|i|
such trade carried on by its subjects:1 This is a point as to which there
has been no difference of action among governments, or difference of
opinion as to the duty of governments among writers on public law. It
is one of those things which, on the part of its subjects, a government,
according to the existing practice of nations, is not called upon to prevent. It is one of those things which the belligerent, who, in furthering
his own purposes is indifferent to the loss he inflicts on the neutral, must
submit to if he is unable to prevent it, and for which he is not entitled
to hold the neutral state responsible.
Speaking of the transport of articles contraband of war, M. Ortolan
states the law most correctly: M. 0rtoian
Si c'est l'elat neutre lui-m6me qni fait ope"rer ce transport, soit qu'il le fasse gratuite-
ment, soit qu'il en recoive le prix, il devient auxiliaire de lalutte, et par consequent il
rompt la neutrality. La chose change si ce sont les snjets de cet 6tat qui, sans appni
de leur gouvernement, font de ce __.me transport un objet de leurs operations commer-
ciales. tine puissance qni resfce neutre n'est pas obligee de deTendre ce commerce k sea
sujets, encore moins de les punir pour l'avoir fait; seulement elle ne peut le couvrir de
sa protection. En d'autres termes, le pavilion ne couvre pas les marchandises de contre-
bande de guerre, non pas meme dans le cas ou ces marchandises appartiennent a des
neutres.3
Among the various articles coming under the denomination of contraband of war, according to the general principles of international law, two more particularly interest us on the present
1 Kent's Commentaries, vol. i, p. 142.
2" Diplomatie de la Mer," vol. ii, chap. 6.
Ships  ol   war
Wills,
11ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
occasion—ships of war and coals. Both are excluded from the category
of contraband by M. Hautefeuille, who refuses to recognize as such anything which is not in its actually eximng state ready to be used for attack or defense. The following passages from his work, "Des droits et
des devoirs des nations neutres," explain the views of the author on the
subject of ships, which, till armed, he refuses to consider contraband of
war, and which, whatever the construction, when unarmed, he holds to
be objects of lawful commerce:
Je ne puis comprendre qu'un b&timent, quelles que soient sa grandeur, sa forme, sa
destination, soit un objet de contfebande de guerre.   Le navire n'est pas propre a la I
guerre, prepare pour servir exclusivement aux operations militaires, apte a 6tre employ 6 k ces operations, immediatement et sans aucun changement, sans aucune addition.
Lorsqu'il est depour vu des canons, des munitions, des armes et des hommes qni doivent
les employer, ce n'est pas une machine de guerre; c'est un vehicule plus ou moins
grand, plus ou moins solide, mais ce n'est qu'un v6hicule.   Pour lui donner les quails
tes sp^ciales et exclusives qui determinent le caractere de contrebande de guerre, il est*
n^cessaire de transporter a bord des canons, des armes, des munitions, en un mot, tout
l'attirail du combat.   C'est alors seulement que le batiment devient, non une machine
de gUerre, mais une machine portant des instruments de guerre et susceptibles de
nuire, par cette circonstance seulement, au belligerant.   Mais la maehine elle-m6me,
mais le vebicule dehue" de son armement, ne peut 6tre repute" nuisible.   Au reste, il faut
convenir que ce commerce est peu frequent, et la meilleure preuve que je puisse donner
de l'innocuite de ce negoce est le silence du droit secondaire a son egard.1   .
Les b&timents non armes, construits dans les ports neutres et vendus aux nations
engages dans les hostilites, quelles que soient leur force, la nature de leur construction, I
sont Egalement objets d'un commerce licite.   Ils doivent etre regis par la regie generate, qui e$t la liberte entiere du commerce, entre les nations neutres et les deux?
belligerants.1
As to coal, M. Hautefeuille expresses himself as follows:
La houille est sans doute un auxiliaire indispensable des machines, mais elle ne sau-
rait fetre consideree comme un instrument direct et exclusif de guerre; bien loin de Ik,
les usages pacifiques auxquels elle est employee sont beaucoup plus importants que
ceux qui resultent de l'etat de guerre; et la consommation faite pour ces usages pacifiques est beaucoup plus considerable que celle necessity par les hostilites. D'apres.'
les regies du droit primitif, la houille est done une denree dont le commerce doit toujours rester libre.
Je ne saurais prevoir comment les traites a intervenir entre les pennies navigateurs
trancheront cette question; mais ce que je puis affirmer c'est que la houille, d'apres le
droit primitif, ne fait pas partie de la contrebande; c'est que la loi secondaire ne peut
changer la nature des objets, ni leur donner un caractere qu'ils n'ont pas, d'apres les
principes qu'elle est appeiee a appliquer, mais non a modifier.2
But the views of this eloquent and learned but theoretical author on
this subject are not shared by other writers. Galiani, Hiibner, (the
champion of the rights of neutrals,) Martens, Tetens, Piantanida, Rutherford, Lord Stowell, Chancellor Kent, Heffter, in his able work, P Das
europaische Yolkerrecht der Gegenwart," include ships among the
things which are contraband of war. Among later writers, M. Ortolan
and Sir Robert Phillimore place both ships and coal in the list of articles'
of contraband. I entirely concur in thinking that a ship adapted and
intended for war is clearly an article of contraband. Such a ship is, in
fact, a floating fortress, and, when armed and manned, becomes a formidable and efficient instrument of warfare. Coal, too, though in its
nature ancipitis usus, yet, when intended to contribute to the motive-
power of a vessel, must, I think, as well as machinery, be placed in the
same category as masts and sails, which have always been placed among
articles of contraband, except by M. Hautefeuille, who, as has been
stated, insists that nothing is to be considered as contraband except
what is capable of being immediately applied to the purpose of destructive warfare.
1 Hautefeuille, " Droits et devoirs des nations neutres," vol. ii, p. 136.
s Ibid., pp. 143,144.OPINIONS   OF   SIR   ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
241
It is perfectly clear, though I fear it has not always been kept in view
iu the course of these discussions, that, with the liability to Pas(,iv(. commerce
the seizure and loss of the cargo, (in some instances, it is oi'Aen^lml-
said, of the ship,) if he transmits contraband of war to the enemy of the
belligerent captor, (and to the loss both of ship and cargo if he attempts
to force a blockade,) ends, according to the existing practice of nations,
all restraint on the trade and commerce of the neutral. In his own
country, iu his own markets, in his own factories, the neutral may, according to the practice of nations, sell articles to the belligerent which,
if sent by sea, would be contraband of war. Theoretical writers are not,
indeed, of one mind on this subject. While the great majority of authors
are agreed as to the right of the neutral to sell, in the way of trade, to
the belligerent resorting to his market, whatsoever the latter desires to
buy, if the neutral has it to sell, whether the article be of an innocent
character or contraband of war in its most destructive form, a few
authors have recently written in a different spirit.
Xo writer on international law before G-aliani had ventured to assert that
the neutral was prohibited from selling, in his own country, to a belligerent, articles which, if sent out of his country by sea, would be liable
to siezure as contraband of war. His doctrine to that effect was vigor1
ously refuted by his two distinguished countrymen, Lampredi and Azuni,
and was for a time abandoned as untenable; but it has been revived in
our day. Let us review the leading authorities. The question is not
only of interest to the jurist, but one which will be found to be important to some of the decisions of this tribunal.
Lampredi, in his work on neutral commerce, refutes the opinion of
Galiani.    Ou the general subject, £1 quote from Peuchets'
French translation, not having the original before me,) he
writes as follows :
Lorsqu'une fois l'on a etabli la scule loi que les peuples neutres doivent observer
pendant la guerre, il devient inutile de demander quelles doivent §tre les limites du
commerce qu'ils font en consequence de leur neutralite, parcequ'on peut repondre qu'il
n'en doit avoir aucune, et qu'ils peuvent le faire de la ni.me maniere qu'ils le faisaient
en temps de paix, observant seulement une exacte impartialite pendant tout le temps
de la guerre. II n'y aura done aucune esphx de marchandises qu'ils ne puissent vendre et
porter aux belligSmnts et Vonne pourrapas les empScher de leur vendre ou louer des navires,
pourvu qu'ils ne refusent point a l'un ce qu'ils accordent a l'autre. Devant et pouvant
suivre legitimement leur commerce comme en temps de paix, il ne doit y avoir aucune
distinction de marchandises, d'argent, d'armes, et d'autres munitions de guerre: la
vente et le transport de ces divers objets dans les places des belligerants doivent etre
permis, et ne point porter atteinte a la neutralite, pourvu qu'il n'y ait ni faveur, ni
preference, ni esprit de parti.1 j
In chapter v, page 57, he treats the question whether   neutrals
may sell every kind of merchandise within the neutral territory to a
belligerent, as one which no jurist anterior to Galiani had ever thought
of bringing into controversy, all their discussions being confined to the
carriage of contraband to the enemy.   It is not, he explains, till they
have left the neutral territory that articles, though of warlike character,
assume the character of contraband.    In chapter vii, page 72, he says :
Le caractere de contrebande ne vient done pas, aux marchandises, de l'usage qu'on
peut en faire dans la guerre, mais de tout autre source. Aussi longtemps qu'elles sont
sur le territoire neutre, elles ne different pas des autres marchandises; elles s'y vendent
et s'y achetent de la m_me maniere et sans aucune difference. Deux circonstances font
prendre... ces marchandises le caractere de contrabande: 1, qu'elles soient passees a la
puissance de l'ennemi, ou a moins destinees a y passer ; 2, qu'elles soient sorties du territoire neutre. Alors elles deviennent choses hostiles, res hostiles; elles prennent le
caractere de marchandises de contrebande; et si elles sont trouvees hors de tonte juridiction souveraine, comme, par exomple, si l'on les trouvait en pleine mer, elles peu-
11 Commerce des neutres," part i, chap. 3, p. 32.
13 B242
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
vent 6tre 16gitin_en_eut arr&tees et confisqulgB par l'ennemi, quel que soit le pavilion
qui les couvre, non pas parce que ce soit des instruments ou provisions de gnerre, mais
parce que ce sont des cboses appartenants a l'ennemi, on an moms parce qu'elles sont
destinies a deveuir sa propri6t6 et a accroltre ses forces. D'oii il R_--.nl fe que le souverain qui permet, sur son territoire,le commerce libre de tontessortes d'objets ne passe pas
les droits de souverainete, et les puissances belligerantes ne peuvent s'en plaindre ni
1'accuser de donner la main a la vente des marchandises de contrebande,v3l|ui, snr son
territoire, ne peuvent jamais avoir ce caractere, et ne penraiTOB porter le nom que
lorsqu'elles sont devennes on destinces k dev.enir la propriety de 1'enuemi, et sorties du
lorsq
territoire ou elles ont ete achetees
In another work Lampredi, spe
r,l-
mj
of neutrality, says:
Et quia neutrius partis esse debet, et abello omniuoabstinere, nentri etijpjjs suppedi-
tabit quae directe ad bellum referuntur. Suppeditare bicloci irja-usvebereadalterntrnnr
hostem significab; nam si qua gens instrumenta bellica, et costera* supra memorata
utrisque bellantibus sequo pretio veluti merces vendat, neutralitatem non violat. Ad
banc necessariam mercaturse distinctionem animum non advertisse eos, qui de hacro
tam prolixe scripserunt, manifeste patet; maxime enim iutor se differre videntur ex-
port.atio mercium-ad hostem meum ab amico vel neutro populo facta, et eorum ven?.
ditio, quae ad bellum necessaria esse possunt.1
Azuni, who wrote shortly after Lampredi, maintains the same doctrine. In his work " Systeme universel de principes de
droit maritime," (ch. ii, art. 3,) he says:
Le commerce general passif, ou la vente impartiale sur le propre territoire des neutres, de marchandises, denrces, ou manufactures, de toute especc, sera toujours permis,
pourvu que le souverain n'ait pas fait un traite particulier avec un des-belligerants
dont les snjets viennent faire des achats et des provisions sur le territoire neutre, tS
qu'il ne se mele pas des achats, des ventes, et des autres contrats qui transmet tent la
propriete, qu'il n'ordonne pas qu'on remplisse les magasins de provisions de guerre, et
ne fasse pas mettre ses navires a la voile pour les transporter sur le territoire du belr
ligerant. En protegeant egalement le commerce de son pays, en permettant k sea
su^ets de continuer leur commerce de la meme maniere et avec la meme liberte qn'avant
. la guerre, il ne fait qu'user-de droits incontestables, qui ne peuvent 6tre limites que par
des conventions sp6ciales, expressement ou tacitement faites.
After combating the reasoning of Galiani, he adds:
II est necessaire que je repete ici le principe incontestable que j'ai prececlen.uient
rapporte, qu'en suivant le droit conventionnel de l'Europe, les neiitres ne peuvent
porter les choses qui sont specialement propres k la guerre, et qui y sont directement
employes, mais qu'ils peuvent sans inconvenient, selon le droit universel des gens, 168
vendre comme marchandise sur leur propre territoire a quiconque se presente pour lei
acheter, puisqu'ils le font sans partialitl, et sans montrer de favour plut6t pour une
partie belligerante que pour l'autre.
Reddie, in his " Researches Historical and Critical in Maritime and
International Law," cites these views with concurrence and approbation.
In Wheaton's History of International Law, the author speaks of the
refutation of Galiani by Lampredi as superfluous,  as an ''idle question."
Masse, in his work " Le droit commercial dans s
droit des gens," after maintaining the
gerent to intercept contraband, adds :
Mais la these change s'il s'agif'ifr'un commerce passi£ S'il est del 'end it an nentre de
porter des amies et des munitions aux belli _,erants, parcequ'alors il devient l'auxiliaire
de l'un et l'ennemi de l'autre, il ne lui est pas defendn de vendre itupartialeinent sur
son territoire des objets necessaires a la guerrwharceque son territoire est on vert a
tous, que tous peuvent veuir y chercher ce dont ils ont besoin, et que le neutre qni M
borne a vendre chez lui, a la difference de celui qui porte ses marchandises an belligerant, n'est pas tenu de rechercher qni les lui aeli.-te, pour qni el les sont achetees, et
quelle est leur destination ultcrieure. C'est alors qu'il est absolument vrai de dire que
les neutres peuvent continuer pendant la guerre le commerce qu'ils feisaient pendant
SS   rapports avec Is
right of the belffi
Theorem, juris publici universi,'" p. 3, cap. 12, $9, n. 4.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
243
la paix, et que la neutralite est la continuation d'un etat antedeur qui ne modifie pas
la guerre a laquelle le neutre, qui ouvre son marche a toutes les nations, ne prend
aucune part directe ou indirecte.1
Again:
Sur un territoire neutre, il n'y a pas de marchandise de contrebande; toutes y sont
libres. Elles nedevieunent contrebande qn'au moment oh elles en sorteht avec diree-
tion pour un lieu dout leur nature les exclut. C'est alors qu'elles tombent sous la juridiction des belligerants contre lesquels elles sont dirigees. Jusque-la et tant qu'elles
restent en un lieu ou elles ne peuvent leur nuirefils n'ont pas le droit de s'occuper des
transactions pficifiques dont elles peuvent etre l'objet. Sans doute, la guerre donne
une nouvelle impulsion au commerce passif des objets utiles a la guerre; mais cette
impulsion n'est pas du fait des neutres, elle est du fait des belligerants, qui, apres avoir
eux-memes produit des circonstances nouvelles, ne peuvent trouver mauvais que les
neutres en profitent dans les limites de leurs droits ,et de leur territoire.3
p. Ortolan observes as follows:
C'est seulement lorsque de telles mafehandises sont en cours de transport pour une destination hostile qu'elles devienuent contrebande militair.e.   Lorsqu'un etat „, 1
i" ■ - •   _ . • ... , „   + ... M. Ortolan.
neutre laisse ses sujets se livrer au commerce passif de ces tneuies objets,
c'est-a-dire, lorsqu'il permet a tous les belligerants indistinctenient de venir les acheter
sur son territoire pour les transporter ensuite oh bon leur semble, k leurs frais etfk
leurs risques, sur leurs propres navires marchands, il ne fait pas autre chose que laisser
s'accomplir un acte licite; on ne peut pas dire qu'il prenue part a la guerre parce qu'il
laisse ses ports libres, et parce qu'il conserve k toutes les nations le droit qu'elles avaient
avant la guerre d'y entrer avec leurs batiments marchands pour s'y approvisionuer,
par la voie du commerce, des marchandises dont elles ont besoin ; les vendeurs eux-
m_mes ne sont pas responsables de l'usage ulterieur qui sera fait de ces marchandises;
ils ne sont pas tenus de connaltre ni pour qui elles sout achetes ni la direction qu'on
leur reserve.
Le droit conventionnel est d'accord avec ces principes; il ne defend pas la vente im-
partiale faite sur un territoire neutre des marchandises propres a la guerre. Mais si
ces secours eifectifs en nature, que l'un des combattants vient prendre et exporte a,
ses propres risques, etaient fouruis par l'etat neutre lui-mfeme; si, par exemple, des armes,
des projectiles, de la poudre etaient tires de ses arsenaaux ou de ses manufactures
publiques, ce ne serait plus laun commerce prive, etpar consequent il y aurait atteinte
grave a la neutralite.3
Heffter, in his i Volkerrecht der Gegenwart.':
H cite from Bergson's
Heffter
translation,) p. 315, says:
En ce qui concerne les objets de contrebande, la vente faite aux belligerants en tewB||
toire neutre ne saurait etre consideree comme un acte illicite et contraire aux devoirs
de la neutralite; ce n'est que leur transport qui en rend responsable.
Professor Sandona, of Siena, "Trattato di diritto internazionale mo-
derno," comparing passive with the active commerce of neutrals, says:
Dico adunque, che si crede a torto che faccia opera ad un di presso eguale, chi vende
semplicemeute nel proprio paese quanto immediatemente si riferisce ai mezzi di tare
la guerra, e chi trasporta questi mezzi sui mercati o nelle piazze dei belligeranti. II
priino vende le sue merci nel proprio paese, ove nou vi e, stando al puro diritto razio-
nale, alcuna legge che gliene vietiil traffico. E appunto perche dimora in esso, e nieute
osta a questo commercio, egli non fa uso che della sua liberta, che d'altra parte tiuche
rimane nel paese nativo, nessun principe straniero pub limitare La sola
cosa che si pub dirnandare da lui e questa, che sia disposto a vendere egualmente a
chiunque si presenta le sue merci, oude evitare il pericolo di offendere l'imparzialita, a
cui i neutrali souo tenuti.
To these authors Professor Bluntschli has added the weight of his
authority. Professor Bluntsehli.
In his work entitled "Das moderne Volkerrecht," or, as it is called
in the French translation, " Le droit iuternational codiiie," he writes :
Le fait qu'un etat neutre fournit ou laisse fournir a un des belligerants des armes ou
du materiel de guerre constitue egalement une violation des devoirs des neutres.   ,244
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Ear contre, si des particuliers, sans avoir l'intention de venir en aide a l'un des belligerants, lui fournisseuP-. titre d'entreprise coramerciale des armes ou du materiel de
guerre, ils conrent le risque que ces objets soient coMisquees par l'adversaire comme
contrebande de guerre; les gouvernements neutres ne nfffliquent pas a leur devoir en
tolerant le commerced'objets qui sont considers comme contrebande de guerre. .   .   .
Celui qui transporte de la contrebande de guerre a l'nne des parties belligerantes
s'expose k voir ces objets confisques. Mais l'etat neutre n'a pas de motifs de s'opposer
k l'expedition de la contrebande de guerre. Dans les discussions de la loi americaine
sur la neutralite, le president Jefferson dedara en 1793 que la guerre etrangbre ne pri-
vait point les particuliers du droit de fabriquer, de vendre ou d'exporter des armes;
seulement les citoyens americains, ajoutait-il, exercent ce droit a leurs risques et
perils.1
The opinion of Galiani 'has, however, been again revived by two or
three writers in our owu days.
Among these, Sir Robert Phillimore, in his work on International Law,
vol. iii,  §   cexxx, speaking   " as to the   permitting the
sale of munitions of war to a belligerent within the territory of the neutral,'' writes:
If the fountains of international justice have been correctly pointed out in a former j
volume of this work, and it be the true character of a neutral to abstain from every act \
which may better or worsen the condition of a belligerent, the unlawfulness of any j
such sale is a necessary conclusion from these premises.
^Vhat does it matter where the neutral suftelies one belligejjent with the means of j
attacking another ?   How does the question of locality. accoJpng to the principles of |
eternal justice and the reason of the thing, affect the advantage to one belligerent or I
the injury to the other accruing from this act of the alleged neutral?   Is the cannon
or the sword, or the recruit who is to use them, the less dangerous to the belligerent I
because they were purchased, or he was enlisted, within the limits of neutral territory .
Surely not.   Surely the locus in quo is wholly beside the m ark, except, indeed, that the
actual conveyance of tbe weapon or the soldier may evidence a liipterer and more decided partiality, a more unquestionable and active pprticipation in the war.
MM. Pistoye and Ljuverdy also, in their "Traite des prises maritimes," express, though with less energy than the learned author last
mentioned, a like view.
M. Hautefeuille, who, as we have seen, not only refuses to admit vessels equipped for war, if not armed, into the list of contraband of war, but also holds that they are legitimate articles
of neutral commerce, nevertheless maintains that what is called the
passive trade of the neutral in articles of warlike use is inconsistent with
neutrality.   His reasoning is as follows :
Cette question a ete traitee avec beaucoup d'etendue par Lampredi et par Azuni; lai-
doctrine de ces deux auteurs a ete combattu par Galiani. Avant d'examiner l'opinion
de ces publicistes, il me paralt indispensable de rappeler les bases de la discussion, de
poser des principes qui, d'aprbs la loi primitive, doivent la dominer. Ces principes 6t&
dej_t ete etablis. lis peuvent seresumer en deux droits et en deux devoirs. Les droii&v
sont: 1. Liberte et independance du peuple neutre dans son commerce, en temps de
guerre, m.me avec les deux belligerants. 2. Liberte et independance absolues du
neutre sur son propre territoire. Les deux devoirs sont eorrelatifs aux deux droits, ils
les limitent. Ce sont: 1. L'impartialite; 2. L'abstention de tous actes directs d'£
guerre, et par consequent de fournir aux belligerants les armes et les munitions de
guerre. De ces droits-il resulte, sans doute, que la nation pacifique a le pouvoir de
commercer librement avecchacundes belligerants, non seulement sur son propre territoire, mais encore partout ailleurs, sans qu'aucun d'eux puisse s'y opposer; mais ce
droit est borne par le devoir impose au neutre de ne fournir, ni a l'un ni k l'autre, des
instruments actuellement et uniquement destines a la guerre.
Cette limite mise par laloi primitive a la liberte des nations, s'etend-elle a tout le commerce, au commerce passif comme au commerce actif ¥ Le devoir du neutre consiste-
t-il uniquement k ne pas transporter les objets de||ontrebande dans les ports des belligerants ; ou au contraire ne prohibe-t-il pas le fait de vendre, de fournir ces objets k cenx
qui doivent s'en servir pour fi apper un ennemi ¥ A mes yeux, la reponse a cette double
question ne peut etre douteuse. Le devoir impose aux nations, qui desirent ne pas prendre
par aux hostilites, et jouir de la paix au milieu des maux de la guerre, est de ne pas fournir
51. Hautefeuille.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
245
des armes aux mains de ceux qui doivent s'en servir pour frapper. La loi naturelle, qui
impose ce devoir, n'a pas fait de distinction entre le commerce actif et le commerce
passif. Elle ne pouvait en faire, car l'un et l'autre ont le m.rae resultat, celui de donner a l'un des belligerants le moyen de nuire a l'autre. Ce devoir est absolu ; la restriction qu'il impose s'etend a toutes les manibres de fournir a l'un des combattants
l'arnie dont il veut frapper son ennemi. C'est un devoir d'humanite; et il n'est pas
moins inhumain de vendre des instruments homicides dans le port de Livourne que de
les transporter dans celui de Londres ou de Marseille. La vente des denrees de contrebande aux belligerants est done prohibee sur le territoire neutre, de la mbme
maniere et par le m_me motif que le transport de ces denrees dans les ports des peu-
ples en guerre.
Professor Casanova, in his recent work, "Del Diritto Internazionale,"
adopts the views of M. Hautefeuille.
This difference of opinion arises from the different point of view from
which each party considers the question. Tbe one party assume that
to supply a belligerent with articles of warlike use, though in the way
of trade, is to take part in the war; assuming which, they say with
truth, that it is the same thing whether the objectionable articles are
sold to the belligerent in the country of the neutral or in his own. The
other party, starting from the priuciple that, according to natural justice, the rights of the neutral should be left free and untouched by the
wars of others, look on the existing restraints on the freedom of his
commerce as encroachments on his rights, and considering these restraints as arising entirely from convention, deny the illegality of any
trade, which the actual practice of nations does not prevent. The great
authority of Chancellor Kent, and of the majority of writers, is in
favor of the latter view.
But, in truth, the question does not depend on the lucubrations of
learned professors or speculative jurists. However authoritatively these
authors may take upon themselves to write, and however deserving
their speculations may be of attention, they cannot make the law. International law is that to which nations have given their common assent,
and it is best known as settled by their common practice.
ISTow, in all wars, neutrals have traded at home and abroad in articles
contraband of war, subject always in the latter case to the Prac
chance of capture and confiscation. As I have already war8-.
said, no government has ever been sought to be made responsible on
that account. Assuredly, no nation has ever asserted the freedom of
commerce in this respect more broadly than the United States, or acted
up to its principles with greater pertinacity.
On the breaking out of the war between France and England in 1793,
after a proclamation of neutrality by General Washington, then President, Mr. Jefferson, then Secretary of State, thus writes to Mr. Hammond, minister of Great Britain to the United States :
The purchase of arms and military accouterments by an agent of the French government in this country, with an intent to export them to France, is the
subject of another of the memorials; of this fact we are equally unin- ti^.mencan authori
formed as of the former. Our citizens have been always free to make,
vend, and export arms. It is the constant occupation and livelihood of some of them.
To suppress their callings, the only means perhaps of their subsistence,, because a war
•exists iu foreign and distant countries, in which we have no concern, would scarcely be
expected. It would be hard in principle, and impossible in praatice. The law of nations, therefore, respecting the rights of those at peace, does not require from tfhera
such an internal derangement in their occupations. It is satisfied with the external
penalty pronounced in the President's proclamation, that of confiscation of such portion of these arms as shall fall into the hands of any of the belligerent powers on their
way to the ports of their enemies. To this penalty our citizens are warned that they
will be abandoned, and that even private contraventions may work no inequality between the parties at war, the benefit of them will be left equally free and open to
all.i
1 British Appendix, vol. v, p. 242.
1246
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
The collectors of the customs at the different ports were instructed
that—
The purchasing and exporting from the United States, by way of merchandise, articles commonly called contraband, being generally warl^p instruments and stores, is
free to all parties at war, and is notto be interfered with. If our own citizens undertake
to carry them to any of these parties, they will be abandoned to the penalties which
the laws of war authorize.1
In 1842, Mr. Webster writes:
It is not the practice of nations to undertake to prohibit their own subjects from
trafficking in articles contraband of war. Such trade is carried on at the risk of those
engaged in it under the liabilities and penalties prescribed by the law of nations or
particular treaties. If it be true, therefore, that citizens of the United States Lave
been engaged in a commerce by which Texas, an enemy of Mexico, has been supplied
with arms and munitions of war, the Government of the Uuited States, nevertheless,
was not bound to prevent it, and could not have prevented it without a manifest departure from the principles of neutrality, and is in no way answerable for the consequences.   Such commerce is left to its ordinary fate, according to the law of nations.'2
In his message to the American Senate, in December, 1854, President
Pierce declares:
The laws of the United States do not forbid their citizens to sell to either of the
belligerent, powers articles contraband of war, or to take munitions of war or soldiers
on board their private ships for transportation; and, although iu so doing the individual citizen exposes his property" or person to some of the hazards of war, his acts do
not involve any breach on national neutrality, nor of themselves implicate the Government.
Thus, during the progress of the present war in Europe, our citizens have, without
national responsibility therefor, sold gunpowder and arms to all buyers regardless of
the destination of those -articles. Our merchantmen have been, and still continue to
be, largely employed by Great Britain and France in transporting troops, provisions,
and munitions of war to the principal seat of military operations,"'and in bringing
home the sick and wounded soldiers; but such use of our mercantile marine is not
interdicted either by the international or by our municipal law, and therefore does
not compromise our neutral relations with Russia.3
Chancellor Kent, in his Commentaries, says:
It was contended by the French nation in 1796 that neutral govejapaents were bound
to restrain their subjects from selling or exporting articles contraband of war to the
belligerent powers. But it was successfully shown, on the part of'the U^Hted States, that
neutrals may lawfully sell at home to a belligerent purchaser, or carry themselves to the
belligerent powers, contraband articles, subject to the right of seizure^!® transitu. This
right has since been explicitly declared by the judicial authorities of this country. The
right of the neutral to transport, and of the hostile power to seize, are conflicting
rights, and neither party can charge the>other with a criminal act.4
In 1862, on the occasion of the French invasion of Mexico, complaint
was made by M. Romero, the representative of the Mexican government
at Washington, of the French being allowed to purchase horses and
mules in the United States for the purpose of the. war. A long correspondence ensued between M. Romero and Mr. Seward, in which the
latter vigorously maintains what he calls " the settled and' traditional
policy of the country."   He says:
It is not easy to see how that policy could be changed so as to fflgrforni to the views
of M. Romero without destroying all neutral commerce whatsoever. If Mexico shall prescribe to us what merchandise we shall not sell to French subjects, because it may be
employed in military operations against Mexico, France must equally be allowed to
dictfite to us what merchandise we shall allow to be shipped to Mexico, because it
might be belligerently used against France.. Every other nation which is at war
would have a similar right, and every other commercial nation would be bound to
1British Appendix, vol. v., p. 269.
s Letter to Mr. Thompson, Webster's Works, vol
v, p. 333.
3British Appendix, vol. v, p. 333.
4 Kent's Commentaries, vol. i, p. 142.
vi, p
British Appendix, vol.OPINIONS   OF   SU
LEXAND1
COC
instead of bein
respect ifras much as the United States.   Commerce, in that case
or independent, would exist only at the caprice of war.1
As regards the purchase of articles of war, the United States have
not scrupled to purchase arms and munitions of war in
other countries when need required it. xlt the commence- ff!§iiff^|$jij
ment of the civil war, the Government being short of arms, Vailedstates-
agents were sent to England to procure therh in large quantities. Other
agents bought arms in different countries on the continent. Figures
are given in the British counter-case which appear to bear out the statement that " the extra supplies of warlike stores thus exported to the
northern ports of the United States during the civil war are estimated
to represent a total value of not less than £2,000,000, of which £1,500,000
was the value of muskets and rifles alone." Mr. Adams, in a conversation with Earl Russell on the 22d May, 1862/when the latter, in answer
to his remonstrances as to supplies sent out from Great Britain to the
Confederate States, referred to the large supplies of similar materials
obtained on the part of the United States, naively answered that 1 at
one time a quantity of arms and military stores had been bought, as a
purely commercial transaction, for the use of the Federal Army, but
that the practice had been discontinued at his suggestion, because it
prevented him from pressing his remonstrances against a very different
class of operations carried on by friends and sympathizers with the
rebels, and that the United States had, instead, bought largely from
Austria;" "because," adds Mr. Adams, "that government had never given
any couutenance to the insurgents."2
It thus appears that the continental goyernments also did not consider the sale of arms by their subjects as any infringement of the law
of nations.
It seems to me, therefore, that the law relating to contraband of
war must be considered not as arising out of obligations of
neutrality, but as altogether conventional; and that by the
existing practice of nations, the sale of such things to a belligerent by
the neutral subject is not in any way a violation of neutrality,
how stands the matter as to ships of war?   In prim
there any difference between a ship of war and any otlu
article of warlike use ?   I am unable to see any.    Nor can I discover
any difference in principle between a  ship equipped to receive  her
armament, and a ship actually armed.   A ship of war implies'an armed
ship ; for a ship is not actually a ship of war till armed.    Of the authors
I have cited, and who hold ships ot war to be contraband of war, no
one of those who wrote before these disputes between the United States-
and Great Britain had arisen, with the exception of M. Hautefeuille,
makes any distinction between ships equipped to receive their armaments, and ships actually armed.   M. Hautefeuille, who, as we have
seen, refuses to  a ship equipped for armament, but not armed, the
character of contraband, treats the equifping and arming as a violation of neutrality; but he giv.es no reason and cites no authority, and
seems  to me herein—I   say it with the utmost respect—inconsistent
with himself.
Professor Bluntschli, in the
subject of ships furnished to a belligerent
of a neutral power, the following rules:
1 British Appendix, vol. v, p. 336.
2British counter-case, pp. 52-54.   British Appendix, vol. vi, pp. 153, 155, 158, 173.
United States Documents, vol. i. p. 535.
work alreadyARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
In article 763 of his proposed code, he says :
L'etat neutre ne doit pas seulement s'abstenir de livrer des navires de guerre a l'une
des pni|8ances bellig^rantes ; il est aussi tenu d'exercer une surveillance rigoiireuse et
d'emp&cher que des particuliers n'arment des nawies de guerre sur son territoire et ne
les livrent a l'un des belligerants.
In a note he adds:
En temps de paix, un etat peut ^videmment vendre des navires de guerre a uu autre,
ou recourir k l'industrie prive"e des etats strangers.   Mais pendant la guerre, la four-
juerre constttue evidemment un appui et uh renfort accorde" aux
Si l'intention de le faire resulte des circonstances, on devra considerer
contraires aux devoirs des neutres, et l'6tat lese" pourra agir en cons6-
761 he says:
II sufBt que l'intention de veiiir en aide a l'uu des belligerants soit manifesto, pour
que l'etat neutre soit tenu d'iutervenir, alors meme que l'armement du navire de guerre
ou du corsaire ne serait que prepare" ou commence.
In a note he subjoins:
II n'est pas necessaire que le navire soit deja arm6.   Lorsque les constructeurs, tout
en pretendant freter un navire de commerce, ont l'intention de l'armer en guerre, et.
lorsque cette intention peut 6tre constatee, ou du moins est vraisemblable, cet acte
constitue une violation des lois sur la neutralite.   Maip-lorsque cette intention nepeufcf
pas 6tre demontree, on ne saurait incriminer le fait de transformer en navire de guerre-'
un nayire de commerce construit sur un chantier neutre et achete plus tard par un
negociant d'un des pays belligerants.   (Wheaton, Intern. Law, p. 562.)   II en est autre-
ment lorsqu'tyfe navire de guerre est vendu d l'un des bellige'rants d titre (Pentreprise puremewt\
commerciale ou industrielle; il y aura dans ce cas contrebande de guerre, mais cet acte ne con-
stituera pas une violation des devoirs des neutres.2
I must observe that these rules, which are of a very stringent character, are not supported by any reasoning of the author, or by any juridical authority. I might add, that there is no ground for saying that
they have been generally accepted as international law. Even so distinguished a man as Professor Bluntschli cannot give laws to the world
from the professorial chair. Moreover, as I understand him, Professor
Bluntschli draws a distinction between the sale of ships with the in-,
tention of assisting a belligerent, and of ships sold in the course of a
purely commercial transaction.
The first two cited articles would, from the general terms in which
they are framed, appear to apply to ships of war by whomsoever they
may be supplied to the belligerent; but from the note to section 764
and the reference to section 765, hereinbefore cited, as to the sale of
arms and munitions of war in the country of the neutral, I gather that
the professor means to draw a distinction between ships made over to
a belligerent, whether by sale or otherwise, for the purpose of assisting
his cause, and ships of war sold to a belligerent by neutral subjects in
the way of trade.
This is the view taken by Mr. Dana in a note to his edition of u Whea-
ton's Elements of International Law," which has been reprinted in the documents appended to the American case:
Our rules do not interfere with bona-fide commercial dealings in contraband of war.
An American merchant may build and fully arm a,vessel, and provide her with stores,
and offer her for sale in our own market. If he does any acts as an agent or servant of
a belligerent, or in pursuance of an arrangement or understanding with a belligerent,
that she shall be employed in hostilities when sold, he is guilty. He may, without
violating our law, send out such a vessel, so equipped, under the flag aud papers of his
own country, with no more force of crew than is suitable for navigation, with no right
to resist search or seizure, and to take the chances-of capture as contraband merchandise, of blockade, and of a market in a belligerent port. In such case, the extent and
character of tbe equipments is as immaterial as in the other class of cases.   The intent
1 Section 763 and note 1, p.
2 Section 764, p. 384.
]83.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
249
Opinion of M.
tolan.
is all. The act is open to great suspicions and abuse, and the line may often be scarcely
traceable; yet the principle is clear enough. Is the intent one to prepare an article of
contraband merchandise, to be sent to the market of a belligerent, subject to the chances
of capture and of the market? Or, on the other hand, is it to fit out a vessel which
shall leave our port to cruise, immediately or ultimately, against the commerce of a
friendly nation . The latter we are bound to prevent; the former the belligerent must
prevent.1
Professor Gola, of Parma, in a recent work, observes:
Lo stesso dicasi ove si trattasse di costruzioni di navi: l'atto lede la neutralita, ove
l'impresa si eseguisca dal governo, e invece un' opera d'industria ove si compia da pri-
'vati imprenditori nei loro cantieri.2
M. Ortolan, who had made no such distinction in the former edition
of his work, | Sur la diplomatic de la mer," in the last edition of that work has, with reference to this subject, the following, I cannot help thinking, somewhat extraordinary doctrine:
Si l'on suppose un navire construit sur le territoire neutre, non pas sur commande
d'un belligerant ou par suite d'un traite ostensible ou dissimuie avec ce belligerant,
mais en vue d'un dessein quelconque, soit de navigation commerciale, soit tout autre,
et que ce navire, deja par lui-m6me propre k la guerre ou de nature k etre converti k
cet usage, une fois sorti des ports de la nation neutre, soit vendu, dans le cours de sa
navigation, occasionnellement, a l'un des belligerants, et se mette a naviguer en destination directe pour ce belligerant: un tel navire dans de telles circonstances tombe
uniquement sous le coup des regies relatives a la contrebande de guerre. II est sujet a
etre arrete et confisque par l'ennemi quipourra s'en emparer, mais sans qu'aucnn grief
de violation des devoirs de la neutralite puisse sortir de ce fait contre l'etat neutre
pour n'avoir pas defendu a ses nationaux de telles ventes ou ne les avoir pas reprimees.
C'est une operation de trafic qui a eu lien, trafic de contrebande de guerre, dont aucune
circonstance particuliere n'est venue changer le caractere.
. Tel fut, en l'annee 1800, le cas du navire americain le Brutus, Capture par les Anglais
■et juge de bonne prise par la cour d'amiraute d'Halifax.
; Mais la situation change; la contrebande deguerre n'est plus la question principale;
d'autres regies du droit des gens interviennent et modifient profondement la solution,
si l'on suppose qu'il s'agisse de bailments de guerre construits, armes ou equipes surun
territoire neutre pour le compte d'un belligerant, par suite d'arrangement pris a l'avance
avec luj, sous la forme d'un contrat commercial quelconque: vente, commission, louage
d'industrie ou de travail; que les arrangements aient ete pris ostensiblement, ou
qu'ils le soient d'une maniere secrete ou deguisee ; car la loyaute est une condition es-
sentielle dans la solution des difficultes internationales, et sous le couvert des fausses
apparences il fauttoujours aller au fond des choses. II y a ici, incontestablement, une
seconde hypothese qu'il importe de distinguer soigneusement de la precedente.
Nous nous rattacherons, pour resoudre en droit des gens les difficultes que presente
cette nouvelle situation, aun principe universellement etabli, qui se formule en ce peu.
de mots: " Inviolabilite du territoire neutre." Cette inviolabilite est un droit pour
l'etat neutre, dont le territoire ne doit pas etre atteint par les faits de guerre, mais elle
impose aussi a ce m.me etat neutre une etroite obligation, celle de ne pas permettre,
celle d'empScher activement, au besoin, l'emploi de ce territoire par l'une des parties
ou au profit.de l'une des parties belligerantes, dans un but hostile a l'autre partie.
■ Les publicistes en credit ne font aucun doute pour ce qui concerne l'armement et
l'equipement dans un port neutre de b&timeuts de guerre destines k accroltre les forces
des belligerants. Ils s'accordeht pour reconnattre l'iliegalite de ces armements ou
equipements, comme une infraction de la part de l'etat neutre qui les tolererait aux
devoirs de la neutralite.
N'est-il pas evident qu'il en doit 6tre de m_me, a fortiori, dela construction de pareils
batiments, lorsque cette construction a lieu dans les conditions pr6vues en notre seconde
hypothese f
So that, according to M. Ortolan, if a ship happens to be ready made
and armed, she may be lawfully sold to a foreign belligerent, though
with a full knowledge on the part of the seller of the purpose to which
she is to be applied; but, if she is made to order, the transaction assumes the opposite character, and is a breach of neutrality.   With all
■
1 United States Documents, vol. vii, p. 36.
2 " Corso di diritto internazionale," vol. ii, p. 30.ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
respect for the authority of this distinguished writer, 1 must decline to
adopt a doctrine which rests on so shadowy a distinction.
Professor Bluntschli, undertaking to pronounce a judgment on the
opinion of rrofes- subject-matter of this dispute, as it were ex cathedra, in an
_orBhmuchii. article in the "Bevue de Droit International" of 1870, lays
down the following doctrine:
L'etat neutre qni veut .carantir sa neutrality doit s'abstc'iiir d'aider aucune des parties
belligerantes dans ses operations^ guerre. II ne peut pr&ter son territoire pour permettre k l'une des parties d'orga'niser en lieu sur des eutreprises militaires. II est
oblige de veiller fidelement a ce qne des particuliers n'arment point sur son territoire
des vaisseaux de guerre,,destines k etre livres a une des parties belligerantes. (Bluntschli, Modernes y^olkerrecht, section 763.)
. Ce devoir est proclame par la science, et il derive tant del'idee de neutralite que des
egards auxqnels tout etat est necessairement tenu envers les autres etats avec lesquels
il vit en paix et amitie.
La neutralite est la non-participation k la guerre. Lorsque l'etat neutre soutient un
des belligerants, il prend part k la guerre en favour de celui qu'il soutient, et des lors~|
il cesse d'Sire neutre. L'adversaire est autorise a voir daus cette participation un acte
d'hostilite. Et cela n'est pas seulement vrai quand l'etat neutre livre lui-meme des
troupes ou des vaisseaux de guerre, mais aussi lorsqu'il pr6te"a un des belligerants un
appui m6diat en permittant, tandis qu'il pourrait _$§»j?£c/iel§|t[ne, de son territoire neutre
on envoie des troupes ou des navires de guerre.
Partout oh le droit de neutralite etend le cercle de son application, il restreint les. ■
limites de la guerre et de ses desastreuses consequences, et il garautit les bienfaits dev
la paix.   Les devoirs de l'etat neutre envers les bellige'rants sont en substance les meme*
que ceux de l'etat ami, en temps de paix, vis-a-vis des autres etats.   Aucun etat ne peut
non plus, en temps de paix, permettre que l'on organise sur son territoire des agressions contre un etat ami.    Tous sont obliges de veiller a ce que leur sol ne devienne
pas le point de depart d'entreprises militaires, dirigees contrfe des etats avec lesquels?
ils sont en paix.
I entirely agree in all that is thus said by this able jurist—that is, if.
I properly apprehend his language, and am right jn understanding it to
apply not to the sale of ships of war, simpWS^^but to the sending out
of troops and armed ships for the purpose of what the learned professor
terms " military enterprises," and to the " orjganizing of aggressions
against a friendly state."
Another eminent jurist, who has espoused the cause of the United
States, in a very able review of the work of Professor Moun-
tague Bernard, and whose opinion is referred to by the
United States as an authority in their favor, M. Roliu Jacquemyns, does
not, so far as I collect, deny the legality of the sale of ships of war, but
rests his opinion on the general circumstances connected with the construction and escape of the Alabama. But the spirit in which this author
writes will be seen from the following passage:
II eftt dans tousles cas ete digne d'un jurisconsMte de la valeur de M. Bernard de ne
pas se borner a examiner cette grave question des devoirs de la neutralite au point de
vue du droit positif existant. C'est par l'opinion hautement emise de savants comme
lui que les idees geucrales en matiere de droit sont appelees k se rectifier et a. se completer. Or, s'il y a une chose que chaque guerre nonvelledemontre, c'estle caractere,
non-seulement insuffisant, mais fallacieux de la vieille definition: neutrarumpartium..
Si an debut de cette deruiere et opouva n table guerre de 1870, l'Angleterre, au lieu d'Strej
obstinement neutrarum partium, avait clairement desapprouve l'offeusive inique de la
France, est-ce que les iuter&ts de la j ustice et de la paix n'auraient pas ete mieux servis f|
L'id6al dupersonnage neutrarumpur Hum, c'est le jugeq ui, dans l'apologue de l'hultre
et des plaideurs, avale le contenu du mollusque et adjuge les ecailles aux deux belligerants. II n'est d'aucun parti, mais il s'engraisse scrupuleusement aux depens de tons
deux. Une telle conduite de la part d'un grand peuple peut etre aussi conforme aux
precedents que celle du venerable magistrat dont parle la fable. Mais quand elle se
fbnde sur une loi positive, sur une regie admise, c'est une preuve que cette loi ou
cette regie est mauvaise, comme contraire a la science, a la dignite et a la solidarite
humaine.1
Opinion of M. B.
lm Jac _uem_-ns..
1 "Revue de droit international et de legislation compares," 1871, p. 125OPINIONS   OF   SU
LEXANDER  COCKBURN.
251
This reasoning: may be very well deserving of attention for the future;
O v _________ °
but, for the present purpose, when the authority of M. Rolin Jacque-
inyns as to the culpability of Great Britain is cited, I must protest
against the question being determined not according to i existing positive law," but to the opinion of " savants | as to what the law should have
been, or should now be made. The tribunal cannot, I apprehend,
adopt such a principle informing its judgment. Its functions are not to
make the law, but to decide according to the rules of the treaty, with the
light which the acknowledged principles of international jurisprudence
aud the established usages of nations may afford for its assistance.
The occasion may be a tempting one for gif§Bg effect to speculative
opinions or individual theories'. But a decision founded on such aprin-
ple would not insure the approbation of wise and judicious minds, or
command the respect of those who might suffer from a judgment which
would be at variance with the first principles of equity and justice.
Let us see what has been the practical view taken of the subject in
England or America. As far back as the year 1721, ships opinion of the
of war having been built in England, and sold to the Czar ^^otEng^a.
of Bussia, then at war with Sweden, and complaint having been made
by the Swedish minister, the judges were summoned to the House of
Lord's, and their opinion was asked, whether by law the King of England had the power to prohibit the building of ships of war, or of great
force for foreigners, in any of His Majesty's dominions. And the judges,
with the exception of one, who had formed no opinion, answered that
the King had no such power. It is plain that, if the sale of such vessels
had been an offense against international law, the King would have had
power to prevent it by the prosecution of the parties building and selling such ships, as offenders against the municipal law, as the offense
would have been a misdemeanor at the common law.
It appears that Chief Justice Trevor, and Parker, afterwards Lord
Chancellor, had given the like opinion seven years before.1
The judgment of Judge Story in the well-known case of the Santissi-
ma Trinidad,2 shows that the sale of armed ships of war has caseortbesantu-
never beeu held to be contrary to law in America. In that simaTrinidad-
case a vessel called the Independencia, equipped for war and armed with
twelve guns, had been sent out from the American port of Baltimore,
upon a pretended voyage to the northwest coast, but in reality to
Buenos Ayres, then at war with Spain, with instructions to the supercargo to sell her to the Buenos Ayres government if he could obtain a
certain price. She was sold to that government accordingly, and, having been commissioned, was sent to sea and made prizes. She afterward put into an American port, and having there received an augmentation of her force, again put to sea and captured a prize. The validity
of this prize was questioned in the suit on two grounds: 1st. That the
sale of the vessel to a foreign government by American citizens, for the
purpose of being used in war against a belligerent with whom the United
States were at peace, was a violation of neutrality and illegal j 2d.
Because the capture had been made after an augmentation of the force
of the vessel in a port of the United States. The capture was held invalid
on the latter ground.   Upon the first, the judge delivered judgment as
follows:
■
The question as to the original illegal armament and outfit of the Independencia
may be dismissed in a few words.   It is apparent, that though equipped
as a vessel of war, she was sent to Buenos Ayres on a commercial adven- Ju^j!J[stoiyof Mr'
ture, contraband, indeed, but in no shape violating our laws or our
1',Foitescne's Reports," p. 388.
3 Wheaton, p. 283.252
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
national neutrality. If captured by a Spanish ship of war during the voyage, she
would have been justly condemned as good prize for being engaged in a traffic prohibited by the law of nations. But there is nothing in our laws, or in the law of nations,
that forbids our citizens from sending armed vessels, as well as munitions of war, to
foreign ports for sale. It is a commercial adventure which no nation is bound to prohibit, and which only exposes the person engaged in it to the penalty of confiscation.
Supposing, therefore, the voyage to have been for commercial purposes, and the sale
-at Buenos Ayres to have been a bona-fide sale, (and there is nothing in the evidence
before us to contradict it,) there i£ no pretense to say that the original outfit on the
voyage was illegal, or that a capture made after the sale was, for that cause alone,
invalid.
It is now sought to shake the authority of this judgment by saying that
it was unnecessary to the decision of the cause, as the prize was held to be
invalid on the other ground; but it was, nevertheless, a solemn judgment upon a point properly arising in the cause, and, so far as lam aware,
it has never been questioned.
It is indeed alleged (but for the first time) in the American case that
case of the Gran the authority of this decision is to be looked upon as over-
Para- ruled or controlled by a judgment given by the same court
in the case of the Gran Para. Now, the latter judgment was a judgment of the same court, (of which, therefore, Mr. Justice Story was himself a member,) and was pronounced on the very next day. We are told
in the case of the United States, that the cases were argued, the one on
the 20th, the other on the 28th of February, 1822; that the judgment in
the case of the Santissima Trinidad was pronounced on the 12th of
March, that in the case of the Gran Para on the ensuing day, the 13th.
It is said, and truly, that "there can be no doubt they were considered
together in the consultation-room," and lawyers are gravely asked to
believe that it was intended by the second judgment to overrule or
qualify the doctrine involved in the first. JSTo English or American
lawyer could entertain the notion for a moment that, if the same court
had intended to overrule, or even to qualify, the judgment given immediately before, it would not have referred to it in terms and given its
reasons for so sudden a change in its views of the law. But the truth
is—and I am at a loss to understand how the American Counsel can have
failed to overlook this, or to call attention to it when citing the decision,
that so far from overruling or affecting the judgment in the Santissima
Trinidad, the case of the Gran Para had nothing in common with it
beyond that of being a suit for the restitution of prize. It was not the
case of the sale of a ship to a foreign government at all. It was simply
the case of an American privateer armed in defiance of American law,
and cruising under a fictitious commission, the property in her still remaining unchanged in the American citizen by whom she had been
fitted out. The great importance of this distinction will be seen in
another part of this case.
In a learned and able  article  in   the well-known publication, the
"American Law Beview" of January, 1871, the writer, after
referring to the   case of the Santissima  Trinidad as " a
famous and leading case," states the law as follows :
It may be declared as indubitable that the pure unalloyed bargain and sale of a ship'
even a ship of war, to a belligerent is legal by the rules of international law; that such
a ship is, however, contraband of war, and if captured after sale on her way toward
delivery, or before sale on her way toward a market where she is intended to be sold to
a belligerent, she will be properly condemned. Neutrality acts have not been intended
to change this state of the law, but only to furnish sufficient means for preventing its
abuse. Our original proposition that the doctrine of contraband of war does not
operate as a restriction upon trade, upon dealings which are purely commercial, remains
correct, even in this matter of war vessels.
In this view of the law I am glad to have the concurrence of our dis-253
pinion
jqs*
of    Mr.
OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
tinguished colleague, Mr. Adams, who, writing to Earl
Bussell on the 6th of April, 1863, states, with reference to-
certain American authorities which Lord Russell had appealed to:
The sale and transfer by a neutral of arms, of munitions of war, and even, of vessels of
: tpor, to a belligerent country, not subject to blockade at the time, as a purely commercial transaction, is decided by these authorities not to be unlawful. | They go not a step
farther; and precisely to that extent I have myself taken no exception to the doctrine.1
This being the present state of international law on this subject, if it
is desirable to introduce new rules, it must be done by the question a9 I
common consent of nations, not by the speculative doctrines aSciestioconS_n0dr
of theorists, however distinguished. of war-
But is it desirable that it should be altered, and that obstacles to the
industry and trade of neutral nations should be created %
Azuni observes:
Une grande partie du commerce de quelques nations europeennes, telles que les
Sue"dois, les Norv^giens, et les Russes, consiste en marchandises necessaires pour la guerre
maritime, pour la construction et pour Fequipement d'une flotte; elles vendent en temps
de paix, a quieonque en a besoin, du fer, du cuivre, des mftts, des bois, du goudron, de
la poix, et des canons, enfin des navires de guerre entiers. Quelles raisons pourrait-il y
avoir de priver ces nations de leur commerce et de'leur maniere de subsister, a l'occa-
sion d'une guerre a laquelle ils ne prennent aucune part ? II n'y a dans le code de la
justice et de requite" rien en faveur d'une telle protection. II est done ne"cessaire
d'etablir, comme maxime fondamentale de tout droit, que, les peu pies neutres devant et
pouvant licitement continuer le commerce qu'ils font en temps de paix, on ne doit faire
aucune distinction de denrees, de marchandises, et de manufactures, quoique propres a la
guerre, et que, par cette raison, la vente et le transport aux parties belligerantes en sont
permis, si le commerce actif et passif etait etabli en temps de paix, sans qu'on puisse
pretendre, en aucune maniere, quelaneutralite soit vioiee, pourvu que cela se fasse sans
animosite, sans preference et sans partialite.
I cannot but feel the force and justice of these observations. I ask in
like manner, I Why—unless, indeed, on account of reasons of state
affecting the interests of the neutral state itself, in which case private
interests must give way to those of the public—are the armorers of
Birmingham or Liege, or the shipbuilders of London or Liverpool, to
have their business put a stop to because one of their customers happens to be engaged in war with another state % It is not enough to say
that but for the war the demand for the articles in question would not
have arisen. From whatever cause it may proceed, increased demand
is the legitimate advantage of the producer or the merchant, and it is by
the advantage which periods of increased and more active demand bring
with them that the loss arising from occasional periods of stagnation is
balanced and made good.
The authors who desire to put further restraints on the free commerce of neutrals than international law has hitherto done, appear to
me to think too much of the interests of belligerents, who are the disturbers of the world's peace, and to be too unmindful of the interests of
neutral nations, who are simply seeking occupation for their industry
and commerce, indifferent by whom they are employed. They seem to
think, that the belligerent is granting an indulgence or conferring a
favor on the neutral in allowing him to remain a stranger to the war,
which the grateful neutral should be too glad to purchase by the sacrifice of all rights at all incompatible with the convenieuce of the belligerent.
M. Hautefeuille, indeed, invokes humanity, and would prohibit the
sale of articles of--warlike use in order to prevent and put an end to war.
But if considerations of humanity are to be taken into account, it is
obvious that the sale of such things should be prohibited in time of
1 United States Documents, vol. ii, p. 591.
'254
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
peace, as well as of war. They are not the less available in time of war
because bought in time, of peace.
The armorer or the shipbuilder who is thus required to close his
establishment to the belligerents when war arises, may continue to
manufacture and sell, undisturbed, his instruments of destruction down
to the very hour when war is proclaimed. Had Prussia, for instance,
anticipated the attack of France as likely to occur so soon, and had
desired to procure a fleet, sh^ might have resorted to the shipwrights'
yards of England till she possessed ships enough to cope with her formidable adversary on the seas. Butletwarbut be proclaimed, and according to these views the work becomes at once criminal, the workman's
hammer must be arrested, the shipwright's yard closed. There may be
reasons of state in certain instances—as according to British and
American views in the case of ships—for putting a restraint on the
freedom of trade, but it seems idle to base it on the score of humanity.
The effect would simply be that a government meditating the invasion
of another country would have to provide itself in time. The neighbor
upon whom it thus brings war on the sudden, and who may be comparatively unprepared, is not to be at liberty to seek the materials of war
elsewhere, but is to be left at the mercy of the invader. Peaceful nations would thus be at the mercy of others more ambitious and warlike
and better prepared than themselves. The weak would be sacrificed
to the strong. Let me suppose a people rising in a just aud righteous
cause. I will not offend the patriotic susceptibility of my honorable
and esteemed colleague by suggesting, for a single instant, even hypo-
thetically, the possibility that the cause of the insurgents might have
been such a one—I will take what he will readily admit to have been
so, the separation of the United States from the mother country. Let
me suppose that, while Great Britain had her fleets prepared, her
troops armed, her arsenals well stored, America had neither ships nor
arms, nor munitions of war, with which to resist the superior forces of
her adversary. Would it have been in the interest of humanity that
she should be shut out from the markets of the world *? An appeal to
considerations of humanity has no doubt something very captivating about it; but I question very much whether humanity would not
lose more than it would gain by the proposed restraint on the commercial freedom of nations.
The case, however, becomes essentially different when a ship thus
ship of war sent equipped and armed is not sent out to "be taken to the port
out   for   immediate        _• . -_        1      11 • , _ __• __ •__ ______
»ervire. ot the belligerent purchaser, but is sent to sea with oflicers
and a fighting crew for the purpose of immediate warfare. Under such
circumstances the transaction ceases to be one of mere commerce, and
assumes the form of a hostile expedition sent forth from the territory of
the neutral. Such an expedition is plainly a violation of neutrality,
accoriwng to international law, and one which the neutral government
is bound to do its best to prevent.
But what if, in order the better to avoid observation and detection,
Armament   and the vessel is sent forth, without its armament, without its
crew sent out in dif- -1,1 .   • ,     1 ,1 .•__>
.feremships. war crew, aud these, sent to it by another or dinerent ves
sels, are put on board of it in some place or water beyond the jurisdiction of the neutral? In my opinion, except so far as the question-of
diligence is concerned, as to which it may form a very material element,
this makes no difference. The ship, the armament, the crew, though
sent out separately, form each of them part of one and the same enterprise or undertaking. Taken together, they constitute a hostile expedition and must be treated as such.   It is as though a hostile force wereOPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
net
255
sent by sea to invade an enemy's territory, and each arm of the force so
sent, infantry, cavalry, artillery, were embarked in different ships. The
whole would still form one expedition. So here, ships, guns, crew, are
each a part of ope entire whole to be employed and used in furtherance
of one common design. This is happily expressed in the American Law
Beview, in the article already cited: 1 It was not," writes the author,
I because the Messrs. Laird sold a war ship to the confederates that we
have a claim against England for a breach of international law; but it
was because collateral arrangements for completing the equipment and
armament of the ship so sold, by placing on board officers and crew,
guns and provisions, rendered the entire procedure, iu fact, the incep-.
tion of a hostile undertaking from the confines of a neutral country."
Of course the question may become one of degree. The interval of
time which might elapse between the sending out of the ship and that '
of the crew, the distance between the neutral territory and the place at
which the war-crew are* to join, the possible fact that it was originally
intended to procure a crew in some other country than that of the
neutral, the occurrence of intermediate circumstances, might fairly lead
to the inference that there was no present intention to apply the vessel
to the purpose of war, which in my mind is an essential element in
ascribing a belligerent character to that which might otherwise have
remained a purely commercial transaction.
An expedition of this kind being an undoubted violation of neutrality,
every one will agree that it is the duty of the neutral gov- Dllty I neutral
eminent,, if it knows that such expedition is about to leave «overnment-
its waters, to use due diligence to prevent it. Nor does the duty of the
neutral government end here. It is also its duty to use due diligence
to make itself informed as to the true character and destination of a
vessel, where there is reasonable ground to suspect that such character
and destination are unlawful.
The duty of the neutral government in this respect appears to me to
involve three things: first, that the law of the neutral shall be sufficient
to enable the executive to prevent breaches of its duties as a neutral;
secondly, that, where its application is called for, the law shall be put
in force honestly and in good faith; thirdly, that all proper and legitimate means shall be used to detect an intended violation of the law, so
as by the application of the law to prevent it.
Having thus seen what is the present state of international law,
according to the views of leading jurists and the practice American argu-
of nations, more especially that of England and America, ?o?1™i^uLm
the parties to the present dispute, we are enabled to form act-
an opinion as to how far the assertion in the case of the United States
that the English foreign-enlistment act, which, going far beyond the
restraints which international law imposes on the neutral subject, prohibits even the fitting-out and equipping of vessels for the purpose of
war, is only a recognition of duties imposed by international law. The
proposition is altogether untenable.
It is, in the first place, altogether at variance with what we know
historically to have been the origin both of the American acts of 1794
and 1818, and of the British act of 1819, to say that either of these
acts arose out of, or was passed to prevent, the building or equipping
or arming of ships of war to be sold to a belligerent.
The American act of 1794 was passed in consequence of the proceedings of the French envoy and consuls in the United States,   British and A.me_i-
ou the breaking out of the war between Great Britain and taoai:ts-
France, in procuring privateers to be fitted out and manned by Ameri-256
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
can citizens, and furnishing them with letters of marque as privateers.
It was not a question of fitting out ships to be sold to the French government, but of fitting out American vessels, the property of American
ownejip, and manned by American crews, to prey, under commissions, as
privateers, upon the commerce of a friendly nation.
In like manner, the American act of 1818 arose out of the precisely
;$j|pilar conduct of American citizens in fitting out American vessels-,
manned by American crews, against the commerce of Spain and Portugal, under commissions as privateers from the de facto governments
of the revolted colonies of the two couutrrajjyi
The Spanish minister had'loudly complained that some thirty vessels,
specifically named, the property of American citizens, and belonging to
ports of the Union, were thus preying on Spanish commerce.
The representative of Portugal made similar complaints.
This practice carried on, on so large a scale, created great scandal; and.'
after the complaints had gone on for two years, the act of 1818 wa$1
passed to put a check on it, if possible.   This act, in addition to the
enactments of that of 1794, required that a bond in double the value of
the ship should be given in the case of any armed vessel, owned iu
whole or in part by American citizens, going out of an American portal
that the vessel should not be employed against a foreign government;
and gave power to the collectors of customs to detain any vessel, builtl
for war, leaving an American port, under certain suspicious circumstances specified in the act.   It is plain that this statute, like its prede*
cessor, was directed against privateering carried on by American citi-1
zens against countries with which the United States were at peace.
Building or fitting out-fjjhips of war for a belligerent had nofr-conie into
quesigjbn at that time at all.
In like manner the British act of 1819 had in view, not the prevention of building or equipping ships for a belligeren^iu the way of trade,
but the prevention of military or naval expeditions on behalf of the revolted colonies, or malcontent subjects of Spafjji.   Its origin is briefly*
stated in the report of Lord Tenterden to the neiwality laws cOmmis-'
sion:
The British foreign-erlistment act may be, said to have arisen from the provision ;
of a treaty; that with Spain of the 28th of Augnst, 1814.
This treaty, or, as it is called, " additional articles to'the treaty of July 5, 1814,'"
contains the following article :
"Articlk III. His Britannic Majesty, being anxious that the troubles and disturbances "which unfortwately prevail in the dominions of His Catholic Majesty in America1
should entirely cease, and the subjects of those provinces should return to their obedi-- r
ence to their lawful sovereign, engages to take the most effectual measures for preventing his subjects from furnishing arms, ammunition, or any other article to the revolted in America."
In ltild the reactionary policy of King Ferdinand, the prohibitory duties imposed by
him on British commerce, and the ingratitude with which he treated British officers/
and others who had served his cause in Spain, had provoked a great deal of irritation,;
in England ; and there was a considerable party in the House of Commons, headed by
Sir James Macintosh, who were prepared to support the claims of the Spanish American colonies to independence.
Expeditions were said to be in preparation for rendering active assistance both to |
the malcontents in Spain and to the rebels in America, in spite of a proclamation forr.?
bidding such expeditions, which had been published in 1817; and the Government
consequently found i hat it was necessary, in order to keep good faith with Spain and
to prevent in fraction s"of British neutrality, to bring in an act of Parliament to provide
for tbe case which now for the first time arose in modern history, of Great Britain being neutral at the time of a great maritime war.1
That it was against armaments going out from the shores of Great
Britain that the measure was directed is plain from some of the argu-
1 See report of commission, p. 37; British Appendix, vol. iii.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
257
inents used by Mr. Canning in the course of the debate on the bill.
Thus he says:
If a foreigner should chance to come into any of our ports, aud see all this mighty
[ armament equipping for foreign service, he would naturally ask, " With what nation
are you at war ? |   The answer would be, " With none."
I For what purpose, then," he would say, " are these troops levied, and by whom ? "
Jhe reply of course must be, i They are not levied by government; nor is it known
for what service they are intended; but, be the service what it may, government cannot interfere." Would not all that give such a foreigner a high idea of the excellence
of the English constitution? Would it not suggest to him that for all the ordinary
purposes of a state there was no government in England ? Did the honorable and
learned gentlemen not think that the allowing of armaments to be fitted out in this
country against a foreign power was a just cause of war ?i
Mr. Bobert Grant, another member of the government, said that—
k Every government,' in its foreign relations, was the representative of the nation to
which it belonged, and it was of the highest importance to the peace of nations that
governments should be so considered. Nations announced their intentions to each
Jjther through the medium of their rulers. Hence every state knew where to look
for expressions of the will of foreign nations; where to learn whether war or peace
B|as intended ; where to demand redress for injuries, and where to visit injuries unredressed. But all this system was inverted and thrown into confusion, if the government might act in one way and the nation in another. All this system was at an end
if, while we were professedly at peace with Spain, she was to be attacked by a large
army of military adventurers from our own shores—a sort of extra-national body—
utterly irresponsible—utterly invulnerable, except in their own persons—for whose
acts no redress could be demanded of the British government—who might burn, pillage, and destroy, then find a safe asylum iu their own country, and leave us to say,
: "We have performed our engagements—we have honorably maintained our neutral
character."'2
But the language of these acts being large enough to embrace a case
of the equipping a vessel for a foreign belligerent, the foreign-enlistment act has been made available for the purpose of preventing a traffic which is calculated to cause embarrassment to a government pressed
by the remonstrances of belligerents. And this act having been so often
appealed to and discussed, a notion has sprung up that the equipment
of vessels of war, though in the way of trade, is a violation of neutrality,
while, in fact, it is only a violation of the municipal law.
Mr. Dana, in the passage before cited, puts the matter on the right
ground.
Again, it is idle to contend that alterations in the law, since made by
statute, to give a greater power to the executive in dealing
with suspected vessels, are to be taken as the measure of
the obligations incumbent on the British government by international
law. Catching at a few words in the report of the royal commissioners,
who, in recommending certain statutory additions to the law, add: "In
making the foregoing recommendations we have not felt ourselves bound
to consider whether we were exceeding what could actually be required
by international law, but we are of opinion that if those recommendations should be adopted, the municipal law of this realm available for
the enforcement of neutrality will derive increased efficiency, and will,
so far as we can see, have been brought into full conformity with Tour
Majesty's international obligations," the United States desire that it
shall be taken, notwithstanding that the commissioners expressly say
that their recommendations are independent of any considerations of
international law; that these statesmen and learned jurists meant that
without these a dditions the law of England failed to come up to the
exigencies of international law. Such an argument is really undeserving of serious notice.
1 Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, volume 40, page 1106. See also extracts given
in the Argument of the United States, page 510.
2 Hansard, volume 40, page 1244.   Argument of United States, page 512.
17 B
Aa to
r18/6.
effect of act258
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Equally unfounded is the assertion that the provisions of the foreign-
enlistment act are only a statutory declaration of the common law of
England. The enactment of that statute could only be declaratory of
the common law, if co-extensive with the obligations of international
law; whereas, in fact, it went far beyond them. The opinion of the
judges, pronounced as far back as the beginning of the last century,
that even the'sfle of armed ships was not contrary to the law of England, shows the rashness and the incorrectness of this assertion.
But it is claimed on behalf of the United States that, whether the
■foreign-enlistment act was or was not more than co-exten-
i.eiii'w'rentnbyrm'u,.i.-p.ve with internl-fiOnal obligations, the United States were
entitled, irrespectively of the rule of the treaty of Washington, to have it put in force in all its rigor for their protection. This
involves the important question whether, where the municipal law of
the neutral is more stringent than the international law, a belligerent
can claim, as of right, the putting in force of the municipal law in his
behalf, and make the omission to do so a ground of grievance, as founding a right of redress at the hands of a neutral government. A few
short considerations will serve to dispose of this question, which, indeed,
seems to answer itself.
When a Government makes its municipal law more stringent than the
obligations of international law would require, it does so, not for the
benefit of foreign states, but for its own protection,dest the acts of its
subjects in overstepping the confines, oftentimes doubtful, of strict
right, in transactions of which a few circumstances, more or less, may
alter the character, should compromise its relations with other nations.
It was in this spirit and with this object that the foreign-enlistment act
was passed, as is shown by its preamble, which is in the following
terms:
Whereas the enlistment or engagement of His Majesty's subjects to serve in war in
foreign service, without His Majesws license, and the fitting out and equipping and,
arming of vessels by His Majesty's subjects, without His Majesty's license, for warlikel
operations in or against the dominions or territories pf any foreign prince, state, potentate, or persons exercising or assuming to exercislPthe powers of government in or over
any foreign country, colony, province, or part of any province, or against the shipsj,^
goods, or merchandise of any foreign prince, state, potentate^ or persons as aforesaid^
or their subjects, may be prejudWml to and teiw to endanger the peace andioelfare of this
kingdom ; and whereas the laws in force are not sufficiently effectual for preventing
the same:
Now, it is quite clear that the obligations of the neutral state spring
out of, and are determined bjgifche principles and rules of international
law, independently of the municipal law of the neutral. They would
exist exactly the same, though the neutral state had no municipal law
to enable it to enforce the duties of neutrality on its subjects. It would
obviously afford no answer on the part of a neutral government to a
complaint of a belligerent of an infraction of neutrality, that its municipal law was insufficient to enable it to insure the observance of neutrality by its subjects, the reasou being that international law, not the municipal law of the particular country, gives the only measure of international rights and obligations. AVhile, therefore, on the oue hand,
the municipal law, if not co-extensive with the international law, will
afford ho excuse to the neutral, so neither, on the other, if in excess of
what international obligatious exact, will it afford any right to the belligerent which international law would fail to give to him.
In one respect, and in one respect only, does the municipal law, when
in excess of international law, give a right to the belligerent. Equality
being of the essence of neutrality, he has a right to insist that the neu-
JOPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
259
tral subject shall equally be compelled to keep within the municipal law
in dealing with the adversary as when dealing with himself. A belligerent is also beyond question perfectly at liberty to urge upon the neutral government, in the way of solicitation or even of remonstrance, to
enforce the municipal law; but go long as it is not enforced against
himself he has no right to redress, because it is not put in force against
his enemy.
I am at a loss exactly to understand for what purpose these points
have been brought forward, and so strenuously insisted on, in the
American arguments. For, the rule prescribed to us by the treaty, and
to the benefit of which the United States are, therefore, entitled at our
hands, is in the very terms of the foreign-enlistment act. I presume the
purpose was to create a foundation for the imputation against Great
Britain of not having acted in good faith. In that respect I may have
to advert to these arguments again. For my present purpose it is
enough to have cleared the ground of them.
In like manner when it is sought, in the case of the United States, to
make the Queen's proclamation of neutrality the measure Effect or proclama.
of the international obligations of her subjects, every law- tion-
yer ought to know that this is to give to a royal proclamation an authority which it does not possess. The purpose of such a proclamation,
used only in great conjunctures, is to remind the subject of the provisions of the law, and to warn him against breaking it; and if, after such
warning, a man offends against, the law, his offense is aggravated by the
fact that he has set the injunctions of the sovereign at defiance; but
such a proclamation cannot make or add to the law, or alter it in the
smallest particular. The proclamation of 1861 was in the accustomed
form. It drew attention to the enactments of the foreign-enlistment
act, and warned all persons subject to British law that, if they did any
acts in contravention of that act, or in violation of the law of nations,
as by enlisting in the military service, or serving in any ship of war or
transport, of the contending parties; or going or engaging to go beyond
the seas for the purpose of enlisting, or procuring, or attempting to
procure, within Her Majesty's dominions, others to do so; or fitting-out,
arming, -or equipping any vessel to be employed as a ship of war, or
privateer, or transport, by either of the contending parties; or by
breaking or endeavoring to break any blockade lawfully and actually
established by or on behalf of either of the said contending parties ; or
by carrying officers, soldiers, dispatches, arms, military stores, or materials, or any article or articles considered and deemed to be contraband
of war, according to the law or modern usage of nations, for the use or
service of either of the contending parties—all persons so offending
would incur and be liable to the several penalties and penal consequences
by the said statute or by the law of nations in that behalf imposed
or denounced. The Queen's subjects are further warned that all persons
entitled to her protection, if they should misconduct themselves in the
premises, would do so at their peril and of their own wrong, and that
they would in nowise obtain any protection from Her Majesty against
any liabilities or penal consequences.
The effect is that persons are warned that infractions of the foreign-
enlistment act will be visited with the penalties of that statute, while
acts within the penalties of international law will be liable to those
penalties, (namely, seizure and confiscation of property,) and that
against the latter penalties no protection from the Crown must be
expected.
But the proclamation contains no prohibition of these latter acts.260
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Kquipme
sels nnder
treaty.
namely, dealing in contraband of war, or breaking blockade; nor, if it
did, would such prohibition make such acts an offense: such a proclamation has never been understood by British statesmen or lawyers as
making either of these things an offense against.the municipal law, or
as what the government was called upon to prevent, or would be justified in attempting to prevent.
JSTor have similar proclamations of Presidents of the United States
been dealt with as imposing additional obligations on American citizens, or as subjecting them to additional penalties, or as carrying the
obligations of the state further than those imposed by international law^
The American authorities which 1 have cited establish this beyond a&
possibility of coutroversy.
To return to the subject of the equipment of vessels.. Though I have
m of ves- thought it desirable, with a view to other parts of this case,
to work out the question of neutral commerce to its full extent, and thougfil have come to the conclusion that by the general law
of nations the sale of a ship of war, though intended for the use of a
belligerent, is not, when merely a commercial transaction, a breach of
O J 7 *J
neutrality, yet, as Great Britain has consented that the mere equipping
of such a shil, though done in the way of trade, shall be taken to have
been a breach of neutrality which the British government was bound
to use due diligence to prevent, I agree with the rest of the tribunal that
we must for the present purpose, in respect of the fitting out and equipping of vessels, take the rules of the treaty as the test of the alleged.
omissionsand consequent liability of the Queen's government.
Though of opinion that Her Majesty's government were quite right in
construction of saying that the rules laid down by the treaty are not such
mie3 of treaty. as international law would have prescribed at the time these
claims arose, I agree that we are bound by the rules, and that it is our
duty to give full effect to them in dealing with these claims. However
great and unexampled the concession made by Great Britain in consenting to be bound, in respect of past international obligations, by rules
which had no existence in international law when the breaches of neutral obligations complained of are alleged to have occurred, I still think/1;
that we must proceed in this iuquiry as though the rules of the treaty
had been, either by international law or by convention between the
two countries, binding on Great Britain at the time of the civil war. I
cannot but concur with Mr. Evarts that we must give the same effect
to those rules as regards the past as we should give to them if dealing
with a case which had arisen since they were agreed to by the two na-
nffls, nor do I indeed understand this proposition to be disputed by
the counsel on the part of Great Britain. The question is whether due
diligence was used by the British government to satisfy the exigency
of the obligations prescribed by those rules.
I proceed, then, to consider what is this | due diligence" which the
British government admits that it was bound to apply tot
prevent the fitting out and equipping of the vessels in question.
I apprehend that such diligence would be neither greater nor less than
any other neutral government would be bound to apply to the preventing of any bre'ach by its subjects of any head of neutral duty prescribed
by international law.
The difficulty of the position is, that the question has not hitherto come
within the range of juridicial discussion on subjects connected with international law. Hitherto, where a government has acted in good faith,
availing itself fairly of such means as were at its disposal, it has not
Due diligence, wluOPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
261
been usual to consider it responsible to a belligerent government for
acts of its subjects that might have eluded its vigilance, or that the
degree of diligence exercised by it should be submitted to judicial appreciation. And no country has insisted more strongly on this as the limit
of national responsibility than that of the United States. We must
endeavor to find a solution for ourselves.
As I have already observed, I cannot agree that the question of what
is u due diligence" should be left to the unassisted mind of each individual
arbitrator; nor can I agree that the solution is to be found in the facts of
each individual case ; and though judges may be often disposed to apply
the maxim, to which our honorable president has more than once referred,
etc facto jus oritur, it is, I think, one which must not be pushed too far.
I agree with M. Troplong, who, writing on this subject with reference
to civil law, after referring to the different opinions of jurists on the
subject of diligence, says :
II est vrai que jusqu'a present les tribunaux se sont montr€s assez indifKrents sur ces
disputes de la chaire; mais peut-6tre pourrait-on leur faire le reproche de n'avoir amorti
la vivacity de la question qu'en e"tou_fant tout ce qui est discussion de systeme et point
de droit, sous la commode interpretation des faits, et sous un Equitable mais facile arbi-
traire. Neanmoins, dans cette matiere, comme dans toutes les autres, il y a des regies qu'il
faut se garder de de"daigner: elles aident le.magistrat, elles font luire de pre"cieuses lumieres pour ceux qui ont mission de discuter sur les faits et de les juger. Ces regies m'ont paru
simples et judicieuses ; je vais les exposer comme je les en tends; dans tous les cas, et
dusse~-je me tromper, je prie le lecteur de ne pas m'adresser, comme fin de non-recevoir,
le reproche de me livrer k d'oiseuses digressions. De tous les systemes, le moins excusable, a mon avis, c'est celui qui, Sous pr^texte de fuir l'esprit de systeme, se fait une
loi de n'en avoir aucun.1
It seems to me, therefore, right, before proceeding to deal with the
facts, to seek in the domain of general jurisprudence for principles to
guide us in judging how far the obligations of Great Britain have or
have not been satisfied.
]STo branch of law has been the subject of more discussion among juridical writers than that of diliqentia and its correlative ctdpa,
,-,,,.. .,, ^ n ,. ,, -, j.  Diligentia and culpa.
the latter being neither more nor less than the absence ot
the former. I was prepared to expect, from the able men who have
prepared the pleadings of the United States, some assistance to guide
us to right conclusions as to the standard of diligence required of a
neutral government for insuring the obedience of its subjects in matters
of neutrality. But after a vague statement that " the extent of the
diligence required to escape responsibility is, by all authorities, gauged
by the character and magnitude of the matter which it may effect, by
the relative condition of the parties, by the ability of the party incurring the liability to exercise the diligence required by the exigencies of
the case, and by the extent of the injury which may follow negligence,"2
the only authority cited in any detail is that of an obsolete author, whose
exposition of the Boman law has been exploded by modern science.
After this, the case breaks out into the following vague and declamatory statement, not of what the law is, but of what the United States
Government desire it shall be understood to be:
The United States understand that the diligence which is called for by the rules of
the treaty of Washington is a due diligence; that is, a diligence proportioned to the
■magnitude of- the subject and to the dignity and strength of the power which is to
exercise it; a diligence which shall, by the use of active vigilance, and of all the other
means in the power of the neutral, through all stages of, the transaction, prevent its
soil from being violated; a diligence that shall in like manner deter designing men
from committing acts of war on the soil of the neutral against its will, and thus possi-
1 "Code civil expliqu*.," vol. i, p.
2 United States Case, p. 152.
479.
Ml262
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
bly dragging it into a war which it would avoid; a diligence which prompts the
neutral to the most energetic measures to discover any purpose of doing the acts forbidden by its good faith as a neutral, and imposes upon it the obligation, when it
receives the knowledge of an intention to commit such acts, to use all the means in its
power to prevent it.
No diligence short of this would be " due;" that is, commensurate with the emergency or
with the magnitude of the results of negligence. Understanding the words in this sense, the
United States find them identical with the measure of duty which Great Britain had
previously admitted.1
This is, of course, to beg the whole question in dispute. But it is
obvious that a matter of so much importance, as lying at the very root
of this inquiry, requires a more logical and precise consideration than the
foregoing rhetorical statement presents.
The jurists of the seventeenth century, among whom Vinnius occupies a
prominent place,2 divided the diligentia and corresponding
culpa of the Boman law into three degrees. Thus we have
culpa lata, levis, levissima, taking the intermediate degree, or culpa levis,
as being the absence of the diligence which a man of ordinary prudence and care would apply in the management of his own affairs in
the given circumstances of the case. Though attacked by Donellus,
this tripartite division of diligence and default held its ground among
iuridical writers for a considerable time: but on the formation of the
French code, the practical good sense of those by whom that great work
was carried out, so visible in their discussions, induced them to discard
it, and to establish one commonMandard of diligence or care as applicable to all cases of civil obligation, namely, that of the I bon pere de
famille," the " diligens paterfamilias " of the Boman digest. The code
Napoleon has been followed in the codes of other countries. Among
others, the Austrian code has lately adopted the same principle.3
The juridical view, too, of the edgier writers was not destined to stand
its ground. After it had been assailed by Thibaud and Ton Lohr, Hasse,
in a most learned and able treatise, " Die Culpa des romischen Bechts,"
thoroughly exposed its unsoundness, and his views have since been followed by a series of German jurists, including Professor Mommsen in
his well-known work "Beifcrage zum Obligationsrecht."4
French authors have for the most part taken the same view. Commentators on the code, Duranton, Ducarroy, Troplong, and lastly M.
Demolombe, in his great work, the u Cours du code civil," have agreed
that there can only be one standard for the diligence required in the
affairs of life, where the interests of others are concerned, namely, that
of men of ordinary capacity, prudence, and care.
"Qu'est ce que la diligence d'un bon pere de famille?" asks M.
Troplong :5
C'est la diligence de celui qui, comme le dj.t Heineccius, tientle milieu entre l'avare
aux cent yeux et l'homme negligent et dissipe\ C'est dans le systeme dont M. Ducarroy est l'organe, et que j'adopte pleinement, la diligence qu'un individu, aussi diligent
que les hommes le sont ordinairement, apporte a la conservation de ce qui lui appar-
tient. On voit qu'en ce point les deux systemes se rencontrent, et conduisent h, una
m.me definition—c'est-.. dire, ti ce juste milieu qui est dans la nature de l'humanite'.
I The only thing to be considered," says Professor Mommsen, " is
whether the default is such as does not occur to a diligent father of
family in general." § The care to be .taken is ' qualem diligens paterfamilias suis rebus adhibere soleV "
1 United ilptes Case, p. 158.
s See Comment., lib. iii, tit. xv, De Commodato.
3 See "Allgein. Biirgerl. Gesetzbuch," sec. 1297.
4 Vol. iii, p. 360.
5 "Code civil explique"," vol. i, § 371.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
263
I After distinguishing between culpa in criminal and in civil cases, the
same learned writer says:
I It is important, therefore, not so much to distinguish the degree of culpa, but rather
to decide the starting-point at which responsibility for inattention and negligence
commences.
; This starting-point is settled according to one rule for all those cases in which there
exists, not a simple responsibility for dolus, (and culpa lata,) but where culpa is to be
imputed; culpa being admitted in those cases where the conduct falls short of the
measures which a diligens paterfamilias is in the habit of observing in his affairs.
, Only under some few obligatory conditions is a decision more favorable to the
debtor admissible, in so far that in these cases he is allowed to excuse himself from the
responsibility, by proof that in his own affairs he is by habit equally negligent.1
" The ordinary conduct of an intelligent, prudent, and careful Saus-
vater, of a ' bonus et diligens paterfamilias,' " says Bivier in the Bechts-
lexicon of Holzendorff, " affords the normal measure of the obligation of
diligence. He who so conducts himself is in general free from all
reproach.   If he acts otherwise, he is in culpa and responsible."2
"The measure," says Dr. Windscheid, "by which to determine
whether particular conduct is open to the charge of negligence or not
is the conduct of men in general."3
: Professor Unger, in his "Svstem des osterreichischen allgein. Privat-
rechts,"4 thus writes of culpa levis, according to Austrian law:
Culpa levis consists in the omission of that care which an attentive and judicious
head of a family regularly observes, (diligentia diligentis patrisfamilias.) The want of
this care, this kind of culpa, is generally understood, when speaking merely of oversight, of culpa simply. The observance of a higher degree of care than this is not required ; this is the lightest offense for which a man can be made responsible; a culpa
levissima, going beyond culpa levis, does not exist either according to general or to Austrian law. The culpa levis forms the boundary of responsibility. It is by itself omnis
culpa; on the other side of this limit begins the province of Occident, for which the
actors are not held liable.
: The civil code treats of this culpa levis in § 1297, where it states the highest degree of diligence and attention required to be that i which can be exercised by ordinary
capacities." The omission of this care forms the lightest offense for which any one
can be held responsible. By the diligence and attention " which can be exercised by
ordinary capacities" must, however, be understood what, in another place, the code
calls the attention | of a trusty and diligent head of a family," the care | of a good
householder."
Stubenrauch, in his commentary on the Austrian code, treats the
whole subject of culpa with much ability and learning. He ends by
saying:
It is to be assumed that every man who is in possession of his faculties, is capable of
that degree of diligence and attention which can be exercised by men of ordinary capacity. Whoever by the absence of this diligence and care causes injury to another,
incurs liability.5
Mr. Justice Story, with the good sense which characterizes his
writings, says:
Common or ordinary diligence is that degree of diligence which menin general exert
in respect to their own concerns. It may be said to be the common prudence which
men of business and heads of families usually exhibit in affairs which are interesting
to them; or, as Sir William Jones has expressed it, it is the care which every person of
common prudence and capable of governing a family takes of his own concerns. It is
obvious that this is adopting a very variable standard, for it still leaves much ground
for doubt as to what is common, prudence, and who is capable of governing a family.
But the difficulty is intrinsic in the nature of the subject, which admits of an approximation only to certainty. Indeed, what is common or ordinary diligence is more a matter of fact than of law, and in every community it must be judged of by the actual
1" Beitrage," &c, vol. iii, p. 360.
2"Rechtslexicon," vol. i, tit. "Culpa."
3Wind8cheid, "Lehrbuch des Pandektenrechts," Band 1, p. 256.
*Vol. ii, p. 243.
5 Stubenrauch, "Comm. zum allg. ost. B. Gesetzbuch," pp. 1294-97.
ill
ii264
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
state of society, the habits of business, the general usages of life, and the changes, as
well as the institutions, peculiar to the age. So that, although it may not be possible
to lay^iown any very exact rule, applicable to all times and all circumstances, yet
that may be said to be common or ordinary diligence in the sense of the law which
men of common prudence generally exercise about their own affairs in the age and
country in which, they live. It will thence follow, that in different times and in different countries, the standard is necessarily variable with respect to the facts, although
it may be uniform with respect to the principle; so that it may happen that the same
acts which^n one country, or in one age, may be deemed negligent acts, may, at another time, or in another country, be justly deemed an exercise of ordinary diligence.
What is usually done by prudent^inen in a partastalar country in respect to things of
a like nature, whetherit be more oa^less, in point of diligence, than what is exacted in
another country, becomes in fact the generaSlbieasure oi^iligence.1
The same standard is, in practice, applied in the English law. The
older authorities, indeed, speak of three degrees of negligence,
and of "gross" negligence as being necessary in some cases
to found liability; but the tendency of modern decisions has been to
apply in all cases the sound, practical rule that in determining the question of negligence, the true test is whether there has been, with reference to the particular subject-matter, that reasonable degree of diligence
and care which a man of ordinary prudence and capacity might be expected to exercise in the same circumstances. (See what is said by Tin-
dal, L. C. J., in Vaughan vs. Menlow, (3 B. jN". C, 475 5) by Parke, B.,
in Wyld vs. Pickford, (8 M. and W., 461;) by Cresswell, J., in Austin
vs. Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Bailway, (10 C. B., 451;) and
by Bolfe, B., in Wilson vs. Brett, (11 M. and W., 115.)
While, however, I thus seek in the writings opfjurists, and the law of
different nations, some standard for the measure of diligence, I readily
concede that the application of that standard must depend on the cir-
etLmstances of each individual case, and on the view which the judge
may, in his conscience, form of how far the conduct of the individual
complained of may or may not have been that which ordinary prudence
and sense of duty would have prescribed. I entirely agree with what
is said by the learned editors of Zacharige's " Droit civil francais," on
article 1137 of the French code :
L'artiele 1137 se resume en un conseil aux juges de n'avoir ni trop de rigueur __fl
trop d'indulgence, et de ne demander au d^biteur que les soins raisonnablement dus a
la chose qu'il est charge de conserver ou de faire, soit a raison de sa nature, soit a raison des circonstances variables a l'iufini qui modifient son obligation pour la rendre
ou plus large ou plus e"troite.3
What is here said by the learned editors of Zacharia^ appears to me
to afford the true criterion. It is for the judge to determine, according
to the best of his judgment, with reference to the facts of the particular
case, and with reference to the thing to be done or left undone, whether
what has been done, or left undone, as the case may be, has been what
could reasonably and justly have been expected from a person of ordinary capacity and prudence in the affairs of life. More than this is not
to be expected.
I have cited these authorities because, in the absence of any reference
same principle ap- to the question of diligence among writers on international
pned to,government, ]aW) || seems to me that the principle that prevails as to.
men's conduct in the affairs of life may by analogy be well applied to
the discharge of its duties by a government. Applying this standard,
one nation has a right to expect from another, in the fulfillment of its
1 Story on Bailments, $ 14.
2Zacharise, "Droit civil francais," edited by MM. Masse" and Verge".
vol. iii, p. 400..i*r
OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
265
Heads of diligence.
international obligations, the amount of diligence which may reasonably
be expected from a well-regulated, wise, and conscientious government,
according to its institutions, and its ordinary mode of conducting its
affairs; but it has no right to expect more. The assertion of the obligation of a neutral government, as stated in the American case, that
"the diligence is to be proportioned," not only to "the magnitude of
the subject," but also to | the dignity and strength of the power which
is to execute it," as though there could be one measure of diligence for a
powerful state, and another for a weak one—a diligence " which shall
prevent its soil from being violated"—which "shall deter designing
men," &c.—thus making the neutral government answerable for the
event—and 1 which prompts to the most energetic measures"—appears
to me much too extensive, and altogether inadmissible.
The diligence required of a government to prevent infractions of neutrality may relate (1) to the state of its municipal law ; (2) to the means possessed by it to prevent such infractions;
(3) to the diligence to be used in the application of such means to the
end desired.
As to the law, the subject may be divided into the prohibitive law, or,
as it is termed in the American case, the punitive law, and Law.
the preventive law—that is, the law whereby the government is armed
with the power and means of prevention.
As regards the prohibitive or punitive law, no difficulty can arise. It-
is plain that, to satisfy the exigency of due diligence, and to escape liability, a neutral government must take care, not only that its municipal
law shall prohibit acts contravening neutrality, but that the law shall
be upheld by the sanction of adequate punishment—that is to say, of
such as may reasonably be expected to deter persons from offending
against it.
As regards the preventive law, doubtless a government should be
armed by law with power to prevent an infraction of the   Mean,1 dispoSia of
law, when it knows, or has reasonable ground to believe, Go™™me<*~
that such infraction is about to take place.
But when we come to the question of the means which by law should
be placed at the disposal of the government, difficulties of a very formidable character immediately present themselves.
The more despotic and unlimited the power of a government, the more
efficacious will be the means at its command for preventing acts which
it is desired to prevent.
Is this a reason, in a country where absolute and unlimited power is
unknown, where every power is exercised in subordination to the law,
and where, for any interference by the government with the rights of
person or property, redress may immediately be sought, for investing
the executive with an absolute aud irresponsible power, at variance with
the whole tenor and spirit of the national institutions, in order to protect a belligerent from the possibility of injurv from a violation of neutrality?
Again, a nation has a system of procedure which is in harmony with
its institutions, and with which it is satisfied. According to that system,
persons against whom the law is to be put in force cannot be subjected
to be interrogated in order to establish their criminality. Proof must
first be produced, from which, while it remains unanswered, a presumption of guilt arises, before they can be called upon for a defense. Because a different system might be more efficacious in enabling the government to establish a case for confiscating a suspected vessel, for the
I266
ARBITRATION  AT ■ GENEVA.
protection of a belligerent, is the legislature called upon to change the
law because other nations become involved in war ?
Again, the government of a country has been carried on for years according to an established system of official routine. This system may
be somewhat complicated, and may render the action of the executive
less speedy than it might otherwise be. * But it is safe, and has been
found to work sufficiently well in carrying on the affairs of the nation
at home, and abroad. Because a more rapid and a more direct action on
the point to be reached might be obtained by a simplification of the
official machinery, is a government to be held guilty of negligence, because, not foreseeing what was about to happen, it had not altered its
minjjiprial arrangements accordingly ?
A government, in all matters involving legal consideration, is in the
habit of consulSig and acting under the advice of lawyers specially
appointed to advise it.   The purpose is the laudable one of insuring the
perfect legality of the proceedings of the government; but this advantage necessarily involves some loss of time, during which the action of
the executive is for the moment suspended.   Is this practice inconsistJ
ent with the diligence required of a neutral government ?   Honestly!
intending to do what was right, is it to be held responsible because ar
vessel equipped for war has taken advantage of such a delay, thoughf
perhaps, in the particular instance, accidentally prolonged ?
I can only answeijpiese questions in the negative. I do so on thej
ground, as to some of them, that they are things which no government^
could reasonably be asked to do; as to all, that they were not suchl
things as a government of ordinary prudence and sagacity, carrying on'
its affairs in the usual way in which the affairs of governments are I
carried on, could have foreseen the necessity of providing for.
Passing from the law, and the means which the law should place at the
Action of govern- disposal of a government, to enable it to repress intended
ment- violations of neutrality on the part of its subjects, to the
action of the government in the use of such means, it seems to me that|
two things are incumbent on a government:
1st. That it shall use due diligence to inform itself, by the use of the
means at its disposal, whether a violation of the law is about to be committed ; and,
2d. That, beijappliJLsfied of the fact, it shall use due diligence in applying its means and power of prevention.
These conditions honestly and bona fide satisfied, no government, as
it seems to me, can be held liable for the acts of its subjects, but suchl
acts must be deemed to be beyond the reach of any control which it can
reasonably be expected to exercise.
But here questions of great importance, and of equal difficulty, present themselves:
(1.) Is a government, intending' faithfully to discharge its duty
toward another government, to be held responsible for a mere error of
judgment? As, for instance, in thinking a vessel not liable, in point
of law, to seizure, when in fact she was so; or in thinking the evidence
in a particular case insufficient when it was sufficient.
(2.) Is a government wanting in due diligence if it declines to seize a
vessel at the instance of a belligerent, when properly satisfied that, -
though there may be circumstances of a suspicious character, the only
evidence which can be adduced will not justify the seizure before the
law, and that the vessel will therefore be released ?
(3.) Having seized a vessel, and brought the matter before the proper
legal authority, is a government to be held responsible because, throughOPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN
some mistake of the court, either of law or fact, there has been a miscarriage of justice ?
(4.) Is it to be answerable for accidental delay, through which an opportunity becomes afforded to a vessel to evade the eventual decision of
the government to seize her ?
(5.) Is a government to be held responsible for error of judgment in
its subordinate officers, especially when these officers are at great distance, and not acting under its immediate control ? Is it, under such
circumstances, to be answerable for their possible negligence, or even
for their misconduct ?
These are matters of infinite importance to neutral nations, who may
be drawn within the vortex of wars in which they have no concern, if
they are not only to be harassed and troubled by the demands and importunities of jealous and angry belligerents, but are, in addition, to be
held responsible—to the extent, perhaps, of millions—for errors of
judgment, accidental delay, judicial mistake, or misconduct of subordinate officers, acting not only without their sanction, but possibly
in direct contravention of their orders.
We are not informed whether the two governments have, in compliance with the pledge contained in the treaty of Washington, invited
other nations to adopt its rules ; but if it is to be established that these
rules carry with them a liability so extensive, I should very much doubt
iwhether such an invitation, if 'made, would be attended with much
success.
Any decision of this tribunal founded on such a liability would have
the effect, I should imagine, of making maritime nations look upon belligerent powers with very considerable dread.
It is to be remembered that a government cannot be taken to guarantee the event; in other words, to be answerable at all hazards and under
all circumstances for a breach of neutrality by a subject, if it occurs. In
spite of the law, and of the vigorous administration of the law, offenses
will take place, and neither at home nor abroad can rulers be held, under
all circumstances answerable to those who suffer from them. All that
can be expected of the government of a country is that it shall possess
reasonable means to prevent offenses, and use such means honestly and
diligently for the benefit of those who are entitled to its protection.
The terms of the treaty, which require no more than I due diligence,"
exclude all notion of an absolute unconditional responsibility. This is
evidently the meaning of an observation of the British counsel at the
close of the fifth section of his argument on "due diligence," which
the president of the tribunal appears to have found some difficulty in
understanding.
This being so, I have some difficulty in saying that a government acting in good faith, and desiring honestly to fulfill its obli
tions, can be held liable for errors of judgment, unless,
indeed, these are of so patent a character as to amount to crassa .neg
ligentia.
Prolonged and unnecessary delay is, in the very nature of
compatible with diligence.    But delay, within reasonable
limits, honestly intended for the investigation of facts or
the due consideration of the proper course.to be pursued, is not so.   Delay arising simply from accident ought not to be imputed as negligence.
Accident can never be made the ground of an imputation of negligence,
though it may found a legal claim where a party is in mora.
As regards the seizure of a vessel under the foreign-enlistment act,
with a knowledge that the evidence would be insufficient to268
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
justify it, I hold that such a seizure, whether for the purpose of furthering the ends of a belligerent, or because some suspicion might attach to
the vessel, would have been unjustifiable both in policy and principle.
For no government can be called upon to institute legal proceedings-
under such circumstances.   Every government prosecution which ends'
in failure, is, in itself, productive of mischief.   It lessens the authority of
the executive by making it appear to have acted harshly and unjustly,^
and creates sympathy, perhaps unmerited, for parties against whom its
efforts- have been directed, and who have escaped from its pursuit.   It
impairs the authority of the^law by leading to the belief that it may be
infringed with impunity, thereby holding out encouragement to crirae.|
A government would be acting in violation of the spirit of the constitu-|
tion, as well as against law and right, if it seizd|| a vessel, the property^
of a subject, unless it believed such vessel to be justly and legally liable<
to condemnation on legal and sufficient proof.   Moreover, such a proceeding would be useless as well as arbitrary.   The government would
be unable to defer indefinitely the decision of the question, but, on the
contrary, would be bound to submit the case to the proper tribunal at
the earliest practicable moment.   In the case supposed, the result would
necessarily be that the vessel must be released and allowed to depart
unmolested.
It must be borne in mind that the British government possesses no
despotic or arbitrary power. It could neither assume nor exercise such
a power, even to protect a belligerent or maintain its own neutrality.
As regards any miscarriage of justice in matters within the sphere of
judk        -.car- the municipal law, it appears to me utterly out of the ques-
riage- . tion to hold that a government, having done what in it lay,
as by seizing a vessel and bringing it properly before the competent
court, can be held liable because, through some mistake or accident,
justice may have been defeated.
A breach of the law having been committed in the equipping or arming of a vessel for belligerent purposes, all that the government could
do, under the foreign-enlistment act, was to seize the delinquent vessel,-
and bring it into a proper court for condemnation. This done, and the
evidence of the facts in such a case having been submitted by the public
prosecutor to the court, the functions of the government are at an end.
It can do no more. The rest is with the law. In England, in America,
in every well-constituted and well-regulated state, the executive and
judiciary powers are separated by a broM and impassable barrier.
There is no authority in the state, however high, that would venture to
interfere with the discharge of the judicial office. It would be considered a violation of the most sacred principles, and an outrage on all,
propriety, to seek to control, or even to influence, directly or indirectly,
the decision of a judge, even of the most inferior tribunal.
This being so, the government of a neutral cannot justly or reasonably be held responsible for all the mischief which a vessel, equipped in
violation of its law, may do throughout the course of, possibly, a protracted war because a suit which it has properly instituted fails through
a mistake of the judge. To decide in the affirmative would be to establish a rule hitherto unknown, and calculated to impose on neutral states"
a degree of responsibility altogether unprecedented and unheard of.
As regards liability for the acts or omissions of subordinate officers,
Liability for acts it seems to me that, while a government may properly be
of subordinates,     j^a responsible for what is done, or omitted to t>e done, by
its orders or under its own immediate control, it would be most unreasonable to hold it answerable for the acts or negligences of subordinates,OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
269
at all events, unless it afterward ratifies aud adopts what these may
have done. .
In the matter of civil rights individuals may be liable for the negligence of those to whom they depute the conduct of their affairs; but,
considering the complicated machinery of political government, especially when distant colonies and dependencies are concerned, aud the
consequent necessity of employing subordinate officers, it would be
unreasonable and unjust to hold that the negligence of a subordinate,
more especially from mere error of judgment, as, for instance, in allowing
a vessel to take too much coal, was a want of "due diligence" on the
part of the government, for which it can justly be held liable.
The following passage from the British Counter-Case sums up so well
the different sides of this question, that I do not hesitate to produce it
at length:
l-That due diligence requires a government to use all the means in its power, is a proposition true in one sense, false in another; true, if it means that the government is
bound to exert honestly and with reasonable care and activity the means at its disposal ; false, impracticable, and absurd, if it means that a liability arises whenever it is
possible to show that an hour has been lost which might have been gained, or an accidental delay incurred which might, by the utmost foresight, have been prevented;
that an expedient which might have succeeded has not been tried; that means of
obtaining information which are deemed unworthy or improper have not been resorted
to; or that the exertions of an officer or servant of government have not been taxed
to the utmost limit of his physical capacity.
Nor can we fail to observe that, in proportion as we extend the duty of prevention
incumbent on neutral governments, from hostile enterprises which are open and flagrant to acts of a more doubtful character which border on the line betwixt the lawful
and the unlawful, it becomes more and .more difficult to exact from the neutral, in the
performance of that duty, peculiar and extraordinary vigilance and activity. The
duty of preventing the open assembling within neutral territory of an armed hostile
expedition against a neighboring country is plain and obvious, and requires only a
prompt exercise of adequate force. But it is otherwise when we come to acts of a
different class, the criminality of which depends on a latent intention; such, for example, as the mere procuring for belligerent purposes from the yards of a neutral shipbuilder, whose ordinary business it is to build ships of all kinds for customers of all
nations, a vessel with some special adaptation for war. There is nothing in the relation of a neutral to a belligerent to cast on the former the duty of exercising within
his own territory a constant and minute espionage over ordinary transactions of commerce for the protection of the latter. This relation, always onerous to the neutral, is,
at the same time, it must be remembered, purely involuntary on his part. It is forced
on him by the quarrels of his neighbors in which he has no concern, or by their internal discords when those discords break out into civil war.l
. While I readily admit that the measure of diligence which a govern-
ment applies to the affairs it has to administer, if the ordinary course
of its administration is negligent and imperfect, is not necessarily to be
taken—any more than it would be in the case of an individual—as the
measure of diligence which it is to apply in the discharge of international obligationsj yet credit should be given to a government for a
properly diligent discharge of public duty.
Furthermore, if a given law and a particular system of administration have been found by practical experience sufficient to protect the
interests of the government in the important matter of the public revenue, and also to insure the observance of neutral duties on the occasion
of all former wars, surely it is highly unreasonable and unjust to condemn the whole system as defective, and the government as negligent,
for not having amended it in anticipation of future events.
It must not be forgotten that, since the passing of the British statute,
wars have occurred in all parts of the world, but no complaints of the
violation of that statute have occurred till American citizens had
recourse to new modes of defeating or evading it.
1 British Counter-Case, page 22.2.70
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Such, in my opinion, are the principles by which we should be guided
in deciding whether Great Britain has or has not failed to satisfy the
requirements of due diligence. I proceed to apply them to the different
heads of complaint preferred by the United States.
One main head of complaint on their part is that the municipal law
I   of Great Britain, as contained in  the foreign-enlistment
Municipal
ireat Britaii
act, was insufficient to enable the British government to
enforce the observance of the duties of neutrality by its subjects.    We
have first a general condemnation of  English acts of Parliament.I
I English acts," we are told*f," are so overloaded with a mass of phrases, ]
alike unprecise and confused, with so much of tedious superfluity of!
immaterial circumstances, as if they were specially designed to give i
scope to bar chicanery, to facilitate the escape of offenders, and to
embarrass and confound the officers of the government charged with
the administration of law.   Such, indeed, has been the ordinary complexion of ti|| legislation of Great Britain, and this style of complex i
verbosity of legislation has unhappily been transmitted to the UnitedI
States."   But then we have the satisfaction of learning that "there it-
begins to encounter steady efforts of reformation, which are conspicuous
in the legislation of many of the American States.1
Of the foreign-enlistment act we are told that" its practical inefficiency was glaringly apparent on the face of all the relative diplomatic
correspoudence between Great Britain and the United States."
That it was " valueless, except as occasion should arise to make it
serve as a pretext to cover, in diplomatic communication with other
governments, indifference, unfriendly, or hostile animus on the part of
some British minister."
British ministers are represented as " floundering along in the flat
morass of the meaningless verbosity and confused circumlocution of an
act of Parliament." They are represented as having been " compelled
to drift into the condition of foreign war rather than break free from
the entanglement of the cobweb meshes of that act."
It strikes me that those who address us in this strange style must
suppose us to be ignorant that the English act of 1819 was framed on
the model of the American act of 1818; that it is, in the main, identical
in language, and is, ia one, and that an important particular, more
stringent than its predecessor.
The English act, in the part of it with which we are concerned, makes
it an offense to | equip, furnish, fit out, or arm, within the
^Foreign-enlistment United Kingdom or the Queen's dominions, without the
royal license first obtained, any ship or vessel, with the intent, or in order that such ship or vessel shall be employed in the service of any foreign prince, state, or potentate, or of any foreign colony,'
province, or part of any province or people, or of any person or persons I
exercising or assuming to exercise any powers of government in or over
any foreign state, colony, province, or part of any province or people, -
as a transport or storeship, or with intent to cruise or commit hostilities against any prince, &c, &c, with whom the Queen is not at war."
To attempt to equip, &c, any such ship or vessel with a like intent, or
to procure it to be done, as well as knowingly to aid and assist, or be
concerned in so doing, is equally made an offense. The penalty attached to the offense is fine and imprisonment, or either of them, at the
discretion of the court, and the forfeiture of the vessel, with all its accessories, and of all materials, arms, ammunition, and stores whichOPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
271
may be found on board, on the vessel being prosecuted and condemned;
such prosecution and condemnation being directed to be had " in like
manner, and in such courts, as ships and vessels may be prosecuted and
condemned for any breach of the laws for the protection of the revenues
of customs and excise, or of the laws of trade and navigation."
So much for the prohibitive or. punitive part of the law. The preventive part consists in a provision that the ship or vessel
maybe seized by any officer of Her Majesty's customs or rreventireiaw.
excise, or any officer of the royal navy, who is by law empowered to make seizures for any forfeiture incurred under the revenue
laws, or laws relating to trade or navigation, within the limits of their
particular jurisdictions.
On comparing the enactment relating to the fitting out of ships with
the corresponding enactment of the American statute, it
will be found that the English act, on which so much vitu- ii|||H with
perative criticism has been lavished, is, in fact, as regards
the equipment of vessels, more comprehensive and effective than the
former. • For, while the English statute makes it an offense to equip or
arm, in the disjunctive, by the American statute the offense consists in
fitting out and arming, in the conjunctive, thus bringing the vessel a
stage further on toward belligerent completion before the law can interpose.
It is true that the judges in the court of exchequer having been
divided in opinion, in the case of the Alexandra, as to whether the arming of a vessel was not necessary before the intent that she should be
employed for belligerent purposes could be inferred, the result in that
case was that the more comprehensive enactment of the English statute
failed in its effect. But when it is said, in somewhat strong language,
that the effect of the decision in the Alexandra case was to " emasculate" the English statute, it must be observed that, if such was the case,
the effect was only to reduce the English act to the condition in which
the American statute had been from its birth. I think it unnecessary,
on the present occasion, to express any opinion on the question on
which the judges of the court of exchequer were divided. I will only,
in passing,_repeat my conviction that neither the American nor the
English statutes were ever intended to interfere with the execution of
orders from belligerents by American or British ship-builders, but simply to prevent the ports of the respective countries from being used for
fitting out privateers, or being made the base of hostile expeditions.
But the distinction between equipping and arming, and equipping without arming, is immaterial for the present purpose; for, in point of fact,
that distinction never created any difficulty in the action of the British
government. In the cases both of the Florida and the Alabama, the
only question on which the action of the government was arrested was
as to the sufficiency of the evidence of the vessel being intended for the
service of a belligerent.
But it is with reference to the preventive powers conferred on the
Executive by these acts that the case and argument of Preventive powers
the United States principally assail the British statute, °ir_ctfandA?"eri"
and triumphantly assert the superiority of the American
maintaining that, while the British act depends on the sanction
of penalties, the American act places power in the hands of the Executive which effectually secures it against infraction of the law.
Acquainted with the two acts, I read, I must say, with much surprise-,
the following passage in the argument of the United States:
The great-difference between the two consists in the cardinal fact that the provisions272
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
of the British act are merely punitive, and to be carried into effect only by judicial instrumentality ; whereas the American act is. preventive, calls for executive action, and
places in the hands of the President of the United States the entire military and naval
force of the Government, to be employed by him in his discretion for the prevention
of foreign equipments and foreign enlistments in the United States.1
This appears to me a thoroughly inaccurate representation of the
effect of the Americau act, which, as I understand it, confers no discretionary power, on the President beyond that of employing the military or naval forces of the republic to support the law, if necessary.
Beferring to the different violations of neutrality made offenses by the
act, the 8th section provides that—
In every case in which a vessel shall be fitted out and armed, or attempted to be;
fitted out and armed, or in which the force of any vessel of war, cruiser, or other armed
vessel shall be increased or augmented, or in which any military expedition or enterprise shall be begun or set on foot, contrary to the provisions and prohibitions of this
act; and in every case of the capture of a ship or vessel within the jurisdiction or protection of the United States as before defined; and in every case in which any process;
issuing out of any court of the United States shall be disobeyed or resisted by any person or persons having the custody of any vessel of war, cruiser, or other armed vessel
of any foreign prince or state, or of any colony, district, or people, or of any subjects
or citizens of any foreign prince or state, or of any colony, district, or people, it shall?
be lawful for the President of the United States, or such other person as he shall have
empowered for that purpose, to employ such part of the land or naval forces of the
United States, or of the militia thereof, for the purpose of taking possession of and
detaining any such ship or vessel, with her prize or prizes, if any, in order to the execution of the prohibitions and penalties of this act, and to the restoring the prize or
prizes in the cases in which restoration shall have been adjudged, and also for the.
purpose of preventing the carrying on any such expedition or enterprise from the territories or jurisdiction of the United States against the territories or dominions of any
foreign prince or state, or of any colony, district, or people, with whom the United
States are at peace.
To any one who reads this section with any degree of attention, its
meaning, I think, must be clear. __To arbitrary power is given to the
President, nor any power of seizing a vessel at all, except " in order to
the execution of the prohibitions and penalties of the act." IsTo discretionary power whatever is given him except that of using force, where force
is required, for overcoming resistance.
The enactment was contained in the original act of 1794, which was
passed shortly after the French minister, Genet, had set the Government at d6fiance, and threatened to resist by force any attempt to detain
a privateer illegally armed in the port of Philadelphia, and after the
French vice-consul at Boston had actually rescued by force a suspected
vessel which had been seized by the United States authorities.
The section was obviously directed against the repetition of such an
occurrence, and was necessary to enable the President to use the forces
of the state on a sudden emergency without having recourse to the
Senate. The section gives the President no power which he would
not have had without it, except where recourse to actual force is
necessary. It is an entire misrepresentation to say that he has a
discretionary power to seize and detain a vessel- without bringing her
before the proper court for adjudication. His power is to employ
the state force, if necessary, among other things, to seize a vessel,
" in order to the execution of the prohibitions and penalties of the act,"
Vhich implies that the vessel must be submitted, in the usual course, to
the proper legal process to decide on her condemnation or release.
Often as the action of the Government was invoked by the governments
of Spain and Portugal, during their colonial wars, to prevent the arming of vessels in the ports of the United States, frequent as have been
Argument of the United States, p.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
273
the raids and hostile expeditions from American territory since, no instance has been adduced of the exercise of this alleged discretionary
power by a President of seizing a vessel and keeping her, without putting the matter into due course of law, aud I feel tolerably confident
that no such instance has ever occurred.
Instances may have occurred, as in the case of the Spanish gun-boats
building at New York in 1869, in which it was considered necessary to
provide for the use of force to arrest ships believed to be about to go
forth on military expeditions; but such seizures have been followed by
the ordinary course of legal procedure and inquiry, or the intended expedition having been prevented or else abandoned, the vessel has been
restored without any further proceeding. Instances have no doubt
occurred in which vessels have been seized by order of the President,
as head of the executive, as vessels might be seized by order of Her
Majesty's government; but this was only that the statute might be put
in force. In like manner vessels may have been seized under the ordinary civil authority, qnd it being found that there was no sufficient case
against them, may have been set free. But no instauce, I believe, has
occurred, except where force was actually necessary, of the seizure of a
vessel by a President, iu the mere exercise of executive power, suspending the ordinary action of the law. j_To example of such a proceeding has been, or, I believe, can be, adduced, with the single exception of
the case of Gelston vs. Hoyt, to which I am about to refer, iu which the
experiment to exercise such a power was tried and failed.
By the decision of the Supreme Court of the United States, in the
last-mentioned case, which is reported in the 4th volume of Curtis's
Reports, page 228, the view I have taken of the effect of the American
act is conclusively borne out. An action having been brought by a.
shipowner against a civil officer for the seizure and detention of a ship,
the defendant pleaded the order of the President, but the plea was held
bad.   In giving judgment, Mr. Justice Story says :
The argument is that, as the President has authority, by the act, to employ the naval
and military forces of the United States for this purpose, a fortiori ,he might do it by
the employment of civil force. But, upon the most deliberate consideration, we are of
a different opinion. The power thus intrusted to the President is of a very high and
delicate nature, and manifestly intended to be exercised only when, by the ordinary
process or exercise of civil authority, the purposes of the law cannot be effectuated.
it is to be exerted on extraordinary occasions, and subject to that high responsibility
which all executive acts necessarily involve. Whenever it is exerted, all persons who
act in obedience to the executive instructions in cases within the act are completely
justified in taking possession of and detaining the offending vessel, aud are not responsible in damages for any injury which the party may suffer by reason of such proceeding. Surely, it never could have been the intention of Congress thatsnch.a power
should be allowed as a shield to the seizing officer iu cases where that seizure might be
made by the ordinary civil means. One of the cases put in the section is, where any
process of the courts of the United States is disobeyed and resisted ; and this case
abuudantly show that the authority of the President was not intended to be called
into exercise, unless where military and naval forces were necessary to insure the execution of the laws. In terms, the section is confined to the employment of naval and
military forces ; and there is neither public policy nor principle to justify an extension
of the prerogative beyond the terms in which it is given. Cougress might be perfectly
willing to intrust the President with the power to take and detain, whenever, in his
opinion, the case was so flagrant that military or naval force were necessary to enforce
the laws, and yet with great propriety deny it where, from the circumstances of the
case, the civil officers of the Government might, upon their private responsibility,
without any danger to thepublic peace, completely execute them. Itis certainly against
the general theory of our institutions to create great discretionary powers by implication ; and in the present instance we see nothing to justify it.
I cannot help expressing my surprise that, with this decision befort
them, American lawyers should have submitted so incorrect a statement
to this tribunal.   If, indeed, what is meant is that the power of the
18 B274
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
President to use the forces of the State to prevent forcible violations of
neutrality gives any superior efficacy to the American system, the au-.
swer is that which has been given by Sir R. Palmer in his most able
argument, namely, that in all cases similar to those referred to in the
American act, the sovereign of Great Britain possesses full power to
use force, civil or military, such as.the case may cab. for.
The first American neutrality act of 1794 was silent as to the authority' by whom vessels infringing the law should be seized, proceedings-
being apparently left to be taken by any person choosing to become an
informer, to whom half the henalty and half the forfeited property is to.'
go. From the case of Gelston vs. Hoyt, just cited, it however appears?
that at the time that cause was decided, in all cases of the forfeiture of
vessels the duty of seizure devolved on the officers of customs. In thisjv
respect, therefore, the practice of the two countries would be the same.:
Loud complaints having been made, by the representatives of Spain
and Portugal, of the number of privateers fitted out and manned, from:
ports of the Union, by American citizens, and preyiug on the commerce
of the two countries, under commissions from the revolted colonies, a
new statute was passed in 1818, which, in addition to the enactments of
the act of 1794, which otherwise remained the same, contained two new^
provisions.
Section 10 provided that:—
The owners or consignees of every armed ship or vessel sailing out of the ports of the
United States, belonging wholly or in part to citizens thereof, shall enter into bond tu'3
the United States, with sufficient sureties, prior to clearing out the same, in double the
amount of the value of the vessel and cargo on board, iucluding her armament, that
the said ship or vessel shall not be employed by such owners to cruise or commit, hostilities against the subjects, citizens, or property of any foreign prince or state, or of
any colony, district, or people, with whom the United States are at peace.
By section 11 special power was given to collectors of customs—
To detain any vessel manifestly built for warlike purposes, and about to departs
the United States, of which the cargo shall principally consist of arms and munitions,
of war, when the number of men shipped on board, or other circumstances, shall";
render it probable that such vessel is intended to be employed by tbe owner or owners!
to cruise or commit hostilities upon the subjects, citizens, or property of any foreign.
state, or of any colony, district, or people with whom the United States are at peace, un^l
til the decision of the President be bad thereon, or until the owner or owners shall give;!
such bond and security as is required of the owners of armed ships by the preceding*
section af this act.
But the power thus given would evidently not apply to the case we
have here to deal with, of vessels leaving equipped, but without an-;
armament, and having no arms or munitions of war on board.
In like manner the bonding clause just quoted (section 10) applies
only to armed ships, and therefore would equally have been unavailable."
Besides which, it applies only to ships belonging in whole or impart to
American ciffzens, and would therefore obviously have no application
to a ship sold to a foreign government.
But though it is an entire mistake to say that the American act of
1818 was in any respect superior to the British act of the ensuing year1,**
it is true that, since the time the American act was passed, the working
of the legal administration in the United States has become, for the
purpose of proceeding against a suspected vessel, in one respect better
than that of Great Britain. It appears that in each district of the
United States there is a resident legal officer of the Federal Government, called the district attorney, to whom, if the action of the Govi*
ernment is invoked, a question of this kind is referred, and whose duty
it is to ascertain the facts, collect the evidence, and report to the Government. Such an officer is, no doubt, better adapted to such a purposeOPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
275
than a collector of customs. But can it be said to have been the duty
of the British government, not having similar district officers, to appoint
such, at the different ship-building ports, with a view the better to
protect belligerents against ships being equipped or armed against
them1?
Another advantage of the American system is, that the duty of adjudicating in such a case devolves on a judge in the court of admiralty
instead of on a jury, who are sometimes, apt to be swayed in favor of
their own countrymen when sued at the instance of foreigners. But
this relates to the condemnation of vessels, not to their seizure. And
with the exception of the Florida and Alabama, every vessel the
seizure of which could be asked for, as instanced in the cases of the
Alexandra, the Pampero, and the iron-clad rams at Birkenhead was
seized and prevented from doing any harm to the commerce of the
United States. The Alexandra, it is true, was released after trial in
England, but she was seized again at Nassau, and not liberated till after
the close of the war. Practically speaking, therefore, in the later
cases, everything was accomplished which could have resulted from
the most perfect machinery that could have been devised for such a purpose.
Great stress is laid in the pleadings of the United States on the
British act of 1870, passed on the report of the neutrality
rru i_-ii. __. _.-_■___• British act of 18/0.
commissioners. The act is held up as the standard or
neutral duty and of the requirements necessary to give effect to it. No
doubt that act introduced very material changes, and did much to
strengthen the hands of the executive. It made it an offense to build,
or agree to build, or procure to be built, as well as to equip or arm. It
did away with all question as to intent, by making it sufficient if the
party doing any of these things knows, or even has reasonable* cause
to believe, that the vessel will be employed in the service of a belligerent. To dispatch a' vessel with such intent, knowledge, or reasonable,
cause of belief, is added to the category of offenses. Still more remarkable is the new proceeding introduced, iu addition to the former
process, for the condemnation of the vessel, for the purpose of testing
the character of a suspected ship. If the secretary of state, or chief
executive authority in any place, is satisfied that there is reasonable
and probable cause for believing that a ship within Her Majesty's dominions has been, or is being, built, commissioned, op equipped, contrary
to the act, and is about to betaken beyond the limits of such dominions,
he may issue his warrant to any officer of the customs, or public officer,
or commissioned officer of the army or navy, who is thereupon to seize,
search, and detain the ship. The owner may apply, indeed, to the court
of admiralty for the restoration of the vessel; but it is incumbent upon
him, in order to obtain it, to establish that the act has-not been contra-
I vened. So that the order of procedure is reversed. ' Instead of it being
i necessary for the prosecutor to establish at all events a prima-facie
\ case of guilt, the owner has, in the first instance, to establish innocence—
! a proceeding alien altogether to English jurisprudence.
No doubt these are great changes—possibly improvements. But is it
just to say that the pre-existing law was so essentially defective as that
• the British nation can be held liable by reason of its imperfections?
|LaW, like all other human institutions^ is in a constant state of progress
[and change. New events, now conjunctures, new combinations of cir-
I cumstances, the lessons of experience', from- time to time point out to
[the lawgiver the necessity of altering the work of the past to adapt itARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
to the requirements of the present.   Is every amendment of the law to
carry with it the condemnation of the legislation which preceded it?
At all events, it does not lie in the mouths of Americans to say so in
the present instance. I have just passed their own law in reviewj§
According to it, it is not an offense to build or equip a vessel uuless it be
also armed; knowledge, or reasonable ground of belief, is not, as under
the act of 1870, sufficient; the intent must be proved. The intermediate process given by the latter act, and by which the burden of
proving the innocent character of the ship", in the first instance, is cast
on the owner, is unknown.
For all practical purposes, the neutrality laws of the United States
and of Great Britain, prior to the late war, were substantially thesam^
With this model act now for two years before them, the United Statep
have done nothing to bring their law up to the standard of it. How
can they now, with any pretense of justice, ask that Great Britain shall
be tried by the test of a law which is as much in advance of their "own
present law as it is of the past law of Great Britain?
When, notwithstanding this, one reads in the United States argument.
that "the British government has stood obstinately on confessedly defective legislation of neutrality;" that" it is not yet emancipated from,
the national prejudices which obstructed Mr. Canning;" that it " still
lags behind the United States in appreciation of the true princples of
public law, which lie at the foundation of the relation's of independent
sovereign states," it is difficult to express the feeling which arises con^
sistently with the seriousness which belongs to the present occasion.
It is true that it is not the law of the United States, but that of Great§
Britain, that is now on its trial.   It may not be enough to say that if
Great Britain is black America is no whiter.   It may not be enough to
as Great Britain might do in so many instances,' " Si %n me iniquim
es judex, eodem ego te crimine condemnaboP   Tet a comparison of tha
respective laws of the two countries is by no means superfluous.  For a vm
mark is here to be made, which applies also to many other parts of the
present controversy, namely, that the Government of the United Stated
can have no right to require more of that of Great Britain than it coulffl
itself have rendered had the position of the two countries been reversed, and Great Britain had been the belligerent and the United
States the neutral power.
in the absence of convention, equalifel
and reciprocity lie at the very root of international obligations, and no
nation has a right to demand of another more than under the like ciffl
cumstances it would have been able itself to render.
The statement I have quoted above from the United States argument
that " the British government has stood obstinately on coqS
Bm^.mae_rsof t°b. fessedly defective legislation of neutrality," refers, I pre-
act-dSring^th""iwi sume, to the communications which passed during the w<m
between the government of Great Britain and that of tbffl
United States on the subject of an amendment of the British foreign
enlistment act.    With respect to these   communications, the   factS
shortly stated, are as follows:   In 1861, and again 1863-'64, Mr. in
Adams suggested (in the first instance, with a view to check the BritiaH
colonial trade in articles contraband of war) that it might be of advanja
tage if the British legislature would pass an act similar to the temporary act passed by the United. States in 1838, which had referenc|f
only to expeditions or exports of arms (not carried by sea) betweew
the United States aud any foreign territory conterminous with the
United States.   The precedent of this legislation was actually followed,
by Canada in 1864, when events made it requisite.   No other request^OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
277
i for an alteration of this British law was at any time made on the part
[ of the United States.
Ou the 19th of December, 1862, Earl Bussell wrote thus to Mr.
I Adams:
'..I have the honor to inform you that Her Majesty's government, after consultation
I with the law-officers of the Crown, are of opinion that certain amendments might be
introduced into the foreign-enlistment act, which, if sanctioned by Parliament, would
I bave the effect of giving greater power to the executive to prevent the construction,
[ in British ports, of ships destined for the use of belligerents. But Her Majesty's gov-
1 eminent consider that, before submitting any proposals of that sort to Parliament, it
I would be desirable that they should previously communicate with the Government of
E the United States, and ascertain whether that Government is willing to make similar
■ alterations in its own foreign-enlistment act, and that the amendments, like the original
I statute, should, as it were, proceed pari passu in both countries.
I shall accordingly be ready to confer at any time with you, and to listen to any sug-
E gestions which you may have to make by which the British foreign-enlistmeut act and
I the corresponding statute of the United States may be made more efficient for their
I purpose.1
In reply to this overture, (which was received with equal courtesy and
I caution by the Government of the United States,) Mr. Adams was
I instructed not to make any suggestions whatever, but to state (accord-
I ingto Earl Bussell's report of the conversation) I that his Government
t were ready to listen to any propositions Her Majesty's government had
I to make, but they did not see how their own law on this subject could
I be improved," or (according to Mr. Adams's own report) that the Gov-
I ernment of the United States considered their own law as | of very
I sufficient vigor."2 Earl Bussell thereupon said that the cabinet, under
I the advice of the lord chancellor, (Lord Westbury,) had come to the
I same conclusion with reference to the law of Great Britain, " so that
I no further proceedings need be taken at present on the subject." Earl
I Bussell's overture was not founded on any opinion of the insufficiency
I of the British law for the performance of the international obligations
I of Great Britain, but simply on the advice of the law-officers that cer-
I tain amendments might be possible which would increase the power of
I the executive government to deal with cases within the scope of that
I law. There could be no possibility, however, of carrying such amend-
I ments through Barliament unless similar amendments had been simul-
I taueously made in the law of the United States, and the reply of the
I United States, throwing upon Great Britain the whole responsibility of
I making propositions in the matter, gave no assurance that those propo-
I sitions, if made, would lead to any useful result.    If anything had been
■ needed to confirm this impression, it would be found in Mr. Seward's
■ answer, when informed of what had passed.    Writing to Mr. Adams on
I the 2d of March, 1863, he says :-
It remains for this Government only to say that it will be your duty to urge upon
I Her Majesty's government the desire and expectation of the President, that hencefor-
■ ward Her Majesty's government will take the necessary measures to enforce the execu-
Ktion of the law as faithfully as this Government has executed the corresponding statutes oj
■ the United States.3
Not content with instituting a comparison between the neutrality law
of Great Britain and that of the United States, the American   BHH H
lease has gone on to compare both with the municipal law foreienlaw?-
of other states; which comparison it seeks, by some strange manipula-
ition, to turn in favor of the United States, though, as we have seen, the
■ laws of the two countries were, at the time in question, substantially
■ the same.
1 United States Appendix, vol. ii, p. 92.
-2British Appendix, vol. vi, No. 1, p. 48; United States Documents, vol. i, p. 668.
3 United States Documents, vol. i, p. 669.278
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Having gone carefully through the laws of the leading maritime
nations, I find none in which the equipping or arming of vessels for the
use of a belligerent was, prior to the breaking out of the American civil'
war, prohibited, except under circumstances which would make it a
violation of neutrality according to international law. After the breaking out of the war, in one or two countries, as in France and Brazil, the
law in this respect was put on the same footing as the law of Great
Britain and America prior to the dispute. Iu some, as in Italy, it has
been altered since. In these cases the altered law is referred to in the
argument of the United States as though it had existed at the time of
the war.
In the laws of those states which had hitherto taken but little part
in maritime affairs, no law on the subject of equipping or
arming ships was perhaps to be expected.   I only observe,
therefore, as it were iu passing, that Austria had no law relative to
this subject.
In answer to an inquiry made on the part of Her Majesty's government, the Austrian minister for foreign affairs thus responds:
Apart from the principles which lie at the foundation of this declaration, (the declaration of Paris of 1856,; there exists, however, no law in Austria, nor an_. other order
generally binding, which could be made to apply to violations of neutrality by Austrian^
subjects.
The imperial government have endeavored to supply this want in cases of war
between other States, by promulgating in legal forms special regulations for the preservation of neutrality applicable only to the war in question. Thus, in the year 1854, in
consequence of the war then existing, the ministerial ordonnance of May 25,1854, was
promulgated, of which copy is inclosed herewith.
In such special declarations the generally acknowledged principles of international
law, as well as the known views of the belligerent powers on certain points, have been
taken into consideration, in order, as much as possible, to obviate auy complaints of
infringement of neutrality.
There does not exist, however, a law of this kind applicable to all future occasions,'
and more particularly there are no general laws in Austria prohibiting the construe"^:
tion, equipment, or manning of ships (in Austrain .harbors) which are destined for
belligerent powers, or are suspected of being so.1
There is nothing, therefore, to prevent the equipping or arming of
ships for a belligerent by the laws of Austria.
In like manner it appears, from the note furnished to Her Majesty's
representative at Berlin, that no law exists in Brussia prohibiting the building or sale of ships.1
The Swiss law on the subject of neutrality has been introduced in the
United States argument in terms of laudation; but as m the
nature of things it can have nothing to do with maritime
neutrality, I presume it has only been brought forward out of compliment to our Swiss colleague, and I need say nothing further on the subject.
I pass on to maritime nations.   And first, as to France.   It is certain
that there is no prohibition in the French codes against the
building or equipping of ships for a belligerent.   The only
provision relative to a breach of neutrality by a French subject is to be
found in the eighty-fourth aud eighty-fitth articles of the code p6uaty
which are in these terms :
Art. 84. Quiconque aura, par des actions hostiles non-appronvees par le gouvernement, expose' l'6tat k une declaration de guerre, sera pnni du bannissoment; et, si la
guerre s'en est snivie, de la deportation.
Akt. 85. Quiconque aur_t-par des actes non approuves par le gouvernement, expose
des Fran9ais k eprouver des represailles sera puui du bannissement.
'Report of neutrality laws commission, p. 39, British appendix, vol. iii.
2 Ibid., p. 65.
Xiiw'of SwitzerlaOPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
279
On these articles M. Treitt, the learned counsel to the British embassy,
makes the following observations :
Vous voudrez bien remarquer la ge'neralite' de ces expressions, quiconque, actions hostiles : le legislateur n'as pas vonlu definir ce qu'il faillait entendre par actions hostiles ; il
en a laisse" V'appreciation souveraine auxjuges.
II ne s'agit point dans les articles S4 et 85 du code penal des machinations et manoeuvres au profit d'une puissance etrangere, et ayant pour objet de provoquer des hostilites. Ces machinations pratiques dans une intention et uu but criminels rentrent
dans les differeutes especes de trahison, lesquelles sont punies par les articles 76 a 83
du mfime code. Les articles 84 et 85 s'appliquent aux simples cas d'imprudence, de
t&n6rit__ de^negligence; c'est rnoins l'intention que le fait materiel qni est puni. La
loi ne voit que le resultat; ainsi: " La France a-t-elle ete expose"e k une declaration de
guerre, la guerre a-t-elle ete declare? Les Francais ont-ils ete exposes a de represailles? "
Ces seules questions resolues affirmativement entraineront l'application d'une de.
peines si se>eres prononc€es par la loi, et eu outre le paiement de dommages-interdtS:
qui peuvent toujour etre reclame's.
II faut done trois conditions pourqu'il y ait lieu k l'application des articles 84 et 85
du code penal:
1. Que Paction soit hostile.
2. Que Paction n'ait pas ete approuv^e par le gouvernement.
3. Qne la France a ete exposed k une declaration de guerre ou des FranQais exposes
a des represailles.
Je precise ces trois circonstances parceque c'est le pouvoir judiciaire seul qui est
appeie a les resoudre et k decider de la culpability.
Si les juges d^cident que telle action n'est point une action hostile, et par consequent
non-violatrice de la neutralite, le gouvernement devra respecter cette decision et pourra
l'opposer.au belligerant qui se plaindrait.
Si devant les juges l'accnse excipait d'une approbation, soit tacite, soit expresse par
le gouvernement, Paction incriminee ne pourrait plus etre punie.
. Entin, si Paction hostile n'avait pas pour consequence des represailles ou une eventu-
alite de guerre, elle cesse d'etre criminelle.1
Writing to Mr. Fane, then British minister at Paris, M. de Moustier,
the minister for foregn affairs, says:
A proprement parler, il n'y a pas de disposition dans la legislation francaise qui
marque d'une maniere precise les limites de la neutralite a observer eutre deux puissances etraugeres qui sont en etat de guerre, les questions de cette nature etant d'nn
caractere mixte, et trouvant leur solution dans les principes generaux du droit international.2
It is clear, therefore, that the French law went no further than to provide for the punishment of any infraction of international law which has
the effect of exposing France to a declaration of war or to reprisals.
Now, as we have seen, the sale even of armed ships is not an offense
against neutrality and could not produce the consequences referred to in
the articles of the code. It is true the government has the power of
preventing the arming of vessels in its own hands, if it thinks proper to
use it, as the exportation of arms, except with the permission of the
government, is prohibited under heavy penalties—not, indeed, with the
motive of preventing breaches of "neutrality, but from motives of policy
of a very different character. If, indeed, the construction of an armed
vessel formed part of an enterprise having for its immediate object hostile operations against a belligerent power, then, as I have already
pointed out, the whole would amount to a violation of neutrality.
But an imperial decree of the 10th June, 1861, passed with a view to
the war which had then broken out, contained iu its 3d article the following provision:
II est interdit k tout Francais de prendre commission de l'une des deux parties pour
armer des vaisseaux en guerre, ou d'accepter des lettres de marque pour faire la course
maritime, otSde concourir d'une maniere quelconque a requipeuient ou a l'armement
d'un navire de guerre ou corsaire de l'une des deux parties belligerantes.3
1 Report of Neutralitv Laws Commission, p. 45, British Appendix, vol. iii.
2 Ibid, p. 46.
3 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 22.■R
280
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Thus, the law of France, iu respect of the equipping and arming of
ships of war, was placed on the same footing as that of Great Britain
and America.
Belgium, which, as it is known, has adopted the French codes, has likewise the eighty-fourth and eighty-fifth articles of the Code
penal; but with the exception of severe laws against privateering, or the reception of privateers, the prohibitive and preventive
power of the law depends on the articles in question.
The Netherlands, in like jhanner, having also adopted the French code,
i.aw „rthe Neth- have the eighty-fourth and eighty-fifth  articles; but no
er,ands- special provision as to equipping or arming of vessels iu the
way of trade existed prior to the year 1866, as appears from the express?
statement of M. van Zuylen de Nyevelt, the Netherlands minister for;,
foreign affairs, in a letter to Mr. Ward, found in the appendix to the
British case.1
It is true that M. de Zuylen makes the following observation:
Quant aux moyens coactifs dont le gouvernement pourrait disposer pour empecher.
des violations de sa neutralite, les articles 84 et 85 du code p6ual peuvent aussi dins
quelques cas servir k ce but. Ceux, fflir exemple, qui tacheraient d'equiper ou de vendre:
des vaisseaux de gnerre dans nos ports puur le compfce des belligerauts pourraient 8tre ;
poursuivies en vertu de ces articles ; les navires alors seraieut saisis comme piece de*;
conviction et par la m.me leur sortie serait enipfichee.
But it is to be remarked that the foregoing observation as to the possible application of the eighty/fourth and eighty-fifth sections of the
penal code to the equipping or sale of ships is given only as a matter of
opinion; no instance appears to have occurred in which the equipping
or sale of a vessel of war has been held to be an offense within these*
articles. It must obviously depend on whether what was doneamounted
to a violation of international law affording a just cause of war.
The regulations idl&ed by the Dutch government in 1866 do not touch
the case of the equipment or sale of ships, but only the admission of
belligerent vessels into Dutch ports. It may be remarked, in passing,,;
that it is expressly provided by article 4 of ihe regulations that " ships
of war may reufiain ,an unlimited time in Dutch harbours and estuaries,
and may also provide themselves with an unlimited supply of coal."1
Spain has two provisions corresponding to the articles of the French
code, viz, article 148 of the codigo penal, and article 258.
JwfSpam:        of a statute of 1822:2
Art. 148. Whosoever shall, wifitput having been permitted to do so by competent
authority, have provoked or given motive to a declaration of war against Spain on the
part of another power, or shall have exposed Spanish subjects to suffer vexations or
reprisals against their persons or properties, shall be punished with imprisonment j-~j
aud if such person be a public functionary, he shall be punished with temporary reclu-
sion.
Art. 258. "Whosoever shall, without the knowledge, authority, or permission of the
government, have committed hostilities against any allied or neutral power, or shall
have exposed the State to suffer for that cause a declaration of war, or if such hostilities shall have been the ground for reprisals against Spaniards, he shall be condemned to give public satisfaction for such offense, and to reclusion or imprisonment
for a term of from two to six years, and shall pay a tine equal to one-quarter of the
amount of damages-be shall have occasioned, without prejudice to any further punishment which he may be liable to incur for the violence committed. If said hostilities.^
shall have broU"ght on a n i in n iedia te declaration of war, or if such declaration shall have
preceded the time of the trials, the offender shall be punished with transportation.
But there is no law which touches the equipping or arming of ships!
of war for a belligerent.   The decree relating to neutrality isOTied on the
1 Report of neutrality laws commission, p. 63, British appendix, vol. iii.
2 Appendix to United States Counter Case, p. 1062.--»:
OPINIONS   OF   SIR   ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
281
occasion of the American civil war is set out in the British Appendix.1
It contains no prohibition relating to the equipping or arming of ships.
It is stated, indeed, in the United States argument2 that the codigo
penal, in article 151, forbids the expediting of " cruisers." Is it possible
that the writers are ignorant that the term | destinare buques al eorsov
does not refer to cruisers but to privateers'?
Bortugal has a corresponding provision in the one hundred and forty-
eighth article, the Empire of Brazil in the eighty-third arti- Lawof PorUl8al
cie, of the penal code of the respective countries. In the andBra2il-
Brazilian code the offense consists in " committing, without the order or
the authorization of the government, hostile acts against the subjects of
another nation, so as to endanger peace or provoke reprisals."
In the report presented to His Majesty the Emperor of Brazil on these
laws by D. Silva Ferrao, set out in the later United States documents,1'
there is the following very pertinent observation:
Thus, it remains understood that if the fact iu itself were not such as to give just
reason for war, according to international right, it could never be reputed a crime even
were it not authorized by the government, and were it eventually followed by war.
Such a fact is not then a reason but a pretext for war.
In this elaborate report, in which the effect of the foregoing law is
fully discussed, I find no reference whatever to the equipment or arming of ships, as being within it.
The government of Brazil, like that of France, upon the breaking out
of the civil war, made special provision by law for the enforcing of neutrality. By a circular of the 1st of August, 1861, the presidents of the
different provinces were instructed as follows :J
. The Confederate States have no recognized existence; but, having constituted a distinct government de facto, the imperial government cannot consider their naval armaments as acts of piracy, nor refuse them, with the necessary restrictions, the character
of belligerents, which they have assumed.
Iu conformity with this, Brazilian subjects are to abstain from all participation and
aid in favor of one of the belligerents, and they must not take part in any acts which can
be considered as hostile to one of the two parties, and contrary to the obligations of
the neutrality.
The exportation of warlike articles from the ports of the empire for the new Conied-
erate States is absolutely prohibited, whether it is intended to be done under the Brazilian flag or that of another nation.
The same trade in contraband of war must be forbidden to Brazilian ships, although
they may be destined for the ports subject to the Government of the North American
Union.
No ship with the flag of one of the belligerents, and which may be employed in this
war, or intended for it, can be provisioned, equipped, or armed in the~ports of the empire ; the furnishing of victuals aud naval provisions indispensable for the continuation of the voyage uot being included in this prohibition.
I No ship of war or privateer shall be allowed to enter and remain with prizes in our
ports or bays more than twenty-four hours, except in case of forced arrival, aud they
shall in no way be allowed to dispose of the said prizes, or of objects coming from
them.
Thus, going far beyond other nations, Brazil prohibited not only the
sale of ships, but all trade in articles contraband of war even in its own
ports.
Serious disputes having arisen in the course of the ensuing year between the Governments of the United States and Brazil on the subject
of confederate cruisers received in ports of the empire, the Government, in order to prevent as far as possible the occasion of such troublesome remonstrances, published the still more stringent regulations con-
1 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 24.
2 Ib'id., p. 68.
3 Appendix to the United States Counter Case, Part IV, p. 988._^
282
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Law of Italy.
tained in the circular of the 23d of June, 1863j set out in the seventh volume of the appendix of the United States, regulations much more rigorous than those which have been adopted by any other nation.1 But, as
these regulations relate entirely to the reception of belligerent vessels
in Brazilian ports, it is unnecessary to dwell upon them here.
Italy has in the one hundred and seventy-fourth and one hundred and
seventy-fifth articles of the peual code, provisions corresponding to those of the French code :2
' Art. 174. If any person whosoever shall, by acts not authorized by the government of the King, have exposed the state to a declaration of war, he shall be punished
with banishment; if the war has actually occurred, he shall be punished with temporary penal servitude.
Art. 175. If any person whosoever shall, by acts not approved of by the government
of the King, have exposed the subjects of the kingdom to reprisals, he shall be punished with banishment even for a term of ten years or with imprisonment, without
prejudice to any further penalty to which he may be liable on account of the acts he
has committed. If the offender be a public functionary, he shall be punished with
banishment.
So stood the law at the time of the breaking out of the civil war
between the Northern and Southern States of America. In the course
of it the King of Italy, in an ordinance of the 6th of April, 1864, but, so
far as I have been able to discover, then for the first time, adopted the
regulations established three years before by the Emperor of the French.
By article IV, | no Italian subject shall take commission from either
belligerent power to arm ships for war, or accept letters of marque to
cruise, or assist in any way in fitting out, arming, or preparing for war
a vessel or privateer of the said belligerents."3
The naval code, which was published in 1866, in the chapter relating
to the neutrality of the state toward foreign powers, (chap, vii,) has the
following provisions:3
In case of war between powers toward which the state remains neutral, privateers
or vessels of war with prizes shall not be received into the harbors or roadsteads,
except in cases of stress of weather.
They will have to leave,as soon as the danger has ceased.
No ship of war or privateer belonging to a belligerent will be allowed to remain
longer than twenty-four hours ir_ a port, harbor, or roadstead of the state, or in the
adjacent waters, even when aloue, except in case of necessity, arising from bad weather,
of shipwreck, or of an absence of the means necessary to carry on the navigation with
safety.
In no case will they be permitted during their stay in the port, harbor, or roadstead -
of the state to sell, exchange, or barter, or even give away any of the prizes (taken iu
war.)
The ships of war of a friendly power, even when belligerent, are permitted to touch
or even to remain in any harbor, port, or roadstead of the state on condition that the
object of their mission be exclusively a scientific one.
In no case can a belligerent ship avail itself of an Italian port for the purposes of
war, or of obtaining arms and munitions. It shall not be able under the pretense of
repairs to execute any alterations or other works designed to augment its warlike force..
Nothing shall be furnished to vessels of war or to belligerent privateers beyond articles of food aud commodities, and the actual means of repair necessary to the sustenance
of their crews and the safety of their navigation.
In the case in which vessels of war, whether privateers or merchantmen of the two
belligerent nations, are both together iu a port, harbor, or roadstead of the state, there
shall be an interval of at least twenty-four hours between the successive departures of
the vessels of one belligerent and those of the vessels of the other.
This interval can be increased according to the circumstances brought before the
maritime authorities of the place.
The capture of prizes as well as any other act of hostility between two belligerent'
ships within the territorial waters or the adjacent waters of the islands of the state
will constitute a violation of territory.
1 United States Documents, vol. vii, p. 110; British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 24.
2 American MS., Part IV, p. 919.
3 Report of Neutrality Laws Commission, p. 62, British Appendix, vol. iii.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
28°
o
In all these countries, at the time to which our attention has to be
directed, the question whether there had been a breach of the municipal
law by a subject, turned on whether there had been a breach of neutrality, such as to expose the nation to war or reprisals. The equipping
or arming of vessels for sale in the way of commerce does not come into
question at all. It is, therefore, manifest that the muuicipal law, both
of Great Britain and the United States, was far more stringent, though
the punishment under the foreign law in case of a breach of the law
was more severe, by reason of the greater gravity of the result, when a
nation becomes exposed to war, or possibly actually involved in it.
I next turn to the law of the northern nations on the subject of neutrality.
The law of Demark relating to ships, with reference to neutralitj',
is fully set out in the third volume of the British Appendix.1
Denmark appears to be one of the very few countries that have gone
the length of prohibiting to the subject the carriage of articles contraband of war. But though unusually strict in that respect, and minute
as to its regulations ih many others, the law contains no prohibition of
the equipping or arming of ships of war for the purpose of sale.
The Swedish ordonnance of April 8,1854, while it expressly prohibits,
by the eighth section, the arming or equipping of vessels
for the purpose of privateering, is wholly without any prohibition against doing so with reference to ships armed or equipped for
a belligerent state.2
The only article in the Bussian code relating to neutrality is the
two hundred and fifty-ninth, which is as follows:3
Law of Denmark.
Law oi Sweden.
Law of Russia.
If any Russian subject in time of peace shall by open force attack the inhabitants of
a neighboring state or those of any other foreign country, and shall thereby subject
his own country to the danger of a rupture with a friendly power, or even to an attack
by such foreign subjects on the territory of Russia, for such a crime against international law; the offender and all those who participate voluntarily in his enterprise,
with a knowledge of its objects and illegality, shall be sentenced to lose all their civil
rights, and be condemned to hard labor in a fortress for a term of eight to ten years.
With the exception of this article, says M. de Westmann, in answer
to an official inquiry from the British government,3 " La legislation
russe ne renter me pas de dispositions ayant pour but d'empScher sur
le territoire de la Bussie l'accomplissement d'actes dont les puissances
belligerantes pourraient se plaindre comme d'une violation du principe
de neutrality."
There being thus no law in Bussia relating to ships of war, and, as I
have shown, none such in Prussia, I was surprised, after reference to the
efficient regulations of the Dutch government, followed afterward by au
assertion that by those regulations the construction of cruisers was prohibited, (which it is not,) to see it stated that | similar laws were to be
found in Bussia and in Prussia," as to the latter of which it is added,
(in a friendly spirit no doubt,) that it i once had occasion to apply its
laws to the acts of British agents."
But while the codes of so many maritime nations are silent as to the
equippiug or arming of ships of war in the way of trade, the   Law*3 as to P.iva-
codes of several—for example, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden—- H
prohibit the fitting out of privateers.   Here again the argument of the
United States falls into the same strange mistake as before.   It rep-
1 Report of Neutrality Laws Commission, p. 40, British Appendix, vol. iii.
2Ibid., pp. 66, 67.
3 Ibid., p. 65.284
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
resents these governments as preventing not only the armament, but
also the construction of cruisers?- I can hardly suppose the writer
ignorant of the meaning of the term corsaire, the term used in the laws
in question, and which never has but one meaning, that of privateer, or
in French phrase that of a | vaisseau arme" en course par des particuliers,
mais avec l'autorisation du gouvernement."2 Neither of these countries
has any law against the construction of cruisers. Such a statement,
therefore, ought not to have been made.
The argument of the United States winds up the comparison of the
British law with that of other countries, with the following remarkable
observations :3
The institutions of Italy, Brazil, Switzerland, France, Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands, and all other governments of Europe, indeed, except Great Britain, expressly assume, as to the insiSitutions of the United States, that volunteer and unauthorized
military and naval expeditions, undertaken in a neutral country, are to be restrained,
because tending to involve such country in war with the country aggrieved. Infringements of the law are punished mainly for that reason, including the protection of the
national sovereignty.
Hence, in all those countries, except Great Britain, the punitive law is a secondary
fact; the primary fact being the preventive action of the government.
The United States perfectly understood this, the true relation of things, and "while
they indicted persons, and arrested ships, they did not, when occasion required action,
rely on such hrorely punitive, or at mem auxiliary, means, but called into play the
armed forces of laud and sea to support the Executive in summary acts of prevention
by force for the maintenance not only of the sovereignty but of the neutrality of the
Government.
Neither Lord Russell, in his correspondence witjpMr. Adams, nor the framers of the
British case, appear to have had any clear conception of these higher relations of tbe
subject, although distinctly and explicitly stated in the best works of international
law of Great Britain herself.
Great Britain alone pretends that punitive law is the measure of neutral duties; all
other governments, including the United Slates, prevent peril to the national peace
through, means of prerogative force, lodged, by implied or express constitutional law,
in the hands of the Eexcutive.
A stranger misrepresentation could scarcely have been penned. The
assertion that the institutions of Great Britain do not assume that volunteer and unauthorized military and naval expeditions, undertaken in
a neutral country, are to be restrained, is without the shadow of a foundation. It is equally untrue and unjust to say that Great Britain pretends
that punitive law is the measure of neutral duties. Great Britain pretends nothing of the kind. The best answer to these unwarranted assertions is the fact, that the Alabama was attempted to be seized ; that
the Alexandra was seized; as were the Pampero and the Birkenhead
rams, and the Florida at Nassau ; by virtue of the preventive power
alone j and that, if in any of those cases resistance had been offered, or
force required, force would, as a matter of course, have been resorted
to immediately to enforce the law.
But while the United States thus impugn the efficacy of the British
law, and dwell upon the executive, as contradistinguished from legal,
power possessed by their own, and, as they allege, by foreigu governments—of which, by the way, they offer no proof whatever—at another
time, with startling inconsistencj7-, they assert that the government; of
Great Britain possesses this very executive power, and make the omission to put it in force the subject of vehement complaint.
The imagination of the writer must have been singularly lively, while
1 Argument of the United States, p. 72.
2Littre, ad verb.; and see Merlin, "Repertoire," tit. " Prises maritimes."
3 Pages 71, 72.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
285
his conscience must have slept, who could venture to put <>n paper the
following passages i1
No independent state exists, either in Europe or America, encumbered with constitutional incapacity in this respect.
Violations of neutrality are issues of war and peace. Whatever power in a state
declares war, or makes peace, has jurisdiction of the issues of peace and war, including
of course all violations of neutrality.
In point of fact, such authority is not a quality of despotic government only: it belongs equally to the most constitutional government, as appears, for instance, in the
political institutions of constitutional republics like Switzerland and the United States,
and in constitutional monarchies, like Italy and Brazil.
The selection by the counsel of the United States of the countries of
the four other members of the tribunal was, I presume, accidental. But
let us go on:
The counsel of the United States submit these propositions as undeniable and elementary truths.
Tet the case and counter-case of the British government assume and persistently
argue that the sole instrument possessed by the British government to enforce the
performance of neutral obligations, at the time of tbe occurrences in questiou, was a
particular act of the British Parliament.
Every government in Europe or America, except Great Britaiu, asserts and exercises
authority to prevent its liege subjects (aud a fortiori commorant aliens) from doing
acts which tend To involve it in a war with any other government.
But the British government maintains that the sovereign state of Great Britain and
Ireland, the imperial mistress of the Indies, the proudest in fame, the richest in resources, and (including her transmarine possessions) the most populous of the great
states of Europe, does not possess constitutional power to prevent mercenary lawbreakers among her own subjects, or bands of desperate foreign rebels, commorant on
her soil, from dragging her into acts of flagrant violation of neutrality, and thus affording, or tending to afford, just cause of war to other foreign states!
And such is the defense of Great Britain in answer to the reclamations of the United
States.
It would be difficult to find any other example of a great state defending itself
against charges of wrong by setting up the plea of its constitutional incompetency
and incapacity to discharge the most common-place duties of a sovereign state.
Great Britain is not in that condition of constitutional disability which her ministers pretend.
"We find, on the most cursory observation of the constitution of Great Britain, that
the declaration of war, the conclusion of peace,, the conduct of foreign affairs, that all
these things are in Great Britain elements of the prerogative of the Crown.
We cannot believe and do not concede thar in all these greater prerogative powers
there is not iucluded the lesser one of preventing unauthorized private persons from
engaging in private war against a friendly foreign state, and thus committing Great
Britain to causes of public war on the part of such foreigu state.
If the exercise of such power by the Crown involves derogation of the rights of private persons which ministers fear to commit, they should'obtain a proper act of Parliament, either for antecedent general authorization or for subsequent protection, all
which is within the scope of the theoretic omnipotence of Parliament.
The British ministers do not scruple to suspend the privileges of the writ of habeas
corpus, whether with or without previous parliamentary authorization, aud whether"
in the United Kingdom, or in the colonies, on occasion of petty acts of rebellion or
revolt, that is, the case of domestic war: a fortiori they should and may arrest and
prevent subjects or commorant foreigners engaged in the commission of acts of foreigu
war to the prejudice of another government.
Is it possible to deny or to doubt that British ministers might .as Well do this as the
ministers of Switzerland, Italy, Brazil, and the United States in like circumstances?
Again Switzerland, Italy, Brazil, and the United States—
H
po
t Britain and Ireland less executive
:1 if she have loss, could not the
Has the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Br
r~wer than the President of the United States ?   Anc.
deficient power be granted to her by act of Parliament, just as readily as similar executive power, in this relation, has been granted to the President of the United States
by their Congress?
But there is no such deficiency of power in the British ministers.   Their own conduct in pertinent cases proves conclusively that they have the power, and can exercise
United States Argument, pp. 43-45.286
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
\
it, when they choose, without affording occasion of any serious doubt or denial of the
constitutionality of-their acts.
Be it remembered that the excuse of the British government, for omitting to detain
the Alabama and other confederate cruisers, was the alleged want of power to act
outside of the foreign-enlistment act.
And yet, subsequently to the escape of the Alabama from the port of Liverpool, on
occasioia of the construction in the ports of Great Britain of certain other vessels for
the confederates, commonly spoken of as the Laird rams, the British government
seized them upon its own responsibility in virtue of the prerogative power of the
Crown, aud so prevented their departure to make war against the United States.
Sitting on this tribuual as in some sense the representative of Great
Britain, I cannot allow these 'statements to go forth to the world without giving them the most positive and unqualified contradiction. They'
are wholly uncalled for, as being unnecessary to determine the question
whether, in particular instances, Great Britain had been wanting in
diligence. They are not only unjust, but in the highest degree Ungenerous, (I use the mildest expression I can find,) on an occasion when
Great Britain is holding out the hand of friendship and conciliation to.
America, and though, perhaps, at a heavy sacrifice, is seeking to bury
all sense of past grievance by submitting the claims of the United States
to peaceful aud friendly arbitration. But it is not only that these observations are ungenerous and unjust. There is in this extraordinary
series of propositions the most singular confusion of ideas, misrepresentation of facts, and ignorance, both of law and history, which were
perhaps ever crowded into the same space, and for my part I cannot
help expressing my sense, not only of the gross injustice done to my
country, but also of the affront offered to this tribunal by such an attempt to practice on our supposed credulity or ignorance.
It is not true that" the case and counter case of the British government assume and persistently argue that the sole instrument possessed
by the British government to enforce the performance of neutral obligations, at the time of the occurrences in question, was a particular act
of the British Parliament."
It is not true that the British government has ever "maintained that
Great Bnlain did not possess constitutional power to prevent mercenary subjects or foreign rebels from dragging her into acts of flagrant
violation of neutrality."
It is not true that1'a great state" is here "defending itself against
•charges of wrong by setting up the plea of its constitutional incompetency and incapacity to discharge the most common-place duties of a
sovereign state."
The  transparent fallacy which runs  through  the whole of this
series  of declamatory assertions  consists in confounding infractions
of  the   municipal   law   with  infractions   of  neutrality   properly   so
called.    Though, by convention  between the two governments, the
equipping of  a ship  without   arming  may have   acquired, ex post
facto, for the purpose of the present arbitration, the character of a violation of neutrality, no agreement can change the substantive reality of
things belonging to the past.   Now, at the time the occurrences took'
place on which the present claims arise, to equip a ship in the way of
trade, though intended for the service of a belligerent, was not, as I
have already shown, and as Mr. Adams himself, in all fairness, fully
admits an offense against international law, and therefore was not a violation of neutrality.   While, therefore, in a case of actual violation of
neutrality, as by sending forth an armed ship, or a ship immediately
about to be armed, for the purpose of immediate warfare, the executive
power might, ex proprio vigore, interfere, and if necessary by force, to
prevent such a proceeding, the seizure of a vessel unarmed, and not im-OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
287
mediately about to go forth, and in respect of which, therefore, no breach
of neutrality had taken place, could only be done by virtue of the municipal law as constituted by the act of Parliament. But if a seizure was to be
made under the act, it was necessary that proof should be forthcoming
to justify and uphold it. Therefore it was true that, as regarded the
equipping of ships, the powers of the executive were limited to cases iu
which proof of a breach of the act was forthcoming. Therefore it was
that, in the case of the Florida, the government, thinking there was not
sufficient evidence of belligerent purpose, abstained from seizing, and
in that of the Alabama delayed the seizure for a time. Therefore it
was that, in the later cases of the Alexandra and the rams, the govern-
meut, being, advised that the evidence was sufficient, proceeded to seize.
Heuce, in discussing the question whether it was at that period, and in
the then admitted state of international law, the duty of the government,
to seize the vessels in question, it is necessary to refer to the foreign-enlistment act to ascertain what were the powers of the government. The
distinction is a very obvious one, and one which persons must be, I
should think, willfully blind not to see.
The assertion, coming from the quarter from which it proceeds—the
government of a great republic, where all executive power, I should
have imagined, would be clearly defined by law and exercised in subordination to it—that the British government should have proceeded,
independently of and, if necessary, iu defiance of the law, to seize ships
and arrest subjects as well as foreigners engaged, as it is termed, in acts
of foreign war to the prejudice of another government, surprises me, I
must say, not a little; but when, as'the ground of such an assertion, I
am told that " British miuisters do not scruple to suspend the privileges
of the writ of habeas corpus, whether with or without previous parliamentary authorization, whether in the United Kingdom or in the colonies, on occasion of petty acts of rebellion or revolt; that is, the case of
domestic war," I find myself lost in amazement, and seek in vain to
discover what can possibly be meant by so strange a statement. War,
whether it be domestic or foreign, is of course war; and, in regard to
those who are actually engaged in war, the law of war necessarily
supersedes the civil law and civil rights, and would per se, suspend
the privileges of the habeas-corpus act. But if it is meant that, even in
time of war, the executive could, as regards persons not taking part in
the war, or not coming within the operation of martial law, suspend the
habeas-corpus act without an act of Piarliament, the assertion is equally
unfounded and surprising, whether looked at in an historical or in a
legal point of view.
But a discovery has been made by those who drew up the United.
States argument which, I must say, appears to me, as an English law
yer, surpassinj
strange.
It is, that that which could not have been.
done toward seizing vessels under the foreign-enlistment act for want of
evidence necessary to support a seizure under that act might have been
done with a high hand, by virtue of the prerogative of the .Grown; in
support of which strange doctrine the following instances are given, in
which it is alleged that what was done was done by virtue of the prerogative.   Such are:
The Queen's proclamation of neutrality of May 13,1861.
The regulations issued by the government of Her Majesty in regard to the reception
of cruisers and their prizes in ports of the empire, June 1, 1861, June 2, 1865.
The executive orders to detain the Alabama at Queenstown and Nassau, August 2,
1862.
The executive orders to detain the Florida at Nassau, August 2,1862.
The executive orders to detain the rams at Liverpool, October 7,1863.
mARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
The debate and vote in Parliament justifying the detention of the rams by the gov--
ernmeut "on their own responsibility," February 23, 1862.
The executive order that "for the future no ship of war belonging to either of the
belligerent powers of North America shall be allowed to enter or to remain or to be
in any of Her Majesty's ports for the purpose of being dismantled or sold," September 8,1864.
The final executive orders to retain the Shenandoah in port, " by force if necessary," 1
and to I forcibly seize her upon the high seas," September and October, 1865.1
In addition to which the final decision of the government with regard
to the Tuscaloosa is referred to, as also the opinion of the law officers,
advising the seizure of the Alabama at Liverpool, and the rejection, at
the instance of the law officers, of the clause proposed to be inserted iu
the neutrality act of 1870, for prohibiting the entry of vessels, equipped
in contravention of the act, into British ports.
While I quite see how likely statements of this sort are to produce an
effect on the minds of persons not familiar with the constitutional law
of Great Britain, I am at a loss to understand how counsel, familiar with
English law, can take upon themselves to make them.
1 The limits of the royal prerogative are ascertained and defined; they
certainly do not include a power to interfere with the liberty, property,
or industrial pursuits of the subject, except where such power is expressly
conferred by law. Iu the instances given, with the exception of the
Queen's proclamation, as to the effect of which I have already spoken,
and the regulations as to the admission of belligerent vessels to British
ports, and the accommodation there to be afforded to them, which are
undoubtedly matter of royal prerogative, and .the order in respect of
the Shenandoah, which was, as will hereafter be seen, a most excep.
tional case, every instance enumerated was, though in one sense an act
of the executive, yet an act done by virtue of power conferred by the
foreign-enlistment act, and not by virtue of the prerogative. As an
English judge and lawyer, I affirm that, short of their going out as a
hostile expedition, in which case force might undoubtedly be used, these
vessels could not have been seized under the exercise of prerogative
power.
Throughout the statements of the United States a comparison is drawn
comparison jj|. between the conduct of the United States and that of Great
a„dunitec_lst_t.sa__ Britain   in   reference to the maintenance of  neutrality.
to    observance    of    _-jr--i ,, -r _    •, •   -i ,       , . . .       .        . «
neutrality. when the .British government   retorts with instances of
American default in this respect, the answer comes that it is Great
Britain, not the United States, that is now on its trial.   And this is
IgBfectly true; but. when the plaintiff seeks to prejudice the defendant
in the eye of the
favor to himself by holding up his own conduct as righteous and immac-
Ipirce, whereby to make that of the defendant appear more black, it is
but fair that his pretensions should be submitted to the criticism to
which he justly exposes himself.
The argument of the United States asks at the hands of this tribunal
for a rigorous enforcement of the obligations of neutrality against Great
Britain, on the ground that, while the latter has been unmindful of its
duties as a neufpal, the United States have maintained a consistent and
unvarying course in the most exemplary fulfilment of those duties. I
select one from many "fissages in which a comparison between the two
nations in this respect is invidiously made:
Qualis ab incepto talis adfinem. With consistency unwavering, and at whatever hazard of domestic or foreign inconvenience, even if it were friendly powers like France
and Great Britain with which we were thus brought into contention, the United-
United States Argument, pp. 324, 325.m
OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
289
States have steadily adhered to principles of international neutrality ; and we may
well, therefore, demand the observance of those principles, or reparation for their non-
observance on the part of Great Britain.1
It becomes, therefore, perfectly legitimate to take—as is done in the
British counter-case—-a retrospect of the history of American neutrality
so vauutingly extolled in the papers before us. It cannot be fair or just
that a country in whose ports privateering against the commerce of
friendly nations has been openly carried on upon the largest scale, and
from whose shores armed expeditions and raids have, in so many instances, gone forth, should seek to enlist the favor of this tribunal in
order to swell the damages against Great Britain, by holding itself up
as a model of neutral perfection. It is not so much for this purpose,
however, that I advert to the history of the past, as it is for that of
showing that there is no foundation for the assumed superiority of
American laws or institutions in respect of the fulfilment of neutral
obligations. The use of a review of American history in this respect
will readily be seen.
America undoubtedly has the credit of being the first nation that, by
positive legislation, sought to restrain its subjects within Legislation .are*.
the strict limits of neutrality. But those who make this
boast as against Great Britain should also remember that it was through
the acts of American citizens that such legislation first became necessary. The large and just mind of the greatest of American statesmen
saw at once the reproach and the danger arising to his country from
her ports being used for the building and equipping of privateers by
American citizens, and for sending them out, manned with American
■crews, commissioned by the Prench government, to make war on British
vessels, while the United States and Great Britain were at peace. For,
as I have already observed, this was the mischief against which the legislation of 1794 was directed.
At that time no complaint had arisen of ships of war being built for a
belligerent. The complaint, again and again made by the British minister, was of I the practice," as Mr. Jefferson calls it, 1 of commissioning,
equipping, and manning vessels in American ports, to cruise on any of
the belligerent parties."2 The Government of General Washington was
perfectly sincere in its desire to prevent American ports from being used
for this purpose; and, had there always been Washingtons at the head
of affairs, the well-founded complaints of Spain and Portugal, in 1816
and 1817, might never have arisen. I say | wefll-founded complaints,"
for the few vessels built or equipped in Great Britain during the late
civil war bear but a small proportion to the organized and systematic
privateering which was carried on from American ports at the period I
am referring to.
I first take the case of Spain, as it appears in the corre- I   .
n i _•,-.-, i   •     -i -i _-»    =_"      -w-_    • ■•-__. -t • Complaints ot Spam.
spondence set out in the third volume of the British Appendix.
On the 2d of January, 1817, Don Luis de Onis, minister of Spain to
the United States, thus addresses Mr. Monroe, then Secretary of State :
Washingtok, January 2,1817.
Sir: The mischiefs resulting from the toleration of the armament of privateers in
the ports of this Union, and of bringing into them, with impunity, the plunder made by
these privateers on the Spanish trade, for the purpose of distributing it among those
merchants who have no scruple in engaging in these piracies, have risen to such a
height, that I should be wanting iu my duty if I omitted to call your attention again
to this very important subject.
19 b
1 United States Argument, p. 94.
•? British Appendix, vol. v, p. 242.290
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
It is noborions that, although the speculative system of fitting out privateers, and
-putting them under a foreign flag, one disavowed by all nations, for the purpose of-
destroying the Spanish commerce, has been more or less pursued in all ports of the
Union^ali is more especially in those of New Orleans and Baltimore, where the greatest
violations of the respect due to a friendly nation, and, if I may say so, of that due to
themselves, have been committed; whole squadrons of pirates having been fitted out
from thence, in violation of the solemn treaty existing between the two nations, and
bringing back to them the fruits of their piracies, without being yet checked in these
courses, either by the reclamations I have made, those of His Majesty's consuls, or the
decisive and judicious orders issued by the President for that purpose.
After setting forth deprecations done by three American privateers,
he continues:
The consul at New Orleans informs me that the pirate Mitchell, with the vessels under his command, fitted out by different merchants at that port, of whom a Mr. Dupuy
is supposed to be the principal, has lately taken several Spanish prizes to Galveston,'
and that from the proceeds of their sales he has remitted to the said deputies $105,000,
which he has deposited in the Bank of Louisiana, after deducting the shares of the
captain and crew, amounting, as is supposed, altogether to $200,000.   The same consul
adds that two of the prizes, one from Campeachy, and the other from Guatemala, were I
'burned, and their crews landed by that savage monster, near Boquilla de Piedras, that
they might be, as they actually were, put to death by his great friend, Villapinto, a
noted rebel ringleader, who, being pursued by the King's troops, had retreated, to the,
seashore to make his escape.   Of ninety men composing these crews, only nine were!
saved.
The consul at Norfolk informs me of the arrival there of a privateer schooner from
Buenos Ayres, one of several fitted out at Baltimore, and wholly owned there; that
from what he has been able to ascertain, among other vessels she plundered a Spanish!
ship, laden with a cargo of cochineal, indigo, and specie, to the amount of more than.1
$200,000, and proceeded to Baltimore to divide the spoil among the concerned.   The":
said consul, in the discharge of his duty and exercise of bis rights, addressed an appli-1
cation to the collector of the customs, copy of which is annexed, and also of the answer!
of the collector, by which you will perceive that he declines this just reclamation.   I
could cite innumerable other cases, as well attested as those I have just stated, but I;-;
omit them, as their detail would fatigue you, without tending to demonstrate more'
effectually that they proceed from tbe non-observance by the officers of this Govern-3
ment of the President's proclamation, and of the treaty of limits and navigation between!
the two governments.1
On the 16th of January Don Luis writes again:
I have just received information from the King's consul at New Orleans of the capture, within sight of the Balize of that port, and at little more than musket-shot from the
land, of the Spanish schooner Hipolita, Captain Don Buenaventura March, by the piratei
Jupiter, under the Margarita flag.   To enable you fully to judge of the atrociousness;
of this capture, manifestly in violation of the territory of the United States, I have '
the honor to inclose the declaration of the captain of the said schooner, made before;
His Majesty's consul at the aforesaid port, by which it appears he was at anchor in the
Pass of the Mississippi, and with pratique from the Balize on board, when he was ~
boarded by the aforesaid pirate, and so inhumanly treated by him as to be left welter-.
ing in his blood upon the deck.
It would be superfluous tc-affect your sensibility by a detail of the multiplied injuries I
and outrages incessantly sustained by His Majesty's subjects in these ports; they have.
already been admitted by the President in hia message to Congress, recommending the|
adoption of such measures as in their wisdom may appear best calculated to repress
them, thereby offering to the King, my master, a pledge that His Excellency admits the
necessity of indemnifying them as far as possible.   It is, however, with great regret"
that I Have to remark on the delay in carrying such urgent measures into execution,
and that the injuries complained of have not been prevented by a due observance of
the laws of nations, and of the existing treaty, which, by the Constitution, has the;;
force of law in all the courts, in consequence, of its ratification by the President and
the Senate.2
On the 10th of February Don Luis complains of five more privateers,
belonging to ports of the ||ates, as having taken prizes, and being engaged in cruising against Spanish ships.2
On the 26th of March he writes:
I have just been informed that there have entered at Norfolk two pirates, under the
British Appendix, vol. iii, p.
; Ibid., vol. iii, p. 101.
99.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
291
flag of Buenos Ayres, the principal of which is called the Independencia del Sud, armed
with 16 guns and 150 men; her captain is the well-known pirate called Commodore
Chaytor. The second is the schooner Romp, which, to enter into that port, has changed
her name to that of Atrevida; shfe has a crew of 70 men, and appeared to be commanded
by a person called Grinnolds. Both vessels were built and fitted out at Baltimore, belong
to citizens of that place, and others in this republic, and their crews and captains are
of the same. Their entrance into Norfolk has been public, to revictual, and return to
their cruise against the subjects of the King, my master; but their principal object is
to place in safety the fruits of their piracies, which must be of great importance, if we
attend to the information from Havana, which states that they have robbed a single
Spanish vessel, coming from Yera Cruz, of $90,000; and to the fact that, on the 21st of
the present month, they had deposited $60,000 in the Bank of Norfolk, had landed" a
number of packages of cochineal, and had declared that they had taken to the amount
of $290,000. I am informed that the person called Commodore Chaytor was about to
set out for Baltimore, probably to settle accounts, and divide his robberies with the
persons interested in the outfit. It is a circumstance worthy of remark, that these two
pirates saluted the fort at Norfolk, and that it returned the salute upon the same terms
as would have been done with a vessel of war of my sovereign, or of any other nation
acknowledged by all independent powers.1
At the same time, another vessel, the Orb, is made the subject of
equally strong complaint:
The pirate Orb, fitted out at Baltimore, under the name of the Congress, and flag of
Buenos Ayres, commanded by Joseph Almeida, a Portuguese, and a citizen of this republic, has had the audacity to return, and enter the said port, there to deposit a part
of his robberies. The piratical character of this vessel is as fully acknowledged, as it is
proved that she was armed and manned with people of this country, and of others in
the above-mentioned port, and that she had made different prizes in the neighborhood
of Cadiz and other ports; since there now is in the port of New York the Spanish
polacre, the Leona, captured by her, whose cargo, consisting of $200,000, is concealed,
where it is not known; and in the same port of Baltimore there are deposited the proceeds of the Spanish brig Sereno and her cargo, captured by the same vessel. No evidence can, in my judgment, be offered which gives greater certainty to-facts so notorious.
If by chance anything could be added thereto, it would be the acknowledgment of their
atrocities. Nevertheless, I have the mortification to say that neither this notoriety nor
the reclamations of His Majesty's consul at that port have as yet been sufficient to produce those steps which are required by humanity to secure the person of this notorious
pirate, to take the declarations of the crew, and to prevent their enjoying their plunder
to the prejudice of the lawful owners.2
One cannot help being struck with the similarity of the complaints
of the Spaniard with those of which we have lately heard so much.
The ships are "pirates;" the facts are "notorious;" "no further evidence
can be necessary."
In like manner we have Mr. Bush answering as though it had been
from Downing street:
I have had the honor to receive your two notes, dated the 26th of this month, stating
that you have been informed that two armed vessels which have been committing unauthorized depredations upon the commerce of Spain have recently arrived at Norfolk,
and that a third, liable to the same charge, has arrived at Baltimore, thus bringing
themselves within the reach of those laws against which, in the above and in other
ways, it is alleged they have offended.
Conformably to the constant desire of this Government to vindicate the authority of
its laws and the faith of its treaties, I have lost no time in writing to the proper officers, both at Norfolk and Baltimore, in order that full inquiry may be made into the
allegations contained in your notes, ancj. adequate redress and punishment enforced,
should it appear that the laws have been infringed by any of the acts complained of.
I use the present occasion to acknowledge also the receipt of your note of the 14th
of this month, which you did me the honor to address to me, communicating information
that had reached you of other and like infractions of our laws within the port of Baltimore ; in relation to which I have to state that letters were also written to the proper
officers in* that city, with a view to promote every fit measure of investigation and
redress. Should it prove necessary I will have the honor to address you more fully at
another time upon the subjects embraced in these several notes. In the mean time I
venture to assure myself, that in the readiness with which they have thus far been
attended to* you will perceive a spirit of just conciliation on the part of this government, as well as a prompt sensibility to the rights of your sovereign.2
1 British Appendix, p. 105.
2 Ibid., vol. iii., p. 106.292
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Don Luis replies as Mr. Adams or Mr. Dudley might have done:
By your note of yesterday I am apprised that the President, on being informed, by
the notes to which you have replied, of the _w_dacity»with which the pirates armed in
this country introduce into it the fruits of their robberies, has been pleased to give
suitable orders to the authorities at Norfolk and Baltimore, that having ascertained
the facts which I have brought to his knowledge, they should duly proceed according
to law against the violators of the laws of this republic. The district attorney for the
United States at Baltimore has replied to the King's consul there, that he has no evidence upon which he can proceed against Captain Almeida; but if a witness should
offer, who will depose to the facts referred to, he will proceed to order an embargo to
be laid on his vessel. I am perfectly aware that good order, the personal security of
individuals, and the prevention of any violence being committed upon them, require
that suits should be instituted according to the rules of court; but when a crime is
notorious to all, and is doubted by none, when the tranquilfflty and security of the State,
the honor of the nation, and the respect that independent powers owe to each other, are
interested in putting a stop to crimes so enormous as those I have had the honor to
denounce to you, it appears to me that the magistrates are authorized to collect a
summary body of information, to inquire whether the public opinion is doubtful, and
if there be ground to institute a suit. The collector of the customs cannot be ignorant
that the three vessels, which I have named to you, were built and fitted out at Baltimore ; that they were cleared at that custom-house as Americans; that their crews
were, at their departure, composed of citizens of this Union,£ae were their captains;
and that the effects which they have landed can only come from Spanish countries.
"What stronger testimony, if more is wanted, than their own declaration, can be desired
to proceed against these pirates ?
The ship's papers, the declarations of the crews, the log-book, are all testimony
which can' throw light upon the truth or falsehood of the crime alleged, and make it
unnecessary to trouble them until it be ascertained that there is ground for proceeding
judicially against them.1
Next comes a complaint of the capture of a Spanish brig by the
pirate Almeida, commanding the Orb or Congress, with depositions of
sailors of the captured vessel.2
These letters, like those of Mr. Adams, are accompanied .by others
from the local consuls, with copies of correspondence between those
functionaries and the collectors of the ports. Thus Don Antonio Villa-
lobos having called on Mr. Mallory, collector of Norfolk, to seize two
noted privateers, the Independencia del Sud aud the AtEjfvida, saying
that these vessels had been "improving their equipment and considerably augmenting their crew," Mr. Mallory writes, as Mr. Edwards might
have done:
In reply I conceive it proper only to remark, that these vessels have not been unnoticed by me, and that, in my conduct toward them, I shall endeavor, as I have done,
to observe that course which my official duties appear to me to have prescribed. In
pursuing which, that I may have the aid of every light to guide me which facts can
afford, and as the allegations thus made by you, in an official form, must be presumed
to be bottomed on positive facts, which have come to your knowledge, you will have
the goodness, I trust, to furnish me, with as little delay as possible, with the evidence
of their existence in your possession.3
i The Spanish Dudley replies:
With regard to the evidence you require I will not hesitate to say that, as the facts
I have stated are matter of public notoriety, known to everybody, and I had no reason
to suppose that you were ignorant of them, I did not deem it incumbent on me to add
any proof to the simple narration of them ; and I was confident that, by going on to
point out to you the stipulations and laws which are infringed in consequence of those
facts, you will think yourself authorized to interfere in the manner requested.
I will assert, sir, as a known fact, that the brig now called Independencia del Sud is
the same vessel which was formerly known under the name of the Mammoth privateer,
belonging to Baltimore, armed and equipped in that port, from which she sailed under
the command of the same James Chaytor, who still commands her; that the very same
James Chaytor was necessarily then, and cannot have ceased since to be, a citizen of
the Uuited States, is settled and has a f___o_ly in Baltimore, whence his wife came down
a few days ago in the packet Walter Gray, and is now in this town on & visit to her
husband; that he has enlisted men in this port, many of whom are not so obscure as
'British Appendix, p. 107.
2 Ibid., p. 103.
I Ibid., p. 112.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
293
not to be generally known. I will mention, as an example, Mr. Young, of Portsmouth,
who is now acting as first lieutenant on board the said. brig. I will assert as a fact
that the Atrevida. is the very schooner known before under the name of the Romp, the
same that underwent a trial for piracy before the Federal court in this State; that her
present commander, Captain Grinnolds, is a native of one of the neighboring towns,
and very well known in this place; and finally, that this vessel has been at one of the
wharves altering her copper, which I call an improvement in her equipment.
If these public facts, falling within the knowledge of every individual, require more
proof than the public notoriety of them, I must request to be informed as to the nature
of that proof, and also whether you are not warranted to act upon just grounds of
suspicion without that positive evidence which is only necessary before a court of
justice.1
The collector did not look upon the facts as sufficient to warrant any
action ou his part.
The correspondence goes on in much the same strain. On the 19th of
September, Don Luis writes to Mr. J. Q. Adams :
A complaint having been laid before His Catholic Majesty's government by a part of
the crew of the Spanish polacca Santa Maria, captured on her passage from Havana to
Cadiz by the pirate called the Patriota Mexicano, commanded by Jose" Guillermo Este-
fanos, manned with citizens of these States, and covered by their flag, under which he
chased and brought to the said polacca, until, having ascertained her capture, he
hoisted the insurgent flag, I have received the commands of the King my master to request of the President, through your medium, the most decisive measures for putting an
end to the abuses practiced in the ports of this Union, by arming privateers to cruise
against the Spanish trade, thus prostituting the flag of the United States by these predatory acts, and trampling under foot, with an unparalleled audacity, national rights
and the existing treaty between Spain and these States.
I therefore now renew those urgent reclamations which, on former occasions, I have
submitted to the President, through your department, on this important point; and I
trust that the numerous instances of these abuses and horrible depredations will induce
his excellency to adopt energetic measures to restrain these excesses, which so deeply
compromit the neutrality of the United States in the eyes of all nations, and are wholly
repugnant to the friendship and good understanding happily subsisting between them
and His Catholic Majesty.
In a letter of the 2d of November, he writes :
It is very disagreeable to me to have to repeat to you, sir, what, unfortunately, I have
been several times under, the neoessity of sumbitting to the President, through the
medium of your predecessors, namely, that the act of Congress of the 3d of March, 1817,
has in no wise lessened the abuses by which the laws are evaded, and which render
entirely illusory the laudable purposes for which they were enacted. From the greater
part of the ports of these States there frequently sail a considerable number of vessels
with the premeditated intention of attacking the Spanish commerce, which carry their
armament concealed in the hold. It rarely happens that they can be arrested, inasmuch
as the collectors of the customs say that they have not at their disposition the naval
force necessary to effect it; on the other hand, armed vessels, under the flag of the insurgents, enter into the ports of the Union, and not only supply themselves with all
necessaries, but also considerably increase the means they already have of destroying
the trade of Spain, as has recently been the case at New York, whereby (the so-called)
privateers of His Majesty's revolted provinces, which are in reaSy nothing more than
pirates, manned by the scum of all countries, enjoy greater privileges than the vessels
of independent powers.2
The same state of things continues in ISIS.
Luis de Onis informs Mr. Adams:
At my passage through Baltimore, on my way to Philadelphia, it was represented to
me by His Catholic Majesty's consul for the State of Maryland that there were in that
port four pirates, or privateers, if you please so to call them, namely, the Independencia
del Sud, Captain Grinnold; the Puerredon, alias Mangore, Captain Barnes . the Repub-
licano, Captain Chase; and the schooner Alerta, Captain Chaytor. These pirates, denominated privateers, or vessels of war, of the pretended government of Buenos Ayres,
have entered the port of Baltimore for the purpose of dividing the spoil resulting from
their depredations on Spanish commerce, and of refitting and arming to renew these
excesses on the high seas. It is a matter of universal notoriety at Baltimore that three
of the above-named vessels were fitted out there, and the fourth is a schooner captured
by them from Spanish subjects ; it is no less so that their commanders'and the greater
On the 9th of June, Don
British Appendix, vol. iii
Ibid., p. 118.
113.GENEVA.
part of the crews are American citizens, and that there is scarcely a single individual
belonging to Buenos Ayres to be found among them. .        * *
I am aware, ^1, that you will tell  me that the courts are open to the recognizance
of claims of this nature, and ready to apply the law to such cases as occur and are supported by suitable testimony; but I am under the necessity of declaring to you that it
is in yain to seek such testimony, however cle&t it  may be to everybody.    I have
demonstrated, in the most pointed- manner, to His Majesty's consul the propriety of
directing his attention to points of so much importance ; but he has proved to me that
a great portion of the commercial people of Baltimore being interested in the cases%
which produceMiy present reclamations, no one is willing to come forward and offer
testimony against what is termed the general interest;  and thus the wise measures ofs
government are eluded, justice is paralyzed, and the suits procrastinated and deferred
from court to court, with a view to deprive His Majesty's subjects of that justice which;!
they have an undoubted right to seek in the tribunals on all their claims.1
Having stated that the vessels, in addition to the object of " conveying to the parties interested at Baltimore the proceeds of their spoliations on the Spanish commerce, and, among others, that of the Bhilippine
Company's ship Triton, to the amount of $1,500,000, captured by the
pirate Independencia del Sud, and carried to Buenos Ayres to be sold
there, have a project in fitting out anew and of attacking some possessions of the King, my master, on this continent, to which they may
more easily send their prizes ; that these same privateers have brought,
in two Spanish prizes, which are at this moment in the port of Baltimore,
one of them a vessel belonging to the royal navy," he continues:
I, therefore, demand, in the name of the King, my master, the restoration of those
prizes, as having been made by American citizens, and vessels fitted out in this country,
in violation of the existing treaty between the two powers, and that the sailing of the
said privateers be stopped, and they compelled to give security for the result of an ex-';
pecfition, of which, without knowing positively that they intend to execute it, I have!
the strongest grounds for presuming they mean to do.2
The correspondence closes with a letter of Don Luis to Mr. Adams ol
the 16 th of November, 1818, in wbich he thus writes:
Whatever may be the forecast, wisdom, and jlgtice conspicuous in the laws of the
United States, it is universally notorious that a system of pillage and aggression has
been organized in several parts of the Union againsigithe vessels and property of the
Spanish nation; and it is equally so that all the leg»|suits hitherto instituted by His
Catholic Majesty's consuls in the courts of their respective districts for its prevention,
or the recovery of the property, when brought into this country, have been, and still
are, completely unavailing. The artifices and evasions by means of which the letter
of the law has on these occasions been constantly eluded, are sufficiently known, and
even the combination of interests in persons who are well known, among whom are
some holding public offices. With a view to afford you- and the President more com-,
plete demonstration of the abuses, aggressions, and piracies alluded to, I inclose you
correct lists, extracted from authentic documents deposited in the archives of this legation, exhibiting the number of privateers or pirates fitted out in the United States!
against Spain, and of the prizes brought by them into the ports of the Union, as well
as of those sent to other ports, together with the result of the claims made by the
Spanish consuls in the courts of this country. Among them you will find the case o|l
two armed ships, the Horazio and Curiazo, built at New York, and detained by His
Majesty's consul there on the ground of their having on board thirty pieces of cannon
concealed, with their carriages, and a crew of 160 men. On which occasion it was pretended that it could not be proved that these guns were not an article of commerce,
and they finally put to sea without them, the extraordinary number of officers and
crew passing for passengers. The number of privateers or pirates fitted out and pro-
.tected in i the ports of this republic, asvwell as of the Spanish prizes made by them,'
*ar exceeds that contained in the within list, but I only lay before your Government
those of which I haAre certain and satisfactory proofs. The right of Spain to an adequate indemnity for all the spoliations committed by these privateers or pirates on the
Crown and subjects of His Catholic Majesty is undeniable; but I now submit it to your
Government only to point out the extreme necessity of putting an end to these continued acts of hostility and depredation, and of cutting short these enormous and flagrant abuses and evils, by the adoption of such effectual precautions and remedies as
will put it out of the power of cupidity or ingenuity to defeator elude them.3
1 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 123.
-Ibid., p. 124.
:,Ibid., p. 131.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
295
The letter is accompanied by a list of thirty privateers belonging to
the ports of New Orleans, Charleston, Bhiladelphia, Baltimore, and
New York, with a formidable list of prizes made by them.
During this time similar complaints had been constantly addressed to
the United States Government, on behalf of that of Bortu-* H|w„.fM[
gal, by the minister of the latter power, the Chevalier Cor- tugal-
rea de Serra. Portugal being at that time, involved in war with the
Artigas government, privateers were in like manner fitted out and
manned by American citizens against the commerce of Portugal.
On the 8th of March, 1818, the Portugese minister writes to Mr. Adams
that he is ordered to lay before the eyes of the United States Government
the case of three Portugese ships, (of which he gives the details,) § captured by privateers fitted in the United States, manned by American
crews, and commanded by American captains, though under insurgent
colors." He incloses an extract from the documents proving these facts,
and offers to place the documents themselves at the disposal of Mr.
Adams.1
Mr. Adams, setting, as it were, an example to future British foreign
secretaries, answers:
The Government of the United States having used all the means in its power to prevent the fitting out and arming of vessels in their ports to cruise against any nation
with whom they are at peace, and having faithfully carried into execution the laws
enacted to preserve inviolate the neutral and pacific obligations of this Union, cannot
consider itself bound to indemnify individual foreigners fos. losses by captures, over
which the United States have neither control nor jurisdiction. For such events no nation can in principle, nor does in practice, hold itself responsible. A decisive reason
for this, if there were no other, is the inability to provide a tribunal before which the
facts can be proved.
The documents to which you refer must, of course, be ex-parte statements, which in
Portugal or in Brazil, as well as in this country, could only serve as a foundation for
actions in damages, or for the prosecution and trial of the persons supposed to have
committed the depredations and outrages alleged in them. Should the parties come
within the jurisdiction of the United States, there are courts of admiralty competent
to ascertain the facts upon litigation between them, to punish the outrages which may
be duly proved, and to restore the property to its rightful owners, should it also be
brought within our jurisdiction and found upon judicial inquiry to have been taken
in the manner represented by your letter. By the universal laws of nations the obligations of the American Government extend no further.2
Again, on the 15th of October, the Chevalier de Serra writes:
Washington, October 15,1818.
Sir : This very moment I perceive the intelligence that a ship is fitting in the
Patuxent to cruise against the Portuguese commerce, and the ship so fitting is no other
than the Portuguese fine brig Soam Sexto, taken some weeks before by the Baltimorean
privateer Fortuha, sent into Beaufort, North Carolina, and the goods shipped for New
York and Baltimore where they are under reclamation. Captain Taylor left Baltimore
on Sunday to take charge of her, and the night before the last a great deal of stores
left. Baltimore for this ship.
You know perfectly towhat extent the supreme Executive can exert his power to
prevent such a breach of all moral and international law ; and I dare not doubt that
it will be exerted, persuaded as I am of the honorable feelings of this Government.
I am, &c,
JOSEPH CORREA DE SERRA.
P. S.—There exist now in Baltimore many persons who are able to identify the ship.3
The reply comes—that the vessel shall be seized %   No.
Washington, October 23, 1818.
Sir : I have had the honor of receiving, and have laid before the President of the
United States, your letter of the loth instant.   I am directed by him to inform you
1 British Appendix, p. 149.
2 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 150, No. 6.
3 Ibid., No. 7.ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
that, if you wj|| furnish a list of the names of the persons chargeable with a viola*,-
tion of the laws of the United States, in fitting ont and arming a vessel within the
United States for the purpose of cruising against the subjects of your sovereign, and
of the witnesses by whose testimony the charge can be substantiated, directions will be
given to the attorney of the United States for the district of Maryland to institute suits *~
against the pefsons complained of, in the proper court competent to their trial.
I pray you, &c,
JOHN Q. ADAMS.1
Yet there can be no doubt that, during this time, the United States-
Government werev honestly sincere in their desire to put down the
scandal occasioned by this wholesale system of privateering. Several
vessels were seized, of which some were actually condemned, others-
released only on giving security; but the practice continued, vessels
being enabled to elude all the vigilance and activity of the officials. As
late as the 23d of November, 1819, the Chevalier de Serra writes id a
disconsolate strain, representing the evil as increasing rather thatff
diminishing:
Philadelphia, Noven\ber 23,1819.
Sir : I have the honor of submitting the following facts and considerations :
During more than two years I have been obliged by my duty to oppose the systematic and organized depredations daily committed on the property of Portuguese subjects by people living in the United States- and with ships fitted in ports of the Union,
to the ruin of the commerce of Portugal. I do justice to, and am grateful for, the"
proceedings of the Executive, in order to put a stop to these depredations, but the evil
is rather increasing. I can present to you, if required, a list of fifty Portuguese ships,
almost all richly laden, some of them East Indiamen, which have been taken by theses
people during the period of full peace. This is not the whole loss we have sustained,.'
this list comprehending only those captures of which I have received official complaints. The victims have been many more, besides violations of territory by landing-
and plundering ashore with shocking circumstances.
One city alone on this coast has armed twenty-six ships which prey on our vitals,
and a week ago three armed ships of this nature were in that port waiting for a favorable occasion of sailing for a cruise. Certainly, the people who commit these excesses
are not the United States, but nevertheless they live in the United Slates and employ
against us the resources which this situation allows them. It is impossible to view
them otherwise than a wide-extended and powerful tribe of infidels, worse still than'
those of North Africa. The North Africans make prizes with leave of their government according to their laws.and after a declaration of war ; but these worse infidels-
of whom I speak, make prizes from nations friendly to the United States against the
will of the Government of the United States, and in spite of the laws of the United
States. They are more powerful than the African infidels, because the whole coast of"
Barbary does not possess such a strength of privateers. They are numerous and widely
scattered, not only at sea for action; but ashore likewise to keep their ground against
the obvious and plain sense of your laws, since most generally, wherever they have
been called to the law, they have found abettors who have helped them to invade the
laws by formalities.
I shall not tire you with the numerous instances of these facts, but it may be easily'"
conceived how I am heartily sick of receiving frequent communications of Portuguese
property stolen, of delinquents inconceivably acquitl?^, letters from Portuguese merchants deeply injured in their fortunes, and seeing me (as often has been the case) oppressed by prayers for bread from Portuguese sailors thrown penniless on the shores'-
after their ships had been captured. j
The Executive having honorably exerted the powers with which your Constitution
invests him, and the evil he wished to stop being found too refractory, it would be mere
and fruitless importunity if I continued with individual complaints except by positive
orders. This Government is the only proper judge of what constitutional dispositions-'
or arrangements may be* established for the enforcement of the laws, and he alone has
the means of obtaining them, which are constitutionally shut to any foreign minister ; I trust in the wisdom and justice of this Government that he will find the proper
means of putting an end to this monstrous infidel conspiracy, so heterogeneous to
the very nature of the Uuited States.
Before such convenient means are established, the efforts of a Portuguese minister
on this subject (the only one of importance at present between the two nations) are of
little profit to the interests of his sovereign.   Relying, confidently on the successful
efforts of the Government to bring forth such a desirable order of things, I choose this
1 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 150, No.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
297
moment to pay a visit to Brazil, where I am authorized by His Majesty to go. My age
and my private affairs do not allow much delay in making use of this permission, and
I intend to profit by the first proper occasion that may offer. The arrangements for
my departure will require my personal exertion^, and it will not be consequently in
my power to make an early or long residence in Washington this winter. As soon as
I shall be able I will present myself there to pay my due obeisance to the President of
the United States, and my respects to you.
Accept, &c,
JOSEPH CORREA DE SERRA.1
The United States Government took the very proper step of getting
an act passed prohibiting the entrance of privateers into certain ports
of the United States; but this does not appear to have had the effect
of stopping the evil; privateering appears, if we may judge by the
continued complaints, to have gone on as before.
On the 8th of June, 1820, the Chevalier de Serra calls attention to a
ship, taken by one of the pi^ateers, having been sold by judicial authority | in Baltimore, under the hammer, to Captain Chase, a notorious privateersman, standing under an indictment for piracy."
He adds:
It is to be immediately fitted as a privateer (and a for_G§il.able one it wffll prove, by
its size and strength, which are those of a good frigate) to crnise against the Portuguese Indiamen, and the command of it will be givenj as it is assured, to the notorious
Captain Taylor.
1 have not the least doubt that the supreme Executive of this nation has both the
power and the will of putting a stop to this hostile armament, particularly when, as
in this case, he has timely information which will be successively put under his eyes,
at the very stage of this inimical attempt on the Portuguese commerce.'-
Again, on the 16th of July:
Wilmington, JufylG, 1820.
Sir: I am ordered by my sovereign to lay before this Government the names and
value of nineteen Portuguese ships and their cargoes, taken by private armed ships,
fitted in the ports of the Union by citizens of these States. The values have been
ascertained by the proper courts of justice, and revised with all care and attention by
the royal board of commerce. In proportion as the value of the other ships stolen is iu
the same manner ascertained, their names, and the amount of losses, will be laid before
this Government.3
The value of the nineteen ships is stated at $616,158.
In this letter the chevalier proposes the appointment of commissioners to " confer and agree upon what reason and justice demand." The
proposal was declined.
The reply was:
The appointment of commissioners to confer and agree with the ministers of Her
Most Faithful Majesty upon the subject to which yoiir.Jefter refers, would not be consistent with tbe Constitution of the United States nor with any practice usual among
civilized nations. The judicial power of the UnitjgB. States is, by their Constitution,
vested in their Supreme Court, and iu tribunals subordinate to the same. The judges
of these tribunals are amenable to their country by impeachment, and if any Portuguese subject has suffered wrong by any act of any citizen of the United States within
their jurisdiction, it is before these tribunals that the remedy is to be sought and obtained. For any acts of citizens of the United States committed out of their jurisdiction aud beyond their control, the Government of the United States is not responsible.4
The proposal was renewed in 1822, but again declined. The Government had done all it could do. " Every attention, compatible with the
rights of citizens of the United Stages and with the laws of nations, had
been paid by the Government to the complaints of M. Correa of captures
made by privateers fitted out within the United States and partly manned
1 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 1E5.
1 Ibid., p. 156, No. 19.
3 Ibid., No. 20.
4 Ibid., p. 57.298
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Ifilffi
by their citizens." " The laws for securing the faithful performance of
the duties of neutrality had been revised and enforced; decrees of restitution had been pronounced by the judicial tribunals in all cases of Portuguese captured vessels brought within the jurisdiction of the United
States; and all the measures within the competency of the Executive
had been taken by that department of the Government for repressing
the fitting out of privateers from United States ports, and the enlistment of citizens in them."
Mr. Adams adds, in a letter to the United States minister at Lisbon:
" These measures, however, do not appear to have been altogether satisfactory to the Portuguese government, doubtless because they are not
sufficiently understood by tliem.m The Portuguese minister thought that
the short and simple process would have been to seize the ships, by virtue of the executive power; but the Mr. Adams of that day thought of
•' the rights of American citizens and the law of nations."
The pleadings of the United States say little or nothing in answer to
the facts relating to Portugal. As to those relating to Spain, they say
in a somewhat off-hand way, " What then? if we did injury to Spain
we repaired it."2 The British Counter Case answers that the reparation
consisted in setting off, in a subsequent treaty between the two nations,
some unascertained claims against the serious claims for actual losses
sustained by the Spanish commerce through the acts of American privateers.3 I agree with the United States that Spain having consented
to be satisfied with this reparation, nothing more is to be said on that
head. Nor do I think that matters which happened half a century ago
can with any fairness be brought forward to the prejudice of the United
States in answer to the present claim, not ^even though provocation
might have been given by the assertion of American superiority so ostentatiously obtruded in the pleadings of the United States. But these
instances of infractions of maritime neutrality on so large a scale are
important for a very different purpose; they show the difficulty of repressing offenses of this sort; they show that the asserted superiority
of the American law is an empty boast; and they entirely bear out my
view as to the alleged power of the President to make up for any deficiency in the ordinary law as administered by the courts. In the long-
series of complaints made by the representatives of Spain and Portugal
as to the thirty privateers, of the issuing of which from the ports of the
United States Don Luis de Onis thus incessantly complains, or as to
the twenty-six which the Chevalier de Serra mournfully enumerates as
capturing Portuguese vessels, no instance, so far as I am aware, occurs
in which, when the Government officials alleged that the evidence was
insufficient, the President intervened, by virtue of the discretionary
power said to be vested in him to arrest a vessel.
The temporary act passed by the American Congress in 1838, on the
American act of occasion of the Canadian insurrection, has been more than
once referred to in the course of the present controversy|
The circumstances under which that act was passed are stated in the
proclamation of President Yan Buren, of the 5th of January, 1838, in
which he said that information had "just been received that, notwithstanding the proclamation of the governors of the States of New Tork
and Yermont, exhorting their citizens to refrain from any unlawful acts
within the territory of the United States, and notwithstandingthepres-
1 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 162.
2 Argument of the United States, p. 83.
| British Counter Case, p. 35.
"See Case of the United States, p. 134.
Argument of the United States, p. 87.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
299
ence of the civil officers of the United States, * * * arms
and munitions of war and other supplies have been procured by the
(Canadian) insurgents in the United States; that a military force, consisting in part, at least, of citizens of the United States, had been actually organized, had congregated at Navy Island, and were still in arms,
under the command of a citizen of the United States, and that they
were constantly receiving accessions and aid."
As Congress sits from January to March, the necessary law which the
circumstances called for might have been passed at once, but it was delayed till March 10, 1838, and does not appear to have been approved
by the President until the 20th of April; even then, it seems either to
have been inefficacious or feebly enforced, as on the 21st of November,
the President issued another proclamation:
Whereas there is too much reason to believe that citizens of the United S^bes, in
disregard of the solemn warning heretofore given to them by the proclamation issued
by the Executive of the General Government, and by some of the governors of the States,
have combined to disturb the peace of a neighboring and frienctfe nation; and whereas
information has been given to me, derived from official and other sources, that many
citizens in different parts of the United States are associJEpad or associating for the
same purpose; and whereas disturbances have actually broken out anew in different
parts of the two Canadas-; and whereas a hostile invasion has been made by citizens
of the United States, in conjunction with Canadians and others, who, after forcibly
seizing upon the property of their peaceful neighbors, for the purpose of effecting their
unlawful designs, are now in arms against the authorities of Canada, in perfect disregard of their own obligations as American|j$itizens, and of the obligations of the Government of their country to foreign nations.
It may here be remarked, in passing, that, while open assistance was
thus afforded from the United States to the Canadian insurgents, in
1838, during the whole period of the civil war, the confederates never
once succeeded in directing any hostile operations of importance from
Canada against the exposed American frontier; and that in October,
1864, when a few adventurers made the attack on the' bank at St. Al-
ban's, (a town near the Yermont boundary,) prompt measures were taken
to prevent any such attempt being renewed from the Canadian side,
and an act was passed by the Canadian Parliament when it met in
February, 1865, quite as stringent in its provisions as the act of Congress of 1838.
Lopez, a Spanish adventurer, had formed a plan in 1849 for an attack
on Cuba, with the object of annexing it to the United States. Expedition or _..-
The idea of Cuban annexation was then in great favor with pez awin" Cuba-
an important political party, who hoped to secure the entrance of a
slave-holding State into the Union, and thus counterbalance the growing power of the Northern or free States. Lopez accordingly met with
much popular support.
On the 11th August, 1849, the President of the United States .issued
a proclamation stating that" there was reason to believe that an armed
expedition was about to be fitted out in the United States, with an intention to invade the island of Cuba or some of the provinces of Mexico," and that i the best information which the Executive had been able
to obtain, pointed to the island of Cuba as the object of this expedition;" and calling upon "every officer of this Government, civil or military, to use all efforts in his power to arrest, for trial and punishment,
every such offender against the laws providing for the performance of
our sacred obligations to friendly powers."
On the 7th May, 1850, Lopez left New Orleans in a steamer with
about five hundred men, accompanied by two other vessels, and on the
17th landed at Cardenas,- a small town on the northwest side of the
island, and occupied the town; but troops arriving shortly afterward300
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
from Havana, he was compelled to re-embark, and escaped to the United
States.1
It appears, from the appendix to the American Counter Case,3 that
on the 25th of May orders were given for the arrest of Lopez; but the
appendix ifpsilent as to the result, which was that no delay being granted
by the district judge to procure evidence against him, he was discharged
amid the cheers of a large crowd.
The Spanish authorities -liberated forty-two of Lopez's band, whom
they had taken prisoners, and they were taken back to the United
States in the United States ship Albany. A further attempt seems to
have been made to bring Lopez and his followers to justice, as on the
21st of July the grand jury at New Orleans found a true bill against
him and fifteen others for violating the act of 1818; but the American
Government failed in making out their case, and finally abandoned the
prosecution.3
On the 25th of April, 1851, the President issued another proclama"
tion, stating that "there was reason to believe that a military expedi
tion was about to be fitted ou^ in the United States, with intention to
invade the island of Cuba," and warning all persons of the penalties
they would incur by joining in it. The President concluded by " calling upon every officer of this Government, civil and military, to use all
efforts in his power, to arrest for trial and puniljtment evefy such offender
against the laws of the country."4
Nevertheless, in the following August, Lopez started ou a fresh expedition, of which the following details are taken from the President's message to Congress of December 2, 1851:
Lopez left New Orleans for Cuba on the 3d of Augnst, in the steamer
Pampero with four hundred men, " with evident intentions to make war
upon the authorities of the island." The steamer left stealthily, and
without a clearance, and, after touching at Key West, proceeded to the
coast of Cuba. Lopez and his band were soon overpowere d • by the
Spanish troops, and Lopez himself was publicly executed at Havana.
The President adds :
What gives a peculiar criminality to this invasion of Cuba is, that under the lead of
Spanish subjects, and with the aid of citizens of the United States, it had its origin,
with many, in motives of cupidity. Money was advanced by individuals, probably in
considerable amounts, to purchase Cuban bonds, as they have been called, issued by
Lopez, sold, doubtless, at a very large discount, and for the payment of which the
public lands and public property of Cuba, of whatever kind, and the fiscal resources
of the people and government of that island, from whatever source to be derived, were
pledged, as well as the good faith of the government expected to be established. All
these means of payment, it is evident, were only to be obtained by a process of bloodshed, war, and revolution. None will deny that those who set on foot military expeditions against foreign states by means like these are far more culpable than the ignorant an(J the necessitous whom they induce to go forth as the ostensible parties in the
proceeding. Those originators of the invasionHfCuba seem to have determined, with
coolness and system, upon an .T_||dertakiag which] should disagree their.country, violate
its laws, and put to hazard the lives of ill-informed and deluded men. You will consider whether further legislation be necessary to prevent the perpetration of such
offenses in future.6
No such farther legislation was, however, carried out; though it was
not long bef|ie the need for it was again put to the test.
This time the scene of operations was on the Pacific' coast, and the
1 British Appendix, vol. iii.   Report of Neutrality Laws Commission, p. 34.
3 English text, p. 666; French text,' p. 389.
3 British Appendix, vol. iii.   Report of Neutrality Laws Commission, p. 31.
* Appendix to American Counter-Case, English text, p. 705; French text, p. 120.
5 British Appendix, vol. iii.   Report of the Neutrality Commission, p. 34.OPINIONS   OF  SIR. ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
301
Walker's expedi
tion against Mexic
and Central Americi
leader chosen to conduct it was the well-known Walker;
the plan being to gain possession of the Mexican xiosses-
sions in Lower California.
The attempt was made in October, 1853, by an expedition from San
Francisco. The invaders seized the town qf La Paz, killed seven of its
defenders, and wounded others, and committed various excesses. They
were re-enforced by another expedition, which sailed in the Anita from
San Francisco, in December, but they were eventually driven out of the
country.
This expedition seems to have given rise to a new name, that of "filibusters," which has since been used to designate those who engage in
outrages of this description, having their origin in America.
Filibustering became a sort of profession; and, under the name of
"transit" and "emigration" companies, schemes were next openly
planned for attackmg Central America.
Walker sailed'for San Francisco on the 4th of May, 1855, arrived at
Eealejo on the 15th of June, and assumed the title of president of Nicaragua, in which capacity he was recognized by the United States
representative. Having been surrounded at Eivas by the native forces
in May, 1857, through the mediation of the commander of the United
States ship of war Saint Mary's, he was allowed to surrender unmolested, and to be conveyed away on board that vessel with the remnant
of his followers.
On returning to the United States he organized a fresh expedition,
this time at New Orleans. The attention of the authorities was called
to it, and a circular was issued on the 18th of September, 1857, which
states that " there is reason to believe that lawless persons are now engaged within the limits of the United States, in setting on foot and
preparing the means for* military expeditions, to be carried on against
the territories of Mexico, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica;" after which it proceeds to call upon the district attorneys and marshals " to use all due
diligence, and to avail" themselves "of all legitimate means at" their
I command" to enforce the provisions of the act of 1818.
In October, Lord Napier, Her Majesty's minister at Washington, had
warned the American Secretary of State that two thousand men had
been enrolled, arms purchased, £250,000 subscribed, and that shipping
was being hired.
On the 10th of November, Walker was arrested and was held to bail
in $2,000; but on the very next day he embarked with three hundred
unarmed followers from New Orleans for Mobile Bay, where he was
joined by fresh recruits in another vessel, the Fashion, in which he
sailed for Nicaragua. Some of his band occupied Fort Castillo. He
was himself, with the others, detained by the United States Commodore Paulding in the San Juan Elver and taken to Aspinwall, whence
he returned to the United States.1
The counsel of the United States have taken credit for their Government for this proceeding on the part of the commodore. They say,
" when wrong-doers manifested obstinate persistence of wrong, the military and naval officers of character and discretion, like General Scott,
Admiral Paulding, and General Meade, were employed to apply to such
persons the only method of prevention applicable to the case, namely,
force, to maintain the domestic order and foreign peace of the Government."
As a matter of fact, however, the proceedings of the commodore were
at the time justly censured as having been in excess of his authority.302
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
The President, in his message to Congress of the 7th of January, 1858^~
uses this language:
In capturing General Walker and his command after they had landed on the soil of
Nicaragua, Commodore Paulding has, in my opinion, committed a grave error. * * *
The error of this gallant officer consists in exceeding his instructions and landing his
sailors and marines in Nicaragua, whether with or without her consent, for the purpose
of making war upon any military force whatever which he might find in the country,
no matter from whence they came. * * * Under these circumstances, when Marshal
Rvnders presented himself at the State Department on the 29th ultimo with General*?
Walker in custody, the Secretary informed him " that the Executive Department of the
Government did not recognize Gefteral WaBxer as a prisoner; that it had no directions-
to give concerning him, and that it is only through the action of the judiciary that he
could be lawfully held in custody to answer any charges that might be brought against
him."
The protest of the Nicaraguan and Costa Eican governments will be
found in the correspondence presented to Parliament respecting Central
America, together with a description by Lord Napier of the grievous
injury inflicted by the filibusters upon those countries.   General Cass.J
replied, on behalf of the United States Government—
That unlawful warlike enterprises have been carried on from the United States, composed of persons from different countries, against the territory of Nicaragua, is not to
be denied. But during the whole progress of these illegal efforts the Government of
this country has faithfully performed the duty imposed upon it by the laws, as welb
through public proclamations against such enterprises as by giving the necessary directions to the proper officers to prevent their organization and departure, as by invoking the action of the judicial tribunals, and also by the employment of its naval force.
He, at the same time, " denied that a fresh invasion was preparing.'^
This was on the 25th of July. In October President Buchanan found
it necessary to issue a proclamation, containing the following passages,
which show that General Cass' information was far from correct, or
that the Government officials, from whose-reports he had gained it, must
have been singularly blind to what was taking* place:
Whereas information has reached me, from sources which I cannot disregard, that
certain persons, in violation of the neutrality laws of the United States, are making a
third attempt to set on foot a military expedition within their territory against Nicaragua, a foreign state, with "which they are at peace. In oMer to raise money for
equipping and maintaining this expedition, persons connected therewith, as I havej
reason to believe, have issued and sold bonds and other contracts pledging the publiisf
lands of Nicaragua and the transit route through its territory as a security for their
redemption and fulfillment.
The hostile design of this expedition is rendered manifest by the fact that these :
bonds and contracts can be of no possible value to their holders unless the present
government of Nicaragua shall be overthrown by force.
The leaders of former illegal expeditions of the same character have openly expressed
their intention to refiew hostilities against Nicaragua. One of them, who has already
been twice expelled from Nicaragua, has invited, through the public newspapers, Amer-.j
ican citizens to emigrate to that republic, and has designated Mobile as the place of
rendezvous and departure, and San Juan del Norte as the port to which they are bound.
This person, who has announced his allegiance to theUwted States, and claims to be president of Nicaragua, has given notice to the collector of the port of Mobile that two or
three hundred of these emigrants will be prepared to embark from-that port about the
middle of November.
Two months afterward, in December, 1858, Walker's filibusters actually embarked at Mobile in the sailing-schooner Susan, without a
clearance, on the pretense of being bound on a coasting voyage. An
unsuccessful attempt was made by the revenue-cutter to stop them, but
was resisted, and the Susan was joined unmolested by the Fashion and
the Washington wph military stores.
The expedition afterward broke down from the Susan being wrecked.
Walker and his band then proceeded, in March, 1859, to California,
whence they were said to have intended to make a descent on Punta
1 American Counter Case, Appendix, p. 612.r
OPINIONS   OF   SIR   ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
103
Arenas; but this attempt was not carried into execution, and Walker
returned to Louisiana.
In November, 1859, he, for the third time, eluded the Mobile authorities, and set sail once more from that port in his old vessel the Fashion.
The Fashion put back from want of stores, and some of the persons concerned in the expedition were arrested; but there is no report of their
having been punished. He started again in June, 1860, in the John A.
Taylor; was met off Euatan by another vessel with arms, and effected
a landing on the Central American coast. His career was brought to
a close by his being shot at Truxillo in September, I860.1
The British Counter Case gives a short account of the various Irish
American societies which preceded the Fenian brotherhood
in the United States.
This "American institution," as the Fenians called it, declared itself to
leuvirtually at war" with England., at a meeting held at Cincinnati in
January, 1865. Fenian bonds were issued, and soon afterward the following extraordinary spectacle was presented:
The head-center, as he was previously called, of the brotherhood was
styled president of the Irish Eepublic; the executive council entitled
themselves " senators " with a president; a house was hired at a rental
of $1,200; secretaries of the treasury, of war, &c, were appointed; and
the Irish Eepublic was declared to be founded at New York.2
.Menaces of invading Canada were held out at numerous public meetings, and were made good by a Fenian raid, on the 1st of June, 1866,
from Buffalo against Fort Colborne, in Canada. This was speedily repulsed and sixty-five prisoners were taken, while the remainder of the
Fenians recrossed the river into the United States, where they were arrested to the number of three hundred and seventy-five by the American authorities, and their arms were taken from them. The subsequent
events are thus narrated in the British Counter Case, and the statement has not been contradicted :
The stores of arms at Buffalo, Ogdensburgh, and Saint Albans were also seized by
the United States district marshals. On the 5th of June, the arrest of the other Fenian
leaders was ordered ; and on the 6th the President issued a proclamation, stating that
it had become known to him that certain evil-disposed persons had begun to set on
foot, and had provided and prepared, and were still engaged in providing and preparing means for a military expedition and enterprise, which expedition and enterprise
was to be carried on from the territory and jurisdiction of the United States against
British territory; and authorizing the United States military forces and militia to be
employed " to arrest and prevent the setting on foot and carrying on the expedition
and enterprise aforesaid."
On the same day on which this proclamation was signed, the Fenian prisoners at
Buffalo were released on their own recpgnizances; and, on the 7th, O'Neill and two other
principal leaders were also released on bail.
Another band of Fenians made a demonstration near Saint Albans, but retreated immediately on the appearance of a Canadian regiment.
Several arrests were made at Saint Albans and elsewhere; and Roberts, the president
of the Fenian senate, and chief instigator of the raid, was taken into custody at New
York. His examination commenced on the 11th; on the 12th he was released on parole ; and the district attorney eventually abandoned the prosecution from want of
evidence, with the intention of preferring an indictment before the grand jury.
On the 23d July the House of Representatives of the United States passed the following resolutions:
"Resolved, That the House of Representatives respectfully request the President of the
United States to urge upon the Canadian authorities, and also the British government,
the release of the Fenian prisoners recently captured in Canada.
| Resolved, That this House respectfully request the President to cause the prosecu-
»304
1
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
tions, instituted in the United States courts against the Fenians to be discontinued, if
compatible with the public interests."
In pursuance of tbe second of these resolutions, the Attorney-General instructed the
district attorney at Buffalo to abandon the Fenian prosecutions there, and they were
abandoned accordingly.
The prosecution was also withdrawn in the cases of Sweeney, Spear, McMahon, and
the other leaders of the Vermont-frontier demonstration, who had been arrested, but
released on bonds c||$5,000 after a day's detention; and the intended indictment of
Roberts was dropped as a matter of course.
In October the Government decided to return some of the arms which had been
taken from the Fenians.1
A bond was on this occasion taken from the editor of the I Buffalo^
Fenian Volunteer" and another Fenian sympathizer, that the arms should
not be used in violation of the neutrality laws.
The remainder of the arms taken at Buffalo and Ogdensburgh were
returned in the following year.
During 1867 the Fenians were occupied in promoting disturbances and
outrages in England and Ireland.
In 1868 they obtained from the United States governor the return of
thirteen hundred muskets seized at Saint Albans. In November, 1868,
the Fenian leader O'Neill marched in review through Philadelphia, with
three regiments in Fenian uniform, numbering, as reported, three thousand men.
Nothing, however, happened till 1870, when the second Fenian raid
upon Canada took place from Saint Albans and Malone. Eepulsed at
both places the Fenians sought refuge, as usual, across the frontier.
Several of the leaders were arrested and a quantity of arms taken
possession of by the United States authorities. Altogether thirteen tons
of arms are said to have been seized at the two raids, and conveyed to
United States arsenals; besides these a field-piece and numbers of rifles
were abandoned on the scenes of action. On the 12th of July the trials
of the Malone raiders took place; two were condemned to two years'
imprisonment and a fine of 810, and one to one year's imprisonment and
a similar fine. On the 29th of July the Saint Albans raiders were tried:
O'Neill was sentenced to two years' imprisonment and a fine of $10 .$1
another of the leaders to nine months' imprisonment and a fine of $5;
and another to six months' imprisonment and a fine of $1. The proceedings against two others were postponed. On the 12th of October,
O'Neill and his companions received an unconditional pardon from the
President.
On the day on which the pardon was granted the President published
a proclamation, warning evil-disposed persons that the law forbidding
hostile expeditions against friendly states would for the future be rigorously enforced:
Whereas divers evil-disposed persons have, at sundry times, within the territory or
jurisdiction of the United States begun, or set on foot, or provided, or prepared the
means for military expeditions, or enterprises to be carried on thence, against the territories or dominions of powers with whom the iSttfbecL States are at peace, by organizing bodies, pretending to have powers of government over portions of the territories,
or dominions, of powers with whom the United'States are at peace, or by being, or
assuming to be, members of such bodies ; by levying or collecting money for the purpose, or for the alleged purpose, of using the same in carrying on military enterprises
against such territories or dominions ; by enlisting or organizing armed forces to be
used against such powers, and by'Sting out, equipping, and arming vessels to tranSr
port such organized armed forces to be employed in hostilities against such powers.
And whereas it is aUeged, and there is reason to apprehend, that such evil-disposec
persons have also, at sundry times, within the territory and jurisdiction of the United
States, violated the law thereof by accepting and exercising commissions to serveby
land or by sea against powers with whom the United States are at peace, by enlisting
_ed
ed
] British Counter Case, p. 43.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
305
Expeditions in aid
tthe Cuban in.ur-
themselves or other persons to carry on war against such powers ; by fitting out and
arming vessels with intent that the same shall be employed to cruise orcommit hostilities against such powers, or by delivering commissions within the territory or jurisdiction of the United States for such vessels, to the intent that they might be employed
as aforesaid, &c.
On the 5th of October last, less than a year after his release, and after
this proclamation, O'Neill led a third raid against Canada on the Pembina frontier, but was arrested by the United States troops, and this
time met with entire immunity, being discharged on the ground that
there was no evidence of his having committed any overt act within the
United States territory.1
As stated in the British Counter Case, the proclamation of October,.
1870, referred not only to the Fenians, but to expeditions in aid of the
existing Cuban insurrection, some of which are mentioned.
The correspondence between the Spanish minister at Washington
and the  United   States Government on the subject of
these expeditions against Cuba is, in   parts, so applicable to the present question, that I cannot refrain from
quoting some passages.
Mr. Lopez Eobcrts writes thus to Mr. Fish on the ISth of September,
1869:3
Certain malcontent Cubans have established themselves in the United States, especially in New York, and these are endeavoring, by every means in their power, not to
conquer their independence by their own efforts, but to gain at present the sympathies
of the American people, in order afterward to seek the aid of this Government for their
cause. The history of what has taken place in the lastifew months is the clearest proof
of this. In a state of peace, it has been seen with astonishment that associations were
publicly organized in many ports belonging to a&iendly nation, said associations
being composed of the agents of the insurgents, with no other object than that of
directing their attacks against Spain^ Enlistments of men have also taken place during
whole weeks, as if the object were to form expeditionsf||uthorized by law, and consequently with the consent of the authorities. These emissaries have carried their spirit
of speculation so far as to take advantage of the good faith of emigrants from Europe,
sending them to fight in Cuba, under command of the so-called General Jordan, and
other officers, who fought on the side of the South in the civil war. Hostile demonstrations have likewise been suffered to take place against a nation which, in 1861, had
not even allowed (in order not to wound the susceptibility of the United States) the
title of belligerents to be given to an insurgent population numbering 6,000,000 or
7,000,000 of whites, who occupied, a third of the territory of the republic, and were in
possession of such resources that the'y were only conquered by prodigies of valor, military talent, and heroic perseverance ; and, after having seen the departure of various
filibustering expeditions, in broad daylight, and unmolested,'from New York and other
Federal ports, the minister of Spain finally found himself obliged, by the incomprehensible apathy of the authorities, to take the initiative in order to prevent these repeated
infractions of the neutrality laws.
To this Mr. Fish replies as follows, on the 13th October, 1869:3
This Government allows freedom of speech and of action to all, citizens or strangers, restricted only to the observance of the rights of others and of the public peace.
The Constitution of the United States secures to the people the right peacefully to
assemble, and also to keep and bear arms ; it secures them in their persons against
unreasonable search and seizure, and provides that no warrant shall issue but upon
probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and that no person shall be deprived
of life, liberty, or property without due process of law.
If certain malcontent Cubans (subjects of Spain) have misconstrued and abused the
privileges thus accorded by a liberal Government, the undersigned need not remind
Mr. Roberts what the occurrences, daily reported from across the ocean, are showing,
that governments cannot always restrain their malcontent subjects or residents.
Laws will be broken at times; and happy is that form of government that can con-
1 British Counter Case, p. 45.
2 Papers relating to Cuban affairs, presented to the House of Representatives, February 21, 1870, p. 131.
3Paper8 relating to Cuban affairs, p. 138.
20 B
JfeARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
trol the tendency of evil minds, and restrain, by its peaceful agencies, the violence of;
evil passions.
The undersigned is forced to admit with regret, that an unlawful expedition did
succeed in escaping from the United States aud landing on the shores of Cuba.   It
escaped from the United States without having attracted any notice or suspicion on
the part of the Government, or its officers or agents, and, as the undersigned believesjp
without any suspicion on the part of the agents of the Spanish government.   Previous to its departure, Mr. Roberts had been frequently informed that this Government;
would act upon any informipion or suggestion which it could obtain through its own*
agents, or that might be furnished by the Spanish authorities or their agents.
On the 17th of December, 1870, Mr. Eoberts writes to Mr. Fish to
complain of the conduct of »the United States authorities in permitting
the departure from New York of the Hornet, a notorious vessel, which,
as would appear from the British Counter Case,1 has since succeeded in
landing an expedition in Cuba.   This vessel, formerly a dispatch-boat
in the United States Navy, was sold, in June, 1869, by the Navy Department to a certain Senor Macias.   She was seized on her departure from
Philadelphia, but released, and proceeded to Halifax, where she was,
again detained by the British authorities, but discharged, as no arms
were found on board.   Leaving Halifax she sailed along the United
States coast, taking on board, at different points, cannon, small-arms,
ammunition, and men, and put into Wilmington.   Here she was agaiu_
seized, and a prosecution was instituted against some of the officer^
and crew.   These proceedings seem to have terminated ineffectively,
and the vessel was eventually released, upon bonds being given that
she would not be used in violation of the neutrality laws.   From Wil-*
mington she proceeded to New York, where she was once more seized,
and again released.
Mr. Eoberts incloses in his note a letter addressed by the Spanisra
consul at New York to the United States district attorney, in which,
after recapitulating the above facts, the consul goes on:
I have now information on which I rely with perfect confidence, that this steamer,
in the hands of said Macias and his agents, is being fitted out at this port, to at once
sail, to take on board at sea a military expedition from Nassau of some two hundred
men and military officers, which will leave there in a vessel, and another military ext
pedition from Key "West of some one hundred men, under command of one Cabaleiro ;
after all of which, and taking on board at sea arms provided, one Cisueros (who withi
General Jordan was joint commander of the Perit expedition from this city) will take!
charge of and conduct her to the coast of Cuba.
I respectfully submit that the ownership and history of this steamer, together withi
the outfit oh board, and her preparations, easily ascertainable by this Government, if.
prompt movement be made, are sufficient to call for the exercise of the ample prevent^
ive power of this Government against her departure. Trusting that, in a proper way,?
I have complied with the disposition of this Government that I lay complaints of .thus
character before, I hereby leave in your hands the responsibility of permitting this
formidable instrument to proceed on her illegal expedition to the great injury of my
Government.3
What is the reply of the district attorney?   Does he take the su§j|
picions of the consul as facts until disproved, and proceed at once to
detain the vessel'?   Not so.   He answers:
You accompany your letter with no proof or evidence that would authorize me to
seize the Hornet for the alleged intended breeches of our neutrality laws, or to take
any steps beyond those I have already taken. I have caused the most rigid scrutiny
to be exercised, to see that the Hornet has taken on board nothing of a nature to indi^
cate the hostile intentions you mention. I am advised that her intention is to cleat,
and sail in ballast for Nassau. What her intentions may be on reaching that port are
things that remain unproven, and in nowise indicated except by the intimations of <
your favor. I cannot legally act on mere surmise, but if furnished with proper evidence I shall not hesitate to take any steps necessary to prevent violations of our lawrf."*'
1 Page 466.
2Papers relating to Foreigu Relations of the United States, presented to Congress?
December 4,187J, p. 781.
3 Papers relatingglb Foreign Relations of the tplited States, 1871, pp. 781,782.i***§5§g_;g!3*jjl_
OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
o
07
The violation of the laws was not prevented. Mr. Eoberts complains
that " that same day the steamer Hornet put to sea from the port of
New York, without the judicial authorities of the Federal Government
having taken such measures to prevent her departure as should have
been dictated to them by the circumstances.and criminal antecedents of
the aforesaid vessel."
To this complaint of reliance upon the law for preventive, measures,
instead of having recourse to prerogative force, Mr. Fish thus replies:
The undersigned has the honor, in reply to this portion of the first note of Mr.
Lopez Roberts, to say that|l{~' appears from this correspondence that the Hornet, having
been seized on the complaint of the Spanish consul only two months before the date
of the correspondence, and a hearing in which the Spanish consul took part having
resulted in the discharge of the vessel, no subsequent proof, or anything in the nature
of legal evidence other than a repetition of that which had already been passed upon
by the court, and been decided to be insufficient for the detention of the vessel, had
been forwarded by the consul, or by any other Spanish official; that, nevertheless, the
district attorney offered to again take steps to detain the Hornet, if proof were furnished which would warrant him in so doing, which proof wras not furnished.
The undersigned takes the liberty to call the attention of Mr. Lopez Roberts to the
fact that a district attorney of the United States is an officer whose duties are regulated by law, and who, in the absence of executive warrant, has no right to detain the
vessels of American citizens without legal process, founded not rtpou surmises or upon
the antecedeut character of a vessel, or upon the belief or conviction of a consul, but
upon proof submitted according to the forms required by law.
Mr. Fish, therefore, though he had promised to refer the matter to
the Department of Justice, is of opinion that | the district attorney
complied with his duty, and would not have been justified in taking
steps for the seizure of the vessel on the unsupported representations
of the consul, after the failure of that officer to furnish the requisite
proof to authorize her continued detention."1
After these details it can admit of no doubt that the history of the
United States has been marked not only by systematic privateering
against nations with whom the United States were at peace, but also
by a series of hostile expeditions carried out in the most determined
manner by American citizens against the territories of neighboring and
friendly nations.
The counsel of the United States appear to have been aware of the
anomalous position in which their Government is placed by the contrast between the manifest failure on its own part to repress these
undertakings, and the strictness with which it now attempts to enforce
against Great Britain the duty of diligence to repress far less flagrant
breaches of neutrality directed against itself. A number of documents
have accordingly been appended to the United States counter-case
showing (though in an imperfect and fragmentary manner) the various
instructions and proclamations which have been issued by the President and Government officials of the United States for the prevention
of these enterprises. These documents, however, omit to mention the
results, some of which I have thought it necessary to state. Nevertheless, they tend strongly to confirm the statements of fact contained in
the appendix to the report of the neutrality commissioners and those
made in the counter-case of the British government, and which hare
not been contradicted.
The story of all these expeditions as told in a great part in the por-
clamations of the different Presidents, is pretty mueh the same.2 Some
scheme of annexation, or other form of invasion is started, public ineet-
1 Papers relating to Foreign Relations of the United States, p. 786.
*See President's Proclamations of December 2, 1851, October 30, 1853, and October
12,1869.   British Counter-Case, pp. 37, 39, 45.
di308
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
ings of sympathizers are held, a reckless soldier of fortune is selected I
for chief, funds are raised by bonds issued on the security of the public
lands of the country which it is proposed to conquer, arms are collectedr
recruits advertised for under some transparent verbal concealment of
the object, and at last a certain number of men are got together and
embark, or otherwise set forth. If the country against which the attack
is directed is feeble or unprepared, scenes of outrage and bloodshed
follow, until the marauders are driven to the coast, where they find
refuge on board Amerigibn vessels, (in some cases it has been on board
ships of war,) and return to the protection of the United States to prepare for a fresh attack. If the country is able vigorously to repel them,
as in the case of the Fenian raids, they content tMmselves with a demonstration on the frontier, seek at once asylum, are disarmed, and the
ringleaders are perhaps tried. Those who are convicted are almost
certain of an immediate pardon. After an interval the arms are restored, and unless the scheme has become so discredited by failure as to
be incapable of revival, preparations are fortl?yith recommenced for
another attempt, and everything goes on as before.
In the cases particularly mentioned in the British counter case, viz,
the expeditions of Lopez, Walker, and the Fenian raids, it will be observed that it cannot be said that the Government of the United States
had not full information of the projected enterprises, and ample time
for giving such instructions as might seem to be requisite for their prevention. Indeed," it is maintained in the argument of the United States
counsel (p. 90) that " the President of the United States acted in advance to enforce not diligence only, but active vigilance in all subordinate officers of the Government."
How successfully that vigilance and diligence was eluded may be gath-
ered from the facts which have just been stated.
In the face of such facts the following compaction between the United
States and Great Britain as to the observance of neutral obligations, to
the disparagement of the latter, seems, to say the least of it, somewhat
As to the deportment of the Executive in the course of these occurrences, we confidently appeal to the mass of official acts and correspondence contained in the documents annexed to the American counter-case, to prove that the American Government
not only did everything which law required, but did everything which was humanly
possible, by preventive vigilance, as well as by punitive prosecution, to discharge the
neutral obligations of the United States.
Did the American Government, at any time, or on any occasion, either willfully or
with culpable negligence, fail to discharge those obligations ? We deny it; although,
in the midst of almost continual warfare, both in Europe and America, it is possible
that violations of law may have occurred, in spite of all preveiftive efforts of that
Government.1
# * - # * #
During all this long period, the United States stea_S|^j||b.ored to prevent equipment
of vessels in their ports to the prejudice of Spain. The successive Presidents of the
United States were positive in instruction to all subordinate officers, and vigilant in
observation, to enforce the executiou of the laws of neunality, international as well as
municipal. Prosecutions were instituted by the courts ; vessels unlawfully captured *
were restored, by judicial or administrative order; and the principles of neutrality,
were proclaimed and maintained in every act, whether ,of the courts or of the Executive.1
# # - * # # #
While England professes as her view of public law, that constitutional governments
must of necessity allow themselves to drift oontinually into war by reason of having
no other means to keep peace except an act of Parliament, and that confessedly insufficient, the United States, on the other hand, have as constantly maintained, and do now
1 United States Argument, p. 82.""""•"'SKPHfe
OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
309
maintain, that it is the duty of all governments, including especially constitutional
governments, to discharge their neutral duties in obedience to rules of right, independent of and superior to all possible acts of Parliament. In consonance with which
doctrine it is that every President of the United States, from President Washington to
President Grant inclusive, has never failed to apply due diligence, voluntarily, sponte
sua, in the vigilant discharge of his own official duty, not in mere complaisance to foreign suggestion, by himself or by other officers of the Government, to prevent all unlawful enterprises of recruitment or equipment in the United States.1
Laws, no doubt, have been passed, and proclamations in abundance issued. But, in spite of all this, privateering, armed incursions into
countries at peace with the United States, hostile raids, and filibustering expeditions have gone on as before. The practical result is that the
counsel of the United States cannot be permitted to prejudice the British nation and government before the tribunal and the world by an imaginary representation of the neutrality of the United States; and
some allowance should be made for Great Britain if, on a far more humble scale, something of the same sort should have happened on her
shores, seeing that with a law said to be perfect, and with the loftiest
sense of neutral obligations, the Government of the United States have
not found it altogether possible to prevent their citizens from occasioning trouble to neighboring nations, whether at war or at peace, and giving to other governments much cause of complaint and remonstrance
against their own.
The observation which thus legitimately arises is not got rid of by an
attack on the.past maritime policy of Great Britain, or by a reference
to "the numerous piratical enterprises fitted out in former times against
the possessions of "Spain in America, and the honor accorded to the
chiefs of those expeditions, such as Drake and Hawkins."
However offensive this telling sentence may have been intended, to
be, though an Englishman, I readily forgive it for the sake of the
charming simplicity which has made its authors forgetful of the fact that,
at the time when Drake and Hawkins went forth on the enterprises they
term % piratical," the ancestors of their countrymen and their own still
formed a part of the British nation. May not some of the old blood
which-warmed the hearts and animated the courage of those bold adventurers still flow in the veins of their transatlantic descendants, who
have made the name of "filibuster" detract somewhat from our idea
of the perfect character of American neutrality ?
Having compared the law of' the two nations in the matter of neutrality, I should, in the natural order of things, have now Cmpia.n._ _. _,..
proceeded to the facts connected with the different vessels, frij||ine83-
were it not for the unexpected course pursued by the representatives of
the United States in seeking to prejudge the question to which the inquiry before this tribunal is directed, namely, whether the British government was wanting in due diligence in respect of the equipment of
certain specified ships, by imputing to the British nation an intentional
disregard of its duties as a neutral, and to the British government not
only a want of diligence in the discharge of- its duty for the protection
of the United States against violations of neutrality, but a ivillful negligence, arising out of an undue partiality and desire to favor the confederates.
For this purpose the representatives of the United States before this
tribunal have gone into the whole history of the time; and, not content with disparaging the institutions of Great Britain and reviling her
law, have sought to cast obloquy on her government, on statesmen
United States Argument,
*310
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
whom the British people have been in the habit of looking up to, and,
indeed, on the BritMh nation itself.
We are told of " the early and long-continued unfriendliness of the
British government;" that "Her Majesty's government was actuated
by a conscious unfriendly purpose toward the United States." Again
and again we are told of the unfriendliness and insincere neutrality of
the British cabinet.. " The cabinet were actuated by an insincere neutrality to hasten the issue of the Queen's proclamation." " The feeling
of personal unfriendliness toward the United States continued during
a long portion or the whole of thp time of the commission or omission
of the acts complained of."' Finally, we are told that " the facts established show an unfriendly feeling which might natuiUlly lead to, and
would account for, a want of diligence bordering upon wQIful negligence."
Earl Bussell is made the object of unworthy and unjustifiable attack.
He is represented as having " evinced a consistent course of partiality
toward the insurgents." " When information as to the Florida was
conveyed to Her Majesty's principal secretary of state for foreign affairs, he interposed no objection to her sailing from Liverpool." Surely
the writer must have known he was doing erievous injustice in making
such a statement. The Florida sailed from Liverpool on the 25th of
March. As will appear when we come to the facts connected with
that vessel, Earl Bussell had heard nothing about her for a month before. Again, "when, the overwhelming proof of the complicity of the
Alabama was laid before him, he delayed to act until it was too late."
He who penned this must have known that the delay w&s not Lord
Bussell's, and that, but for an unlucky delay, accidentally occurring
elsewhere, so far as the action of his lordship in that affair was concerned, the Alabama would have been stopped.
Of the cabinet which has been thus assailed, three distinguished
members are no more. But he who, at the difficult time in question,
presided over the foreign relations of Great Britain, still lives among
us in the fullness of years and honor. There have, of course, been
many who, in the strife of party politics, have been opposed to Earl
Bussell; there have been others who have differed from him in particular incidents of his political conduct; but never did it occur to political
enemy—personal enemy he never could have had—to question for a
moment the lofty sense of honor, the high and unimpeachable integrity,
the truthfulness, the straightforwardness, which have characterized the
whole of his long and illustrious career. When the history of Great
Britain during the nineteenth century shall be written, not only will
there be none among the statesmen who have adorned it whose name
will be associated with greater works in the onward path of political
progress than that of Earl Bussell, but there will be none to whom,
personally, an admiring posterity will look back with greater veneration and respect. That this distinguished man should feel deeply aggrieved by the unworthy attack thus made on the government of
which he was a leading member, and on himself personally, it is easy
to understand; but there are attacks which recoil upon those who
make them, and of this nature are aspersions on the honesty and sincerity of Earl Bussell.
Speaking of the officials iu the ei&Ionies, the ea-se of the United
'llptes asks |fte tribunal to bear iu mind what it calls " these constant
demonstrations of .partiality for the insurgents." "Ipey show," it is
said, " a persistent absence of real neutrality, which should throw sus-OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
311
picion upon the acts of the British officials as to the vessels, and should
incline the tribunal to closely scrutiuize their acts."
The British nation comes in, of course, for a share of the abuse thus
freely bestowed. British neutrality is piscribed sometimes as " partial
and insincere," sometimes as 1 habitually insincere." I Great Britain
framed its rules, construed its laws and its instructions, and governed
its conduct in the interest of the insurgents."
I have called this an " unexpected" course; for, assuredly, neither
the British government nor the British people were prepared to expect
that, after Great Britain had not only expressed, openly and before the
world, her "regret" that vessels should have left her shores which afterward did damage to American commerce, but had voluntarily consented
to make good that damage, if it could be shown that any want of sufficient
care on the part of the British authorities had rendered the equipment
and evasion of those vessels possible—on an occasion when, in the
peaceful and amicable settlement of any claim the United States might
have against Great Britain, the remembrance of past grievances or past
resentments was to be forever buried, and the many ties which should
bind these two great nations together drawn closer for the time to
come—advantage should be taken to revive with acrimonious bitterness
every angry recollection of the past, and, as it would seem', to pour forth
the pent-up venom of national and personal hate. Deploring the course
which has thus been taken as one calculated to mar the work of peace on
which we are engaged, I comfort myself with the conviction that a
great nation, like the people of the United States, seeing in the present
attitude of Great Britain a cordial and sincere desire of reconciliation
and enduring friendship, animated itself by a kindred spirit, will not
approve of the hostile and insulting tone thus offensively and unnecessarily adopted toward Great Britain, her statesmen, and her institutions,
throughout the whole course of the case and argument presented on
behalf of the United States.
In support of the alleged unfriendly feeling which the United States
ascribe to the British government, as the foundation of the Aiieg.__v,_e_.-e_t
charge of partiality toward the insurgent States, where <-nfriemlly feel'»«-
the government should have been neutral, they refer, in the first place,
to certain speeches made on different occasions by leading members of
the ministry.
There can be no doubt that these speeches not only expressed the sentiments of the speakers, but may be taken to have been the exponents of
the sentiments generally entertained at the time. But it is a mistake
to suppose that those sentiments involved any unfriendliness toward
the United States. In truth, why should any such unfriendliness h»ave
existed ? The cherished sentiments of the British people on the subject
of slavery had strongly tended to alienate them from the South, and the
recent public discussion of the subject of slavery, on which the South
felt so sensitively, had produced feelings of by no means a friendly
character on the part of the latter toward Great Britain. The North
might, therefore, not unnaturally calculate on the sympathy of Great
Britain, if not on its active support, in a conflict with the South. How
was it that what might thus have been expected 1 priori, was not realized to the extent of such expectation, and that where active sympathy,
or even actual supportl might have been looked for, impartial neutrality
took its place ? The causes are not difficult to find. In the first place,
it appeared to many that right and justice were on the side of the seceding States. To such persons it seemed that when eleven great provinces,
with a population of several millions, forming fully one-fourth of the312
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Union, impelled by the conviction that the political views of the majority of the Federal States were, if not antagonistic to, at all events inconsistent with, their interests, desired to separate themselves from the
Union, to which they were bound only by the tie of a voluntary confederation, an attempt to coerce them by the sword into a forced continuance in it, when it must henceforth be hateful to them, was
to make the issue one of might rather than of right. Others there
were, men of calm judgment and reflection, who, while they deplored
a disruption of the great American Union, yet thought that a re-union
effected by the subjugation- of the South was not to be desired in
the true interest either of the victors or the vanquished; that before
such a result could be brought about, a prolonged and fearful contest
must have taken' place, in which the best blood of the South would
have- been shed, its resources exhausted, its prosperity destroyed for
years, its spirit humiliated and broken, making its restoration to the
Union of little value, except so far as the pride of the Federal States.
might be concerned; that, consequently, the Union having thus been
torn asunder, it would be better for both parties that each should be
left to work out its own destiny, and develop its own resources, in the
vast regions to which its dominions might extend. Many, too, there
were who deplored this contest the more because they believed thafys
despite the superior force and resources of the North, the subjugation
of the South was impossible, and that the prolongation of the contests
•could only lead to useless sacrifices on either side. This vieW proved
erroneous in the result, but it was not the less honestly entertained. A
strong impression, too, could not fail to be produced on the public mind
by the energy, determination, and courage displayed by the South, and
the generous ardor with which its population risked life and fortune in
the desperate struggle for national independence, so resolutely maintained to the last against infinitely superior force. Whatever the cause
in which they are exhibited, devotion and courage will ever command
respect; and they did so in this instance. Men could not see, in the
united people of these vast provinces thus risking all in the cause of
nationality and independence, the common case of rebels, disturbing
peace and order on account of imaginary grievances, or actuated by the
desire of overthrowing a government in order to rise upon its ruins.|
They gave credit to the statesmen and warriors of the South; their'
cause might be right or wrong; for the higher motives ennoble political
action, and all the opprobrious terms which might be heaped upon the
cause in which he fell could not persuade the world that the earth
beneath which Stonewall Jackson rests does not cover the remains of
a patriot and a hero.
Public feeling in Great Britain, howe»ver, never went beyond this:
that both parties having appealed to arms, they should be dealt with
on terms of perfect equality, and that whatever was conceded to the one
should not be withheld from the other—to use a common expression, that
they should be left to fight it out fairly, without Great Britain throwing her weight into either scale, as the Northern States seemed to think
she should have done in their favor, not perhaps by actual assistance in
war, but by withholding from the confederates the character of belligerents, and by treating their ships of war as pirates and denying them
access in British ports. For the United States appear to have been
unable to understand the position assumed by the British government
in making any concession whatever in favor of the insurgent States. It
appeared to them like an act of perfidy toward a friend. Had not political and commercial relations bound Great Britain and the UnitedOPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
31*
o
States closely together for many years ? How then could Great Britain
take any step which should give any advantage to an enemy of the
United States'? Two things were lost sight of in this reasoning : First,
that the insurgent States, with whom the United States were now waging war, had formed part of that Union with which Great Britain had
had the intimate relations referred to—the second port in the Empire,
through which the cotton trade was carried on, having had all its relations with the South; secondly, that Great Britain had the interests of
her own commerce to look after, which were seriously compromised in
the warfare as carried on by the United States. The blockade of the
Southern ports, established by the North with a view to the speedier
subjugation of the South, deemed by the North of such paramount
importance as to render all consideration for the interest of Great Britain
unnecessary, was about to pajMyze the industry of Lancashire and
bring famine and disaster on thousands. Great Britain accepted the
position and acknowledged the blockade. Was she not, in other respects,
to look after her own interests ? It was natural enough that, in the first
heat and passionate excitement, the North should take the view it did
of the conduct of Great Britain. I cannot but think the time has come
when it might take a calmer and a juster view. It will do so hereafter,
in spite of those who still seek to rekindle the flame of discord, the
"ignes," which in their hands may be truly said to be " suppositos cineri
doloso."
The charge of partiality and of willful negligence having been thus
brought requires to be disposed of. For, though partiality does not
necessarily lead to want of diligence, yet it is apt to do so, and in a case
of doubt would turn the scale. Where a sinister motive exists, culpa,
which might otherwise be excused, becomes indeed dolo proxima and
inexcusable. Besides, sitting on this tribunal, as I have already said,
as in some sense the representative of Great Britain, while I may say,
with perfect truth, " pudet haec opprobria nobis dici potuisse," I should
not have fulfilled my duty if I did not see whether their refutation cannot be found in the facts before us.
Independently of having permitted the equipment of ships, three main
heads of complaint are placed on record against the govern- c_mp.aints i
ment of Great Britain : 1. That it acknowledged the Con- ^^^^^
federate States as belligerent, and, as a consequence, refusing to treat
their ships of war as pirates', admlffbed them to British ports on the
same footing with the war-ships of the United States. 2. That it did
nothing to prevent the agents of the Confederate States from procuring
ships and supplies of arms and munitions of war from England. 3. That
it did nothing to stop the blockade-running carried ou through the
British port of the Bahamas and Bermuda.
The contention of the United States that Great Britain was not warranted in acknowledging the Confederate States as belliger- HMJwli
ents might find its answer in the unanimous concurrence of °n"~Uis-~ie,~(~Jr-
the great maritime powers in following her example. But, independently
of this, the course thus pursued may, without difficulty, be shown not
only to have been strictly warranted by international law, but also to
have been the only one which could with propriety have been adopted.
First, let us see how stood the facts at the time of the recognition of
the Confederate States as belligerents by the Queen's government.
Between the November of 1860 and April of 1861 seven Southern
States of the Union—South Carolina, Florida, Mississippi, Alabama,
Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas—had not only renounced their allegiance
to the Federal Government and declared themselves independent, but
ii314
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
had formed themselves into a confederation, under the title of the
"Confederate Stat^.;" had adopted a federal constitution with all the
necessary elements of government; and had appointed a president.
They were in exclusive possession of the territory of these States, to the
total and absolute exciffbion of the former Federal Government. They
had taken measures to raise an army, and had voted upward of
$2,000,000 for the creation of a navy." In April, 1861, hostilities had
actually commenced. By the 13th of April Fort Sumter had fallen.
The arsenal at Harper's Ferry was seized a few days later. On the
15th the President of the United States called out the militia to the
number of 75,000 men.1 On the 17th the president of the Confederate
States issued a proclamation inviting applications for letters of marque
and reprisal, to be granted under the seal of the Confederate Statesjl
against ships and property of the United States and their citizens.2
On the 19th of April President Lincoln issued a further proclamation,
declaring the ports of the seven States blockaded;3 and on the 27fcS|
issued a like proclamation with regard to the ports of North Carolina
and Yirginia, which, in the mean time, had joined the confederation.
Here, then, were nine States, with a population of more than five
millions of people, exclusive of the negro population, (in other words,-;
one-fourth of the United States, shortly afterward to be joined by two'
other States,) which had established a de facto governmeSi, which government had possession of the entire territory within the.limits of those
States, and exercised all the powers and functions of government, with
an organized army prepared to wage war with the rest of the States for
the establishment of national independence, and which had actually
commenced hostilities by the capture of forts occupied by Federal forces.
No one could deny that this was in fact war, and war about to be conducted on a great scale—a war to which the origtipl Government, the
authority of which was thus contested in arras, could not deny the charS
acter of war, with all the incidents which attach to it.
On the 1th of May, 1861, (nine days before the date of Her Majesty's*
proclamation of neutrality,) Mr. Seward himself wrote to Mr. Dayton, at
Paris:
The insurgents have instituted revolution with open, flagrant,.deadly war, to compel
the United States to acquiesce in the dismemberment of the Union. The United States,
have accepted this civil war as an inevitable necessity.4
From the beginning the operations of the war were carried on as in a
war between nations, according to the usages of war among civilized
states. No attempt was made to treat insurgent prisoners as traitors
or rebels.
Under such circumstances, it is impossible to deny that a neutral
state had a right to accord to the insurgent government the character
of a belligerent. Whether it would* be morally justified in doing so
must depend on the circumstances in which it found itself placed rela*!
tively to the parties to the contest. All publicists are agreed that where
an integral portion of a nation separates itself from the parent state
and establishes, de facto, a government of its own, exej|ding the former
government from all powifc aud control, and thereupon a civil war ensues, a neutral nation is fully justified in recognizing the government^
facto as a belligerent, though it has not as yet acknowledged it as a
nation; and from the time of the acknowledgment of its belligerent
status the government de facto acq~i$fes, in relation to the neutral, all
1 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 2.
2 Ibid., p. 4.
3 Ibid., p. 7.
4 UniteplStates Documents, vol. i,p. 35.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
115
the rights which attach to the status of a belligerent of an established
nationality.
" When," says Yattel, "a party is formed in a state which no longer
obeys the sovereign, and is of strength sufficient to make
head against him, or when, in a republic, the nation is divided into two opposite factions, and both sides take arms, this is called
a civil war."1
Again:
'When the ties of political association are broken, or at least suspended, between the
sovereign and his people, they may be considered as two distinct powers; and since
each is independent of all foreign authority, no one has the right to judge between
them. Each of them may be right. It follows, in virtue of the voluntary law of nations, then, that the two parties may act as having equal right.3
Martens says:
Foreign nations cannot refuse to considers^,lawful enemies those,who are empowered by their actual- government, whatever that may b_. This is not recognition of
its legitnnacy.
Hautefeuille says on this subject: pPgjHi
En effet, les peuples strangers ne peuvent intervenir entre les belligerants; la qua-
lite de snjets revolted, que- l'une des deux donne a l'autre, doit etre ecarteepar eux; ils
ne sont, et.ne peuvent 6tre, juges de la justice ou de l'injustice de la guerre. Les nations qui desirent rester neutres doivent accepter la possession de fait; si elles veulent
6tre respectees par les deux parties, elles doivent les reconnaitre et les respecter egalement tons les deux. Le prince stranger que refuserait de remplir les devoirs de la
neutralite envers les insurges ne saurait exiger d'eux d'etre regarde" comme neutre;
il serait a leurs yeux l'allie de leur ennemi, et ils le traiteraient comme tel avec
justice. D'un autre c6te" le souverain qui combat pour ramener sous son obeissance
ses snjets revoltes ne saurait s'offenser que les neutres remplissent leurs devoirs envers
ses ennemis, pnisqu'il ne peut exiger qKls deviennent ses allies, et que,'s'ilsrefusaient
de remplir ces devoirs, ils seraient effectivement ses allies, les ennemis de ses adver.-
saires.3
Professor Bluntschli, though writing adversely to Great Britain on
the Alabama question, yet, as to the status of the confederates as belligerents, has the following passages :4
-Du reste, le parti revolts qui opere avec des corps d'armee mili|gjirement organises,
et qui entreprend de faire triompher par la guerre son programme politiape, agij^yjfj&tS'
qu'il ne forme point un 6tat tout au moins comme s'il en constituMt un, au Im£ et place
d'un e'tat, (an Staates statt.) II affirme la justice de sa cause et la legitimite" de sa mission avec une bonne foi egale a celle qui se presume de droit chez tout etat belligerant. (Pages
455,456.)
Again :
Pendant la guerre on admet, dans l'interet de
de bonne foi pour la defense de leurs pretendus droit
And at pages 461, 462:
Si l'on tient compte de toutes ces considerations, on arrive a la conclusion suivante :
C'est que, a considerer d'un point de vue impartial, tel qu'il s'offrait et s'imposait aux
6tats europeens, en presence de la situation que cre"aient les faits, la lntte engagee entre l'Union et la confederation—c'est-a-dire, entre le nord et le sud—il etait absolument
mpossible de ne pas admettre que les Etats-Unis fussent alors engage's dans une granddt
guerre civile, oh les deux parties avaient le caractere de puissances politiquement et
militairement organisers, se faisant l'une k l'autre la guerre, suivant le mode que le droit
fles gens reconnalt comme re"gulier, at anim^es d'une egale confiance dans leur bon
droit. Les uns pouvaient dprouver plus de sympathie pour l'Union, qui avait pour
eux toute la superiorite d'un etat reconnu et d'une autorite constitutionelle, d'autres
pouvaient faire des vceux pour le succes de la confederation, qui n'etait pas encore re-
connue comme etat federal nouveau, mais qui esperait de se conquerir une existence
propre. Tout le monde e~tait d'accord qu'il y avail guerre et que dans cette guerre il y avait
deux parties belligerantes.
i unman it e, que
(Page 453.)
es  deux partis agissen
1" Droit des gens," liv. iii, § 292.
2 Ibid., liv. ii, § 56.
3 " Droits et devoirs de nations neutres," vol. i, p. 231.
pp. 455,456, &c.
'Revue de droit international," 1870,o
16
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
The principles by which a neutral state should be governed as to the
circumstances under which, or the period at which, to acknowledge the
belligerent status of insurgents, have been nowhere more fully and ably,
or more fairly, stated than by Mr. Dana, in his edition of Wheaton, in I
a, note to section 23 :
The occasion for the accordance of belligerent rights arises when a civil conflict
exists within a foreign state. The reason which requires and can alone justify this
step by the government of another country is that its own rights and interests are so
far affected as to require a definition of its own relations to the parties. Where a
parent government is seeking to subdue an insurrection by municipal force, and the
insurgents claim a political nationality and belligerent rights which the parent government does not concede, a recognition by a foreign state of full beUigerent rights, if
not justified by necessity, is a gratuitous demonstration of moral support to the rebellion, and of censure upon the parent government. But the situat^a of a foreign state
with reference-to the contests, and the condition of affairs between the contending
parties, may be such as to justify this act. It is important, therefore, to determine,
what state of affairs, and what relations of the foreign state, justify the recognition.
I. is certain that the state of things between the parent state and insurgents must
amount, in fact, to a war, in the sense of international law—that is, powers and rights
of war must be in actual exercise; otherwise the recognition is falsified, for the recognition is of a fact. The tests to determine the question are various, and far more
decisive where there is -maritime war and commercial .relations with foreigners.
Among the tests, are the existence of a de facto political organization of the insurgeniR
sufficient in character, population, and resources to constitute it, if left to itself,'a state
.among the nations, reasonably capable of discharging the duties of a state; the actual
employment of military forces on each side, acting in accordance with the.jrules and
customs of war, such as the use of flags of truce, cartels, exchange of prisoners, and
the treatment of captured insurgents by the parent state as prisonersyof war; and, at
sea, employment by the insurgents of commissioned cruisers, and the exercise by the
parent government of the rights of blockade of insurgent ports against neutral com-*",'
merce, and of stopping and searching neutral vessels at sea. If all these elements
exist, the condition of things is undoubtedly war; and it may be war before they arS5
all ripened into activity. •
As to the relation of the foreign state to the contest, if it is solely on land, and the
foreign state is not contiguous, it is difficult to imagine a call for the recognition. If,
for instance, the United States should formally recognize belligerent rights in an insurgent community at the center of Europe, with no seaports, it would require a hardl^-
supposable necessity to make it else than a mere demonstration of moral support. But a
case may arise where a foreign state must decide whether to hold the parent state respon*.
{Mr. Canning to Lord Granville on the Greek war, June 22, 1826.) If the foreign state
sible for acts doneby theinsurgents, orto deal with the insurgents as a de facto government,
recognizes belligerency in the insurgents, it releases the parent stal&jfrom respon sibility
for whatever may be done by the insurgents, or not done by the parent state where the
insurgent power extends. (Mr. Adams to Mr. Seward, June 11, 1861, Dip. Corr. 105.)
In a contest wholly upon laud, a contiguous state may be obliged to make the decision^"
whether or not to regard it as a war ; but, in practico, this has not been done by a
general aud prospective declaration, but by actual treatment of cases as they arise. ■
Where the insurgents and the parent state are maritime, and the foreign nation has.
extensive commercial relations and trade at the ports of both, and the foreign nation
and either or both of the contending parties have considerable naval force, and the
domestic contest must extend itself over the sea, then the relations of the foreign state
to this contest are far different.
In such a state of things the liability to political complications, and the questions of
right and duty to be decided at once, usually away from home, by private citizens or
naval officers, seem to require an authoritative and general decision as to the status of
the three parties involved. If the contest is a war, all foreign citizens and officers,
whether executive or judicial, are to foUow one line of conduct. If it is not a war,
they are to follow a totally different line. If it is a war, the commissioned cruisers of
both sides may stop, search, and capture the foreign merchant-vessel; and that vessel
must make no resistance and must submit to adjudication by a prize-court. If it is?
not a war, the cruisers of neither party can stop or search the foreign merchant-vessel;
and that vessel may resist all attempts in that.<prection, and the ships-of-war of tb§|,
foreign state may attack and capture any cruiser persisting in the attempt. If it 1$.
W»i~, foreign nations must await the adjudication of jprize tribunals. If it is not war,
no such tribunal can be opened. If it is war, the parent state may institute a blockade
Jure gentium of the insurgent ports, which foreigners must respect; but if it is not a war,
foreign nations having large commercial intercourse with the country will' not respect
a closing of insurgent ports by paper decrees only. If it is a war, the insurgent cruisers
are to be treated by foreign citizens and officials, at sea aud in port, as lawful belliger-OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
31T
I ents. If it is not a war, those cruisers are pirates, and may be treated as such. If it
I is a war, the rules and risks respecting carrying contraband, or dispatches, or military
I persons, come into play.   If it is not a war, they do not.   Within foreign jurisdictionr
if it is a war, acts of the insurgents in the way of preparation and equipments for
I hostility may be breaches of neutrality laws ; while, if" it is not a war, they do not
come into that category, but under the category of piracy or of crimes by municipal
[j law.
Now, all citizens of a foreign state, and all its executive officers and judicial magis-
R trates, look to the political department of their government to prescribe the rule of
Ii their conduct in all their possible relations with the parties to the contest. This rule
It is prescribed iu the best and most intelligible manner for all possible contingencies by
I the simple declaration that the contest is, or is not, to be treated as war.   If the state
of things requires the decision, it must be made by the political department of the
i government. It is not fit that cases should be left to be decided as they may arise, by
| private citizens, or naval or judicial officers, at home or abroad, by sea or land.   It is,
I therefore, the custom of nations for the political department of a foreign state to make-
H the decision. It owes it to its own citizens, to the contending parties, and to the peace
It of the world, to make that decision seasonably. If it issues a formal declaration of
|| belligerent rights prematurely, or in a contest with which it has no complexity, it is a
If gratuitous and unfriendly act. If the parent government complains of it, the com-
N plaint must be made upon one of these grounds. To decide whether the (recognition-
|j was uncalled for and premature requires something more than a consideration of prox-
|j imate facts, and the overt and formal acts of the contending parties. The foreign*
|| state is bound and entitled to consider the preceding history of the parties; the mag-
|j nitude and completeness of the political and military organizations and preparations
IS on each side; the probable extent of the conflict by sea and land; the probable extent
II and rapidity of its development; and, above all, the probability that its own merchant-
II vessels, naval officers, and consuls may be precipitated into sudden and difficult com-
|| plications abroad. The best that can be said is, that the foreigu state may protect
|| itself by a seasonable decision; either upon a test case that arises, or by a genii eral prospective decision; while, on the other hand, if it makes the recognition
|| prematurely, it is liable to the suspicion of an unfriendly purpose to the parent state.
| The recognition of belligerent rights is not solely to the advantage of the insurgents.
|| They gain the great advantage of a recognized status, and the opportunity to employ
B! commissioned cruisers at sea, and to exert all the powers known to maritime warfare,
II with the sanction of foreign nations. They can obtain abroad loans, military and
II naval materials, and enlist men, as against everything but neutrality-laws; their flag
|| and commissions are acknowledged, their revenue-laws are respected, and they acquire
It a quasi political recognition. On the other hand, the parent government is relieved fromr
|| responsibility for acts done in the insurgent territory; its blockade of its own ports--
|j is respected; and reacquires a right to exert, against neutral commerce,, all the powers
I of a party to a maritime war.
Mr. Dana, though writing after the present dispute, and with reference to it, pronounces no opinion upon it, but the principles he has thus
j laid down enable us to judge of the matter without difficulty.
This question was the subject of a solemn decision in the case already
cited of the Santissima Trinidad.   One of the points there   The  Santi!iSima
| raised being that the government of Buenos Ayres, under Tri,~idad-
whose commission the vessel had taken prizes, was invalid, the inde-
II pendence of that State not having been recognized by the Governmental of the United States, Mr. Justice Story thus disposes of the objection:
There is another objection urged against the admission of this vessel to the privi-
|jlege8 and immunities of a public ship, which may as well be disposed of in connection
jj with the question already considered.   It is, that Buenos Ayres has not yet been ac-
|j knowledged as a sovereign independent government by the executive or legislature of
| j the United States, and therefore it is not entitled to have her ships of war recognized by
Ii our courts as national ships. We have, in former cases, had occasion to express our opinion on this point.   The Government of the United States has recognized the existence
of a civil war between Spain and her colonies, and has avowed a determination to re-
|| main neutral between the parties, and to allow to each the same rights of asylum and
D hospitality and intercourse.   Each party is, therefore, deemed by us a belligerent nation, having, so far as concerns us, the sovereign rights of war, and entitled to be respected in the exercise of those rights.   We cannot interfere to the prejudice of either
I belligerent without making ourselves a party to the contest and departing from the posture of neutrality.   All captures made by each must be considered as having the same
■ validity, and all the immuuities which may be claimed by public ships in our portsr
I under the law of nations, must be considered as equally the right of each; and, as such,918
o
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
must be recognized by our courts of justice until Congress shall prescribe a different,
rule. This isthe doctrine heretofore asserted by this court, and we see no reason to depart from it.1
An attempt has indeed been made to show that the judgment in the
foregoing case has been overruled or shaken by the succeeding judgment in the case of the Gran Para, in which it is alleged that, notwithstanding the commission of a belligerent power, a vessel was held to
be subject to the jurisdiction of a court of the United States. I have
already shown th'at, in that case, iu which the validity of a capture
made by a privateer fitted out in the United States was questioned by
reason of the illegal character of the capturing vessel, the latter was not
a ship-of-war commissioned by a belligerent government, but simply an
American vessel commissioned as a privateer; nor, indeed, sailing as a
privateer under the commission of a recognized belligerent. She still
remained, therefore, the private property of an American citizen, unprotected by any commission whatever, and a capture made by her could
not be held to be good prize.
In the recent case of the British bark, the Hiawatha, and of the Mexican schooner Brillante, which were captured by ships of the United
States for endeavoring to run the blockade, and which had been condemned as prize, an appeal having been brought, and an objection having been taken that the OonfedeMte States cowl not properly be held
to be belligerents, and that consequently the President had no right to
establish a blockade, Mr. Justice Grier, in delivering the judgment of
the majority of the Court, lays down the following important propositions :
Insurrection against a government may or may not culminate in an organized rebellion ; but a civil war always begins by insurrection against the lawful authority of the
government.' A civil war is never solemnly declared; it becomes such by its accidents—the number, power, and organization of the persons who originate and carry it
on. WheJU^fche party in rebellion occupy and hold in a hostile manner a certain portion of territory, have declared their independence, have cast off their allegiance,
have organized armies, have commenced hostilities against their former sovereign,
the world acknowledges them as belligerents, and the contest a war. They claim to be
in arms to establish their liberty and independence, in Srder to become a sovereign
state, while the sovereign party treats them as insurgents and rebels who owe allegiance, and who should be punished with death for their treason.
The laws of war, as established among nations, have their foundation in reason, and
all tend to mitigate the cruelties and miseries produced by the scourge of war. Hence
the parties to a civil war usually concede to each other belligerent rights. They
exchange prisoners, and adopt the other courtesies and rules common to public or
national wars.
It is not the less a civil war with belligerent, parties in hostile array, because it.may
be called an " insurrection " by one side, and the insurgents be considered as rebels or
traitors. It is not necessary that the independence of the revolted province or state-
be acknowledged, in order to constitute it a party belligerent in a war according to the
law of nations. Foreign nations acknowledge it as war by a declaration of neutrality.
The condition of neutrality cannot exist unless there be two belligerent parties. In
the case of the Santissima Trinidad, (7 Wheaton, 337,) this court say: | The Government
of the United States has recognized-the existence of a civil war between Spain and her
colonies, and has avowed her determination to remain neutral between the parties;
Each party is therefore deemed by us a belligerent nation, having, so far as concerns us,
the sovereign rights of war. "
The law of nations is also called theflaw of nature; it is founded on the common consent as well as the common sense of the world. It contains no such anomalous doctrine as that which this court are now for the first time desired to pronounce, to wit,
that insurgents who have risen in rebelliou against their sovereign, expelled her
courts, established a revolutionary government, organized armies, and commenced hostilities, are not enemies because they are traitors; and a war levied on tbe government by traitors, in order to dismember and destroy it, is not a war because it is an '
"insurrection."
1 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 86.OPINIONS   OF   SIR   ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
119
Chief Jfistice Taney, Mr. Justice Nelson, Mr. Justice Catron, and Mr.
Justice Clifford differed, indeed, from the majority of the court, on the
question as to whether the blockade was, in its inception, lawful, founding their opinion upou the fact that though by the Constitution of the
United States the President could, in case of iuvasion or insurrection,
call out the national forces, Congress alone could declare war, and that,
Congress not having declared war till the 13th of July, 1861, the President had no power to declare a blockade, and consequently that the
seizure of these vessels was illegal. But there was no difference of
opinion on the question of belligerent status so soon as civil war is declared.
The practice of nations has been entirely in accordance with these
principles. All the maritime nations—the others were not concerned in
the matter—concurred in according to the coufeder^pe government the
status and rights of a belligerent power.
But though it would seem impossible to contest that, at some time
during the continuance of the civil war, the recognition of w_..her ar_„_wi.
the belligerent status of the confederate governmentfeust e^mem premature.
have taken place, it is asserted that the recognition by the British government was premature. I will endeavor to take a calm and dispassionate view of the position of the parties, and of this much-agitated
question.
Looking to the s_tate of things which had thus come into existence,
Her Majesty's government could not but see that it would soon become
not only right, but also necessary to the protection of British interests,
to concede to the insurgent -states the character of belligerents. As
soon as it was known in Great Britain that the war was to be extended
to naval operations, the interests of British commerce and British subjects required that the belligerent status of both parties to the great
struggle, which was evidently about to ensue, should be clearly ascertained and defined. It was plain that a state of things was about to
present itself, such as Mr. Dana refers to, as justifying the recognition
of belligerency. Much reliance is placed in the Case of the United
States, page 51, for the purpose of establishing the desire of the
British government to recognize the insurgents as belligerents at an
unduly early period, that as early as the 1st of May, Earl Bussell wrote
the letter of that date to the lords of the admiralty.
The letter is as follows:
The intelligence which reached this country by the last mail from the United States'
gives reason to suppose that a civil war between the Northern and Southern States of
the Confederacy was imminent, if indeed it might not be considered to have already
begun.
Simultaneously with the arrival of this news, a telegram, purporting to have been
conveyed to Halifax from the United States, was received, which announced that the
President of the southern confedercy had taken steps for issuing letters of marque
against the vessels of the Northern States.
If such is really the case, it is obvious that much inconvenience may be occasioned
to the numerous British vessels engaged in trade on the coast of the United States and
in the Gulf of Mexico, and that timely provision should be made for their protection
against undue molestation by reason of the maritime operations of the hostile parties;
aud Her Majesty has accordingly commanded me to signify to your lordships her pleasure that adequate re-inforcements should forthwith be sent to Her Majesty's squadron
on the North Americah and West Indian station, so that the admiral in command may
be able duly to provide for the protection of British shipping in any emergency that
may occur.
I need scarcely observe to your lordships that it might be right to apprise the admiral
that, much as Her Majesty Regrets the prospect of civil war breaking out iu a country
iu the happiness and peace of which Her Majesty takes the deepest interest, it is Her
Majesty's pleasure that nothing should be done by her nayal forces which should indicate any partiality or preference for either party in the contest that may ensue.1
1 Appendix to British Case, vol. iii, p. 3.320
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
When I say that the foregoing letter is relied on, I must correct myself. It is relied on only in a mutilated form. The third paragraph of
the letter, which gives the key to its purpose, aud supplies the motive
of the writer, is, I regret to say, omitted—its place being supplied by
asterisks—while the other paragraphs are given at length.1 When the
letter is before us in its entirety, we see plainly that the purpose Earl
Russell had in view was, not to give any advantage to the insurgents,,
but to secure protection to British shipping in case the invitation of the
confederate president should have the effect of letting loose a swarm of
privateers in the American waters.
There can, however, be no doubt that, prior to the issuing of the
Queen's proclamation of neutrality, Her Majesty's ministers, having
become acquainted with the relative position of the two parties, and see-,
ing plainly that this was no ordinary revolt, and that insurrection had
assumed the form of organized government and of organized warfare,
and looking to the dimensions the contest was about to take, had come
to the conclusion that it would be impossible to withhold from the insurgent government the character and rights of belligerents.
At the time the letter last cited was written, nothing was known
beyond the fact that the confederate government were preparing to issue
letters of marque; but on tbe ensuing day, the 2d, came thenews that
President Lincoln had proclaimed a blockade of all the Southern ports,
though the terms of the proclamation were not yet known. Hereupon
the government, in anticipation of any emergency that might arise,
adopted the constitutional course of consulting the law-officers of the
Crown.
u Her Majesty's government heard the other day," said Lord John
Russell in the House of Commons on the 2d of May—
That the confederated States have issued letters of marque, and to-day we have
heard that it is intended there shall be a blockade of all the ports of the Southern
States.   As to the general provisions of the law of nations on these questions, some of
the points are so new as well as so important that they have been referred to thel aw-.
officers of the Crown for their opinion, in order to guide the government in its instructions both to the English minister in America and the commander-in-chief of the naval
squadron.   Her Majesty's government has felt that it was its duty to use every possible I
means to avoid taking any part in the lamentable contest now raging in the American^
States.   Nothing but the imperative duty of protecting British interests, in case they
should be attacked, justifies the government in at all interfering.   We have not been
involved in any way in that contest, by any act or giving any advice in the matter,
and, for God's sake, let us, if possible, keep out of- it.2
On the 6th of May Lord John Russell stated in the House of Commons that the law-officers and the government had come to the conclusion that, according to principles which seemed to them to be just, the
Southern Confederacy must be treated as a belligerent.3
A dispatch to Lord Lyons of the same day, in which Earl Russell
develops his views on the subject, is worthy of a wise and considerate
statesman:
My Lord : Her Majesty's government are disappointed in not having received fromi-
you, by the mail which has just arrived, any report of the state of affairs and of the
prospects of the several parties, with reference to the issue of the struggle which
appears, unfortunately, to have commenced between them; but the interruption of the
communication between Washington and New York sufficiently explains the non-arrival
of your dispatches.
The accounts, however, which Her Majesty's consuls at different ports were enabled
to forward by the packet, coincide in showing that, whatever may be the final result of
1 See Case of the United States, p. 51.
2 Hansard, vol. clxii, p. 1378; United States Documents, vol. iv, p. 482.
3 Hansard, vol. clxii, p. 1564; United States Documents, vol. iv, p. 483.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
321
what cannot now be designated otherwise than as the civil war which has broken out
between the several States of the late Union, for the present, at least, those States
have separated into distinct confederacies, and, as such, are carrying on war against
each other.
The question for neutral nations to consider is, what is the character of the war;
and whether it should be regarded as a war carried on between parties severally in,a
position to wage war, and to claim the rights and to perform the obligations attaching
to belligerents.
Her Majesty's government consider that that question can only be answered in the
affirmative. If the government of the northern portion of the late Union possesses the
advantages inherent in long-established governments, the government of the southern
portion has, nevertheless, duly constituted itself, and carries on, in a regular form, the
administration of the civil government of the States of which it is composed.
Her Majesty's government, therefore, without assuming to pronounce upon the
merits of the question on which the respective parties are at issue, can do no less than
accept the facts presented to them. They deeply deplore the disruption of a confederacy
with which they have at all times sought to cultivate the most friendly relations; they
view with the greatest apprehension and concern the misery and desolation in which
that disruption threatens to involve the provinces now arrayed in arms against each
other; but they feel that they cannot question the right of the Southern States to
claim to be recognized as a belligerent, and, as such, invested with all the rights and
prerogatives of a belligerent.1
Whether the determination to acknowledge the Confederate States as
•belligerents was come to a few days too soon or not, is'a matter on
which there may possibly be a difference of opinion. But that, on this
account, British statesmen, acting under an anxious sense of duty, iu
furtherance of what they believed to be a just and necessary policy,
should be publicly accused of having been influenced by the sinister design of promoting the interests of the one party at the expense of the
other, while pretending simply to fulfill the duties incidental to their
position toward both parties, is a painful thing. The world must judge
between the accusers and the accused.
Whether the resolution was come to too soon or not, it was not acted
upon till the events Which rapidly supervened could leave no doubt on
the minds of Her Majesty's ministers as to issuing the proclamation of*
neutrality. On the 10th of May, a dispatch was received from Lord
Lyons, containing a copy of the proclamation of President Davis as to
issuing letters of marque, and a copy of that of President Lincoln,
declaring that southern privateers should be treated as pirates, and
announcing the blockade of the southern ports.2
The British government contends, and, as it seems to me, most justly,
that when, by declaring the southern ports blockaded, the President
openly acknowledged the existence of a civil war, and thereby recognized the Confederate States as belligerents in the face of the world, he
thereby rendered it not only the right but tHe duty of the British government to treat them as such.
That it became the right of Her Majesty's government so to treat them
can admit of no possible doubt; no jurist, I am satisfied, will assert the
contrary. The pretension that the Federal Government could treat the
contest as a war, so as to declare a blockade, and thereby exclude neutral
nations from access to the blockaded ports for the purpose of trade, while
neutral governments, on the other hand, were not entitled to treat the
war as one going on between two belligerent powers, is a proposition
which is, I say it with all respect for Mr. Adams, really preposterous.
Applying the principles laid down by the editor of Wheaton, in the
note which J_ have quoted at length, as well as by the other eminent
jurists to whom I have referred, can any one doubt that Her Majesty's
government were fully justified in recognizing the belligerent character
21 B
1 United States Documents, vol. i, p. 37.
2 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 6.322
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
of the Confederate States % When the war between the two parties to
the contest became extended to the ocean, the interests of maritime nations, and more especially of Great Britain, with its extensive commerce
with the ports of both Southern and Northern States, became at once
seriously involved. Between Great Britain and the southern ports there
was the constant intercourse of an active and extensive commerce. The
British ship-owners and merchants had a right to look to the government
for protection to ships and cargoes, if interfered with, in time of peace,
in any way not warranted by international law. It was the duty of Her
Majesty's ships of war stationed on the neighboring naval stations, or
detached from them, to afford that protection. So long, as the war was
not acknowledged by Her Majesty as a legitimate war, any interference
by either belligerent with a British ship might have proved the occasion of some serious collision.
With the recognition "by Her Majesty of the war, all her subjects would
know that the blockade must be treated- as a lawful one, and that any
trade attempted to be carried on with the blockaded ports would be at
the peril of the parties attempting it.
Unless the blockaded ports were treated as the ports of a belligerent,
there could be no lawful blockade. The blockade of its own ports by a.
state, to the exclusion of those who have a right to trade with its subjects, is a thing unknown and unheard of. The subjects of Great Britain
had, by existing treaties, the right of trading with those of the United
States. If the citizens of the Southern States were still to be looked
upon as citizens of the United States, British merchant-ships had a right
of free access to the southern ports notwithstanding the blockade. Nor
could the British government deprive them of this right, or refuse them
its protection if forcibly interfered with.
The effect of a blockade in the disturbance of contracts previously
made makes it of the utmost importance to the commercial world to
have the earliest notice of the fact, and of the recognition of it by the government ; the more so as it has been considered that official notice of a
blockade to a government is sufficient notice to its subjects. *
All these important considerations appear to me to show, beyond the
possibility of dispute, that it becomes the duty of a neutral government,
when it is made aware of the fact of a blockade, to give notice of it to
its subjects at the very earliest moment.
The alternative of refusing to acknowledge the war as a war between
two belligerent powers, was therefore to refuse to acknowledge the
blockade. Would the United States hate preferred that Great Britain
should adopt this alternative 1
By establishing the blockade, therefore, the Government of the United
States made it, as I have said, not only the right but the duty of Her
Majesty's government to acknowledge the belligerency of the confederates, and thus to give to the war, so far as British subjects were concerned, the incidents which attach to war, as respects the relative rights
and obligations of belligerents and neutrals.
The policy of the government was explained and justified by Lord
Russell in a letter to Mr. Adams, of the 4th May, 1865:
Let me remind you that when the civil war in America broke out so suddenly,
so violently, and so extensively, that event, in the preparation of whieh Great Britain
had no share, caused nothing but detriment and injury to Her Majesty's subjects; Great
Britain had previously carried on a large commerce with the Southern States of the
Union, and had procured there the staple which furnished materials for the industry of
millions of her people.
Had there been no war, the existing treaties with the United States wsuld have
secured the continuance of a commerce mutually advantageous and desirable.   ButOPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
323
what was the first act of the President of the United States ? He proclaimed on the
19th of April, 1861, the blockade of the ports of seven States of the Union. But he
could lawfully interrupt the trade of neutrals to the Southern States upon one ground
only, namely, that the Southern- States were carrying on war against the Government
of the United States; in other words, that they were belligerents.
Her Majesty's government, on hearing of these events, had only two courses to pursue,, namely, that of acknowledging the blockade, and proclaiming the neutrality of
Her Majesty, or that of refusing to acknowledge the blockade, and insisting upon the
the rights of Her Majesty's subjects to trade with the ports of the South. Her Majesty's
gdvernment pursued the former course as at once the most just and the most friendly
to the United States.
It is obvious, indeed, that the course of treating the vessels of the Southern States
as piratical vessels, and their crews' as pirates, would have been to renounce the character of neutrals, and to take part in the war; nay, it would have been doing more
than the United States themselves, who have never treated the prisoners they have
made either by land or sea as rebels and pirates, but as prisoners of war, to be detained
until regularly exchanged.
So much as to the step, which yon say your Government can never regard " as otherwise than precipitate," of acknowledging the Southern States as belligerents. It was,
on the contrary,- your own Government which, in assuming the belligferent right of
blockade, recognized the Southern States as belligerents. Had they not been belligerents, the armed ships of the United States would have had no right to stop a single
British ship upon the high seas.1
But it is said that the recognition was premature, because, when it
was made, the official announcement of the blockade had not yet been
received.   What if this had been so ?   The blockade existed in fact;
it was known to the British government; and it was important to Her
Majesty's subjects that it should be made known to them at the earliest
possible moment.   But this assumption, rashly made in the case of the
United States, turns out to be incorrect.   The facts stood thus: The
proclamation of the President with regard to the ports of the seven
States was issued on the 19th of April.   It was followed by a similar
proclamation of the 27th, as to the ports of North Carolina and.Virginia.
The blockade was effectually established on the 30th.   The issuing of
the proclamations was commuuicated to Lord Lyons, the minister of
Great Britain at Washington, on the 29th.    On the 1st of May, Mr.
Seward, the Secretary of State of the United States, writes to him as
follows:
The so-called Confederate States have waged an insurrectionary war against this
Government. They are buying and even seizing vessels in several places for the purpose of furnishing themselves with a naval force, and they are issuing letters of marque
to privateers to be employed hi preying on the commerce of this country. Tou are
aware that the President has proclaimed a blockade of the ports included within the
insurgent States.   All these circumstances are known to the world.2
On the 3d of May the j)roclamation of the blockade, which had appeared in the Boston newspapers, was published in the London newspapers. It turned out afterward that there were inaccuracies in the
version thus given by the Boston newspapers; but the substance of the
thing remained the same; there was no doubt that the blockade had
been declares.
On the 5th of May, the government received a letter of the 23d of
April from their consul at New York, transmitting a copy, correct in
all essential particulars, of the proclamation of the blockade, as also a
complete copy of that of President Davis, inviting applications for letters
of marque.3 On the 10th of May, complete copies of both proclamations were received from the British minister at Washington.*
In the mean time, a copy of the President's proclamation of the 19th
II
1United States Documents, vol. i, p. 295.
2 Appendix to British Case, vol. iii, p. 12.
3 Appendix to British Case, vol. iii, p. 4.
4 Ibid., p. 6.324
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
of April having been forwarded by Mr. Secretary Seward to Mr. Dallas,
the United States minister in England, it was officially communicated
by Mr. Dallas to Lord Russell on the 11th of May.1 Her Majesty's
proclamation of neutrality was not issued till the 14th of May. Thus it
was not till three days after the official communication last referred to,
and nine days after a copy had been received from the British consul
at New York, that Her Majesty's proclamation of neutrality Was issued.
But it is said that the expected arrival of Mr. Adams should have been
awaited. What difference could it have made . No explanations afforded by that gentleman could have altered the facts—facts which
made it the duty of the government to advise Her Majesty to recognize
the validity of the blockade, and, in order so to do, to recognize also
the belligerent status of the de-facto confederate government.
But the not waiting for Mr. Adams is put forward as a breach of faith
on the part of Earl Russell, his lordship having, it is said, pledged
himself to Mr. Dallas, the predecessor of Mr. Adams, to await the arrival of the latter. ' Here again we have an entire misconception. No
such pledge was given, or intended to be given. What passed between
Lord Russell and Mr. Dallas appears from a letter of the latter to Mr.
Seward of the 2d of May :
The solicitude felt by Lord John Russell as to the effect of certain measures represented as likely to be adopted by the President, induced him to request me to call at
his private residence yesterday. I did so. He told me that the three representatives
of the Southern Confederacy were here ; that he had not seen them, but was not unwilling to do so, unofficially; that there existed an understanding between the government and that of Erance, which would lead both to take the same course as to
recognition, whatever that course might be; and he then referred to the rumor of a
meditated blockade of southern ports and their discontinuance as ports of entry-
topics on which I had heard nothing, and could therefore say nothing. But as I informed him that Mr. Adams- had -apprised me of his intention to be on his way hither,
in the steamship Niagara, which left Boston on the 1st May, and that he would probably arrive in less than two week, by the 12th or 15th instant, his lordship acquiesced-
in the expediency of disregarding mere rumor, and waiting the full knowledge to he
brought by my successor.2
It is plain that the motive for waiting the arrival of Mr. Adams'was
to obtain positive knowledge in the place of % mere rumor "—that is,
I rumor of a meditated blockade; " not that there was any intention
of discussing with Mr. Adams the question of the proclamation of neutrality, if. the rumor proved correct. When authentic information
came in the copies of the President's proclamation officially furnished
to the foreign office, full knowledge took the place of rumor, and the
latter became converted into certainty. All motive for delay then ceased
and the time for action had arrived.
Yet this has been magnified into a breach of faith, and that by per-
by the sons who had this letter before them.
The example  of Great Britain in  acknowledging thte Confederate
Recognitionofbei- States as belligerents was followed by the Emperor of the
fiigerency. French in a proclamation of the 10th of June; by the King
of the Netherlands on the lftth; by the Queen of Spain on the 17th.;
Emperor of Brazil on the 1st of August.
The Government of the United States, however, refused to concede
c«ur__,pu_____.by to other nations the right of acknowledging the belligerent
"reignpowers-     status of the seceding States.   In these they saw only what
Mr. Seward termed " a discontented domestic faction."   Writing to Mr.
Dayton on the 30th of May, 1861, Mr. Seward says:
The United States cannot for a moment allow the French government to rest under
1Appendix to British Case, vol. iii, page 7.
*United States Documents, vol. i, p. 34.-^s^§
OPINIONS   OP   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
325
the delusive belief that they will be content to have the Confederate States recognized
as a belligerent power by states with which this nation is in amity. No concert of
action among foreign states so recognizing the insurgents can reconcile the United
States to such a proceeding, whatever may be the consequences of resistance.x
In a dispatch from Mr. Seward to Mr. Dayton, of the 17th of June,
1861} the former writes:
The United States, rightly jealous, as we think, of their sovereignty, cannot suffer
themselves to debate any-abridgment of that sovereignty with France or with any
other nation. Much less can it consent that France shall announce to it a conclusion
of her own against that sovereignty, which conclusion France has adopted without
any previous conference with the United States on the subject. This Government insists that the United States are one whole undivided nation, especiaUy so far as foreign
nations are concerned, and that France is, by the law of nations and by treaties, not
a neutral power between two imaginary parties here, but a friend of the United
States.
# # * # * # .■
It is erroneous, so far as-foreign nations are concerned, to supppse that any war ex-
ists-in the United States. Certainly there cannot be two belligerent powers where
there is no wax. There is here, as there has always been, one political power, namely,
tbe United States of America, competent to make war and peace, and conduct commerce and alliances with all foreign nations. There is none other eithor in fact or recognized by foreigu nations. There is, indeed, an armed sedition seeking to overthrow
the Government, and the Government is employing military and naval forces to repress it. But these facts, do not constitute a waf presenting two belligerent powers,
and modifying the national character, rights, and responsibilities, or the characters,
rights, and responsibilities of foreigu nations. It is true that insurrection may ripen
into revolution, and that revolution thus ripened may extinguish a previously existing
state, or divide it into one or more independent states, and that if such states continue
their strife after such division, then there exists a state of war affecting the characters,
rights, and duties of all the parties concerned. But this only happens when the revolution has thus run its successful course.
The French government says, in the instruction which has been tendered to us, that
certain facts which it assumes confer upon the insurgents of this country, in- the eyes
of foreign powers, all the appearances of a government defaoto; wherefore, whatever
may be its regrets, the French government must consider the two contending parties
as employing the forces at their disposal in conformity with the laws of war.
This statement assumes not only that the law of nations entitles any insurrectionary faction, when it establishes a de-facto government, to be treated as belligerent, but
also that the fact of the attainment of this status is to be determined by the appearance
of it in the eyes of* foreign nations. If we should concede both of these positions, we
should still insist that the existence of a de-facto government, entitled to belligerent
rights, is not established in the present case.3 _
In a-dispatch of June 19 he writes:
What is now seen in this country is the occurrence, by no means peculiar, but fre-
queut in all countries, more frequent even in Great Britain than here, of an armed insurrection engaged in attempting to overthrow the regularly, constituted and established government. There is, of course, the employment of force by the Government
to suppress the insurrection, as every other government necessarily employs force in
such cases. But. these incidents by no means constitute a state of war impairing the
sovereignty of the Government, creating belligerent sections, and entitling foreign
states to intervene or to act as neutrals between them, or in any other way to cast off
their lawful obligations to the nation thus for the moment disturbed.3
Writing to Mr. Adams on the 21st of July, he says:
The United States aud Great Britain have assumed incompatible, and thus far irrec"
oncilable, positions on the subject of the existing insurrection.
The United States claim.and insist that the integrity of the Republic is unbroken,
and that their Government is supreme, so far as foreign nations are concerned, as weli
for war as for peace, over all the States, all sections, and all citizens, the loyal not
more than the disloyal, the patriots and the insurgents alike. Consequently, they insist that the British government shall in no way intervene in the insurrection, or hold
commercial or other intercourse with the insurgents in derogation of the Federal
authority.4
The position assumed by the United States Government was plainly
untenable, being neither more nor less than this—that when a body of
1 United States Appendix, Vol. i, p. 192.
8 Ibid., p. 206.
2 Ibid., p. 202.
* Ibid., p. 214.326
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
states secede from a former government and form one of their own,1 the
original government is to be the sole judge as to when the status of belligerency can be conceded—a proposition wholly at variance with alt
received principles of international law.
How Lord Russell viewed the matter appears from a dispatch to Lord
Lyons, of June 21:
I have to state to your lordship that I have every reason to be satisfied with the
language and conduct of Mr. Adams since he has arrived in this country.
The only complaint which he *has urged here is, that the Queen's proclamation an
nouncing her neutrality was hasty and premature.
I said, in the first place, that our position was of necessity one of neutrality; that
we could not take part either for the North against the South, or for the South against
the North. •
To this he wiUingly assented, and said that the United States expected no assistance
from us to enable their Government to finish the war.
I rejoined that if §uch was the case, as I supposed, it would not have been right
either toward our admirals and naval commanders, nor toward our merchants and
mercantile marine, to leave them without positive and public orders; that the exercise of belligerent rights of search and capture by a band of adventurers clustered in
some small island in the Greek Archipelago or in the Atlantic would subject them to
the penalties of piracy; but we could not treat 5,000,000 of men, who had declared '
their independence, like a band of marauders or filibusters. If we had done so, we
should have done more than the United. States themselves. Their troops had taken prisoners many of the adherents of the confederacy, but I could not perceive from the newspapers that in any case they had brought these prisoners to trial for high treason, or shot
them as rebels. Had we hung the captain of an armed vessel of the southern oonfed^
eracy as a pirate, we should have done that which a sense of humanity had prohibited
on the part of the Government itself.
The question soon assumed a practical form. When the Government
Question _, t„ of the Confederate States had armed certain vessels, and
confederate vesseu ka(j piace(i them under the command of officers duly commissioned by it, and those vessels put into ports'of the neutral powers,
the Government of the United States protested loudly against their
being received as vessels of war, on the ground that the insurgent
States still formed an integral portion of the Union; that they were to
be looked upon as rebels; and that commissions from.a government,
the independence of which had not been acknowledged} could not give
to its ships the character of ships of war. They insisted, therefore, on
these vessels being looked upon as pirates, to which all entry into the
ports of other nations, and all assistance of every kind, should be denied.
The Federal Government even went further, and threatened to hold neutral governments responsible for any assistance or supplies afforded "to
confederate ships. But the neutral governments were unanimous in
refusing to accede to these demands, and persisted in conceding to the
confederate ships the same privileges as were afforded to those of the
• United States.
The question first arose with the government of the Netherlands, f>n
the occasion of a visit of the confederate vessel, the Sum-
governmeTtnof wtL ter, to the Dutch island of Curacoa, in August, 1861, and of
Netherlands jf       7 o / 7 t
her being allowed to replenish her stock of coal and obtain
supplies there. The ftct having come to the knowledge of Mr. Seward,
he forthwith instructed Mr. Pike, the United States minister at the
Hague, to bring the matter immediately to the notice of the Government:
You are instructed to bring this matter immediately to the notice of the government
of the Netherlands.. The subject of damages for so great a violation of the rights of
the United States will be considered when we shall have properly verified the facts of
the case. In the meantime you will ask the government of the Netherlands for any
explanation of the transaction it may be able or see fit to give. You will farther say'
that the United States, if the case thus stated shall proive to be correct, will expect, inOPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
327
view of the treaties existing between the two countries, and the principles of the law
of nations, as well as upon the ground of assurances recently received from the government of the Netherlands, that it will disown the action of its authorities at Curagoa,
and will adopt efficient means to prevent a recurrence of such proceedings hereafter.1
.Mr. Pike accordingly protests against the idea a that aid and countenance could be afforded by a friendly power to the Sumter, though she
did assume the character of a ship of war of the insurgents. I claimed,"
he says—
That were she afforded shelter and supplies on this ground by the authorities at
Curagoa, and should the Dutch government approve the act, it would be, substantially,
a recognition of the Southern Confederacy, and that, in my judgment, such an act
would be regarded by the United States as an unfriendly and even hostile act, which
might lead to the gravest consequences. I held that nothing more need be asked by
the so-styled Confederate States, as a practical measure of recognition, than that a ship
like the Sumter, claiming to be a national vessel of those States, should be permitted
to enter the neighboring ports of foreign nations, and there obtain the necessary means
to enable her to depredate upon the commerce of the United' States. That such a
course on the part of any power, aggravated by the fact that she was unable to obtain
such supplies at home, so far from being neutral conduct, was really to afford the most
efficient aid to the men who were in rebellion against' their own government, and
plundering and destroying the vessels and property of their fellow-citizens on the high
seas, I protested against such a doctrine as tending necessarily to the termination of
all friendly relations between our Government and any government that would tolerate such practices, whether that government were France, or EDgland, or Spain, or
Holland. I remarked that it was not for me to judge of the purposes of European
powers in regard to the existing state of things in the United States; but if there were
to be exhibited a disposition anywhere to take advantage of our present situation, I
believed it would be found that such a course could not be taken with impunity now,
nor without leading to alienation and bitterness in the future.3
A correspondence ensued between Mr. Pike and Baron Yan Zuylen,
the Netherlands minister for foreign affairs, in which the former denied
the right of other nations to accord to the insurgent States the character of a belligerent power, and insisted that the vessels of the Confederate government were but u piratical craft," or at best could only be
looked upon as privateers, in which character they would be excluded,
except in case of distress, from ports of the Netherlands.
M. Van Zuylen stated the views of his government in a most able
paper, from which, however, owing to its length, I must confine myself
to a few extracts:
It is not sufficient to dispose of the difficulty by the declaration that the Sumter is^
as is stated in your dispatches, " a vessel fitted out for, and actually engaged in, piratical expeditions," or " a privateer steamer." Such au asserl ion should be clearly proved,
in accordance with the rule of law, " affirmanti incumbitprobaiio."
After having poised, with all the attention which comports with the weightiness of
the matter, the facts and circumstances which characterize the dissensions which now
are laying desolate the United States, and of which no government more desires the
prompt termination than does that of the Netherlands, I think I may express the conviction that the Sumter is not a privateer, but a man-of-war, grounding myself on
the following considerations:
In the first place, fhe declaration of the commander of the vessel, given in writing
to the governor of Curagoa, who had made known that he would not allow a privateer
to come into the port, and had then demanded explanations as to the character of the
vessel. This declaration purported, " the Sumter is a ship of war, duly commissioned
by the government of the Confederate States."
The Netherlands governor had to be contented with the word of the commander
couched in writing. M. Ortolan, ('' Diplomatic de la mer," i, p. 217,) in speaking of the
evidence of nationality of vessels of war, thus expresses himself:
" The flag and the pennant are visible indications; but we are not bound to give
faith to them until they are sustained by a cannon-shot."
The attestation of the commander may be exigible, but other proofs must be presumed ; and, whether on the high seas or elsewhere, no foreign power has the right to
obtain the exhibition of them.
1 British Appendix, vol. vi, p. 69.
2 Ibid., p. 70.
"*-*$^p328
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Therefore the colonial council has unanimously concluded that the word of the commanding officer was sufficient.
In the second place; tbe vessel armed for war by private persons is called " privateer." The character of such vessel is settled precisely, and, like her English' name,
(privateer,) indicates sufficiently under this circumstance that she is a private armed
vessel—name which Mr. Wheaton gives them.—(" Elements of International Law," ii,
p. 19.)
Privateering is the maritime warfare which privateers are authorized to make, for
their own account, against merchant-vessels of the enemy, by virtue of letters of marque,
which are issued to them by the state.
The Sumter is not a private vessel; is not the private property of unconnected individuals—of private ship-owners. She, therefore, cannot be a privateer; she can only
be a ship of war or ship of the state, armed for cruising. Thus the Sumter is designated, in the extract annexed from Harper's Weekly, under the name of "rebel ship'sof.
war."
Thirdly. It cannot be held, as you propose in your dispatch of the 9th of this month,
that all vessels carrying the confederate flag are, without distinction, to be considered
as privateers, because the principles of the law of nations, as well as the examples of
history, require that tbe rights of war be accorded to those States.
The Government of the United States holds that it should consider the States of the
South as rebels.
It does not pertain to the King's government to pronounce upon the subject of a
question which is entirely within the domain of the internal regulation of the United
States; neither has it to inquire whether, in virtue of the Constitution which rules
that republic, the States of the South can separate from the central Government, and
whether they ought then/aye or bo, to be reputed as rebels during the first period of
the difficulties.1
After referring to historical precedents, especially the case of the
United States themselves in their struggle for independence, " is there
need," he asks, " to remind you that at the outset of the war of American independence, in 1778, the English refused to recognize American
privateers as lawful enemies, under pretense that the letters of marque
which they bore did not emanate from the sovereign, but from revolted
subjects'? But Great Britain soon had to desist- from this pretension,
and to accord international treatment to the colonists in arms against
the mother country."
M. "Van Zuylen cites also the precedent of the American privateer
Paul Jones:
This vessel, considered as a pirate by England, had captured two of His Britannic
Majesty's ships in October, 1779. She took them into the Texel, and remained there
more than two months, notwithstanding the representations of Mr. York, ambassador
of Great Britain at the Hague, who considered the asylum accorded to such privateer
(pirate as he called it in his Memoir to the States-General of 21st March, 1780) as
directly contrary to treaties, and even to the ordinances of the Government of the
Republic.
Mr. York demanded that the English vessels should be released.
The States-General refused the restitution of the prizes.
The United States, whose belligerent rights were not recognized by England, enjoyed
at that period the same treatment in the" ports of the Republic of the United Provinces
as the Netherlands authorities have now accorded to the Confederate States.
If the cabinet of the Hague cannot, therefore, by force of the preceding, class all the
vessels of the Confederate States armed ibr war in the category bf privateers, much
less can it treat them as pirates, (as you call them in your dispatch of the 12th of this
month,) or consider the Sumter as engaged in a filibustering expedition—" engaged in
a piratical expedition against the commerce of the United States," as it reads in your
communication of the 2d of September.1
The subject was resumed in the ensuing October, when the Sumter
had again put into a Dutch port, namely, Paramaribo, and, in spite of
'the remonstrance of the United States consul, had been allowed to
coal and refit.   Mr. Seward immediately directs Mr. Pike to demand
explanations.   Mr. Pike loses no time in writing in peremptory terms:
The reappearance of the Sumter jn a port of the Netherlands, after so brief an interval, seems to disclose a deliberate purpose on the part of the persons engaged in the
1British Appendix, vol. vi, pp. 76, 77.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
329
o
Mr. Pike's previous letter does not pass unno-
rebellion against  the United States Government to practice upon the presumed
indifference, the expected favor, or the fancied weakness of the Dutch Government.
. During a period of forty-six days, during which we have heard of this piratical
vessel in the West Indies, it would appear that she had been twice entertained and
supplied at Dutch ports, and spent eighteen days under their shelter.
This can be no accidental circumstance.
" In the multitude of harbors with which the West India seas abound, the Sumter has
had no occasion to confine her visits so entirely to the ports of one nation, especially
one so scantily supplied with them as Holland. And the fact that she does so is, in my
judgment, not fairly susceptible of any other interpretation than the one I have given.
I feel convinced that the government of the Netherlands will see in this repeated
visit of the Sumter (this time, it appears, without any pretext) a distinct violation of
its neutrality according to its own views, as laid down in your excellency's communication to me of the 17th of September last, and a case which will call for the energetic
assertion of its purpose, expressed in the paper referred to, namely, not to allow its
ports to be made the base of hostile operations against the United States. For that
the Sumter is clearly making such use of the Dutch ports would seem to admit of no
controversy.1
In reply, Baron Van Zuylen repeats the refusal of the royal government to treat the Sumter as other than a ship of war. He observes
that the commission of the officer in command of her had been duly-
exhibited to the governor.   At the same time he informs Mr. Pike—
However, the government of the Netherlands, wishing to give a fresh proof of its
desire [to avoid] all that could give the slightest subject for complaint to the United
States, has just sent instructions to the colonial authorities, enjoining them not to
admit, except in case of shelter from stress, (reldche forc6e,) the vessels of war and privateers of the two belligerent parties, unless for twice twenty-four hours, and not to
permit them, when they are steamers, to provide themselves with a quantity of coal
mpre than sufficient for a run of twenty-four hours.2
The offensive tone of
ticed:
The feeling of distrust which seems to have dictated your last dispatch of the 8th
of this month, and which shows itself especially in some entirely erroneous aiq>recia-
tions of the conduct of the government of the Netherlands, gives to the last, strong
in its good faith and in its friendly intentions, just cause for astonishment, So, then,
the cabinet of which I have the honor to form part, deems that it may dispense with
undertaking a justification useless to all who examine impartially, and without passion, the events which have taken place.3
In the mean time, Mr. Seward had written a dispatch to Mr. Pike, of
the 17th October, in which he states, in explicit terms, " for the information of tbe government of the Netherlands, just what the United States
claim and expect in regard to the matter in debate."
They have asked for an explanation of the case, presented by the admission of the
Sumter by the Governor of Curacoa, if one can be satisfactorily given ; and if not,
then for a disavowal of that officer's proceedings, attended by a justly-deserved
rebuke.
"These demands have been made, not from any irritation or any sensibility of national
pride, but to make it sure that henceforth any piratical vessel fitted out by or under
the agency of disloyal American citizens, and cruising in pursuit of merchant-vessels of
the United States, shall not be admitted into either the continental or the colonial ports
of the Netherlands under any pretext whatever. If that assurance cannot be obtained
in some way, we must provide for the protection of our rights in some other way.
Thus the subject is one of a purely practical character; it- neither requires nor admits of debate or argument on'the part of the United States. If what is thus desired
shall be obtained by the United States in any way, they will be satisfied ; if it fails to
be obtained through the disinclination of the government of the Netherlands, its proceedings in this respect will be deemed unfriendly and injurious to the United States.
The United States being thus disposed to treat thd subject in a practical way, they are
not tenacious about the manner or form in which the due respect to their rights is
manifested by the government of the Netherlands, and still less about the considerations or arguments upon which that government regulates its own conduct in the
matter.   They regard the whole insurrection in this country as ephemeral; indeed,
1 British Appendix, vol. vi, p. 82.
* * Ibid., p. 84.
3 Ibid., p. 85.
I330
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
they believe that the attempt at piracy, under the name of privateering, made by the
insurgents, has already well nigh failed. While, therefore, they insist that shelter
shall not be afforded to the pirates by nations in friendship with the United States,
they, at the same time, are not unwilling to avoid grave debates concerning their rights
that might survive the existing controversy. It remains only to say, in this connection, that the course which the United States are pursuing in their complaints to the
government of the Netherlands is not peculiar to, but it is the same which has been
and which will be pursued toward any other maritime power on the occurrence of
similar grievances.
With these remarks I proceed to notice Baron Van Zuylen's communication. You
will reply to him that the UniteojStates unreservedly claim to determine for themselves
absolutely the character of the Sumter, she being a vessel fitted out, owned, armed,
sailed, and directed by American citizens who owe allegiance to the United States, and
who neither have nor can, in their piratical purposes and pursuits, have or claim any
political authority from any lawful source whatever.
The United States regard the vessel as piratical, and the persons by whom she is
manned and navigated as pirates.
The United States, therefore, cannot admit that the Sumter is a ship of war or a privateer, and so entitled to any privileges whatever, in either of those characters, in
the port of Curagoa; nor can they debate any such subject with the government of the
Netherlands.1
* Mr. Pike expresses his satisfaction at the restrictions placed by the
government of the Netherlands on the confederate vessels, but at the
same time regrets that the same treatment should have been adopted
toward the vessels of the United States; to which M. Van Zuylen replies that the United States Government having desired that measures
should be taken to prevent the prolonged stay in Dutch ports of the-
Sumter or other vessels in the seceding States, the King's government
had admitted the justice of the claim, but that the measures taken
could not reach one of the two parties exclusively; they must be general.
The new regulations led to a singular result. On the 8th of November the United States steamer Iroquois arrived off the port of Curagoa;
the governor informed Lieutenant Palmer, who was iu command of the
vessel, that her stay must be limited to forty-eight hours, and her supply of coal to twenty-four hours'consumption, although at the time the
United States had more than 1,300 tons of coal at Curagoa, which, by
the way, shows that they had established a depot there. Lieutenant
Palmer declined to enter the port on these terms, and his conduct in so
doing was ^approved by Mr. Seward. Mr. Pike is directed to ask for
explanations, with this remark from Mr. Seward:
If His Majesty's government shall approve of the proceedings of the governor of
Curagoa, it will become an important question what measure of hospitalities will be
due by us to the naval vessels and authorities of the Netherlands in similar cases.2
Thus, while the regulation was received with satisfaction by the
United States Government, as a restriction on Confederate vessels, an
attempt to enforce it against one of their own was looked upon as matter of grave offense. It so happened, however, that the Dutch government had, shortly before, on the suggestion of the governor of Curagoa,
revoked the order.
No sooner had this been done than the Government of the United
States desired its restoration. Mr. Pike is instructed to lose no time jn
"calling the attention of Mr. Stratenus to the subject of the intrusion
of insurgent piratical American vessels seeking shelter in the ports of
the Netherlands and their colonies. If you cannot obtain a decree excluding them altogether, it is thought that the government will have no
hesitation in restoring the restrictive policy which was adopted by it
under the representatives of its foreign affairs by Baron Van Zuylen."3
1 British Appendix, vol. vi, pp. 86,
2 Ibid., p. 91.
3 Ibid., p. 95.
87.r
OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
9 CM
ool
Mr. Pike was at the same time instructed to call upon the King's government to reconsider the subject of according to the Confederate States
the character of belligerents, and, in the then state of affairs, to revoke
the recognition.
Both proposals were declined by the King's government. The inconsistency of the demand for the restoration of the restrictive order is
pointed out by M. de Sombreff, the 'new minister of foreign affairs :
In this regard I permit myself to observe to yon that I could not understand how
your government could desire the re-establishment of measures which actually were,
and would again be, applicable to both parties, aud which were, at the time, the cause
why the Union ship Iroquois would not enter the port of Curagoa under the rule of said
restrictive measures.
It was on that occasion that the last were modified, which was brought to your notice
the 30th of December, 1861. •
It follows, from advices which have since reached the government, that the new commander of the Iroquois has expressed himself well satisfied to find the precedent restrictive measures withdrawn, and thus to have the privilege of taking as much coal
as-he might wish. These measures are also favorable to Netherlands commerce with
the United States, so that the interests of the two countries are in perfect accord.
If the instructions given before the month of December, 1861, we?e now returned to,
the government of the Netherlands might not only be taxed, with good reason, with
trifling, but would hurt its own interests, as well as those of the Union, considering
that the consequence of said instructions would be, as has been remarked in the communication of Baron de Zuylen, dated October 29, 1861, that the vessels of war of the
United States, also, could no longer be able to sojourn in the Netherlands East Indian
ports more than twice twenty -four hours, nor supply themselves with coal for a run of
more than twenty-four hours.1
A similar correspondence had, in the mean time, been going on between the United States Government and that of Brazil, in correspondence
consequence of the Sumter having, on the 7th of September, withBfazil~
1861, been allowed to enter the Brazilian port of Maranham, and to take
in a supply of coal there, notwithstanding the protest of the United
States consul. Mr. Webb, the United States minister at the court of
the Emperor, is instructed to "lose no time in calling the attention of
the Emperor's government to the affair."
You will ask explanations thereof, and, unless satisfactory explanations are i-eudered,
you will then inform His Majesty's government that the shelter and supplying of
pirates, as the Sumter is sheltered and supplied, in the ports of Brazil, are deemed an
unfriendly act by this Government, and will ask that such measures shall be taken in
regard to the case as will make the governor of Maranham sensible of His Majesty's
displeasure, and will prevent a recurrence of such injuries to the United States hereafter.
I hardly need say that the proceeding at Maranham is an occurrence of great surprise aud deep disquiet to the United States. That we have supposed that Brazil and
every other state on the American continent have an interest second only to our own
in the stability of the American Union, the downfall of which would, in our belief, inevitably be followed, sooner or later, by the decline and fall of every independent, nation
on this continent, which must in that case become once more a theater for the ambition
of European powers.
. Such respect for the sovereignty of the United States as one great nation owes to
another is an indispensable condition of friendly relations with foreign powers in the
present emergency. You will therefore take care not, for one moment, to admit into
debate any question of claim on the part of the insurgents to any rights, whether as a
sovereign or a belligerent.2
Mr. Webb thereupon addresses to Senhor Taques, the secretary ot
state for foreign affairs, a dispatch of prodigious length, but which ends
with the pertinent inquiry:
Whether it is or is not the intention of the Brazilian government to permit the
piratical letters of marque and privateers of the rebels of the United States to enter
into the ports of Brazil, and there find succor and material aid—"provisions and coal—
to coutinue their voyages" against the commerce of the United States?3
*^^^^»;
1 British Appendix, vol. vi, p.
2 Ibid., p. 4.
3lbid., p. 10.
99.332
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Senhor Taques replied, as the Baron van Zuylen had done before him,
in a most able paper, in which he reminded Mr.. Webb of the numerous
instances in which governments de facto had been admitted to the status
of belligerents, although their sovereign character had uot been acknowledged, pointing out that the recognition of belligerency carried
with it the consequence that the commissioned vessels of the acknowledged belligerent could not be treated as pira'tes, but must receive the
same treatment as those of the opponent.
The correspondence continaed, and, owing to the exceeding fertility
of Mr. Webb's pen, assumes very formidable proportions. It led to the
regulations which I have already mentioned; which regulations the
Presidents of the provinces were ordered to enforce.
Mr. Seward reviews the correspondence with evident dissatisfaction:
We cannot admit, and we are not likely to admit, that anything has occurred, to relieve Brazil, or any other power holding treaty relations with us, from fulfilling the
obligations of friendship toward us, which it has heretofore voluntarily assumed; much-
less can we admit that any such nation has a right, by adopting a character of neutrality^
to give hospitality,Shelter, and supplies to pirates engaged in destroying our commerce,
whether they affect to be public vessels of war, or are content to sail under cover of
pretended letters of marque granted by'the chief of their treasonable faction.
At the same time we are not looking ont for causes of conflict with maritime powers.
We state our complaints "whenever grievances are committed by them, and we ask the
redress due to us from friendly states. Unwilling to drag such powers into our own
domestic strife, we are content with a practical respect for our flag, and we engage in
no discussions with them about the unjust or unfriendly manifestations with which
that practical respect is sometimes attended. Acting on this principle, we have
brought to the notice of the Brazilian government the grievance committed against
us by the governor of Maranham. That government, instead of giving us redress, or.
taking any measures to prevent a repetition of the grievance, has avowed and sanctioned it.1
In the position thus assumed, the Brazilian government stands single and alone. We
cannot, with self-respect, further remonstrate nor debate. I confess that-ths attitude
assumed by Brazil embarrasses us, because it tends to encourage our internal enemies.
We trust, however, that we possess the ability to maintain and preserve our government against all enemies at home, however much aid and encouragement they may
receive from abroad.
It is not needful that you state to the Brazilian government any part of the contents
of this dispatch except its conclusions, which are these: 1st. We stand upon the position heretofore assumed, that the proceedings of the governor of Maranham are intolerable. .2d. We cannot further debate at Rio, nor can we change the field of the discussion from that capital to Washington. 3d. Conscious of our ability to protect all
our national rights, we neither importune nor menace any foreign state which may
deem it fit to do us wrong. But so fast as every such case matures we determine, with-
what prudence and firmness we can, the course which the emergency requires,2
Mr. Webb re-echoes:
We cannot go to war with all the world; and while circumstances compel us to
acquiesce in the conduct of England, Spain, and Holland, we cannot insist upon reparation from Brazil for having adopted, the same line of policy toward us.3
The Marquis d'Abrantes having succeeded Senhor Taques as minister
of foreign affairs, in reference to Mr. Seward's last dispatches writes, on
the lGth "of June, to Mr. Webb:
In view of the conclusions of the last of the dispatches referred to from the Government of the Union, the government of His Majesty the Emperor judges convenient to
regard at an end the discussion of the subject it treats, it being flattering to observe
that from it nothing has resulted in the least altering the relations of friendship and
good understanding between the two countries which it so much interests both to
maintain.
Hereupon Mr. Webb breaks out. After repeating verbatim the complaints set out in bis letter of the 18th of March, he continues:
1 British Appendix, vol. vi,
2 Ibid., p. 35.
3 Ibid., p. 39.
33.(—
OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
333
Here, as your excellency will perceive, is not only grave cause for complaint set
forth, but. a mode is pointed out in which the friendly relations heretofore existing
between the two countries can" be restored, viz, by a simple act of justice, reversing
the decision which Brazil has hastily made. If Brazil cannot meet the reasonable expectation of the Government of the United States, then the Secretary of State, speaking in the name of the President and the Government, claims, at least, as a concession
to the past friendly relations of the two countries, that Brazil will no longer occupy
toward the United Stales a more unfriendly position than any other power; but, by
following the example of other nations, place herself " on the same ground in relation
to the United States which is occupied by other maritime powers, and thus mitigate
the discontent" which it is made my duty to report to this Government. ,
But this is not all.    In a dispatch from Washington, dated the 3d April, the undersigned is instructed to say to the government of His Imperial-Majesty that the Gov-
fj^ninent of the United States, standing "upon the position heretofore assumed," declare
'"that the proceedings of the governor of Maranham are intolerable; and we cannot
:"i&rther debate at Rio, nor can we change the field of the discussion from that capital
to Washington."
And how are these complaints, remonstrances, and friendly intimations to Brazil,
from the Government of the United States, received by the imperial government?
*Why,the undersigned is called upon to apprise his Government that Brazil has "put an
end to this discussion upon theiaforesaid subject," and is happy to perceive that not " the
least alteration will result from it in the relations of friendship and good understanding between the countries."
IMost assuredly these are not the results which the Government of the United States
promised itself when it ordered-the undersigned to place before the government of
frazil the dispatches of the 18th of March, and the very significant extract from
that of the 3d of April; and while it is the duty of the undersigned to convey to his
Government an answer so very different from what he anticipated, self-respect demands
that he should not act as a mere automaton in the matter; and an earnest desire to restore
;and perpetuate the friendly relations which formerly existed between the two countries
compels him to remind your excellency that so desirable a result cannot be obtained
by utterly ignoring our complaints, by treating them as alike groundless and unmeaning, and by assuming that nothing>hasoceu_red to interrupt the good feeUngsfot disturb
the friendly relations between the two countries. The undersigned is grateful to a
kind Providence that in what has occurred the existing friendly relations between the
two governments have not been disturbed; but he is not unmindful that the good feelings upon which those friendly relations were based, and which is ever the best safe-
- guard for their continuance, have been trifled with by the conduct of the governor of
(Maranham, and which conduct has been defended, sustained, and approved by your
immediate predecessor, speaking in the name of the Imperial Government of Brazil.
The Government of the United States, for more than a year, has been actively engaged in putting down the greatest rebellion recorded in the history of the world. A
civil war, which has called into the field more than a million of soldiers, and which
imposed upon the Government of the United States the raising and equipping of an
' army of seven hundred thousand men, and a fleet of nearly five hundred vessels to do
battle for our national existence, has called forth the energies aiud exhibited the resources of a mighty people; and yet, in the hour of greatest peril, our Government has
not hesitated to tell the nations of the world which have done her wrong, when resistance to such wrong was impossible, that " the United States will not debate with other
states a question vital to its own existence," but content herself with pointing ontthe
■wrong done her, leaving fofrthe present the expiation of such wrong and injury solely
to the sense of justice and magnanimity of those who once styled themselves friends.
Hence, as our Secretary of State justly says,- " acting on this principle, we have brought
to the notice of the Brazilian government the grievance committed against us by the
President of Maranham." That Government, instead of giving us redress, or taking
measures to prevent a repetition of the grievance, has avowed and sustained it.
Hence the undersigned is instructed to say to the Brazilian government" that while
the United States cannot ask Brazil for less than the absolute exclusion of pirates from
her harbors, yet, standing as she does alone among nations, in the extent of her unfriendly attitude, if she would but place herself upon the same ground in relation to
the United States which is occupied by other maritime powers, it would mitigate the
discontent which you are authorized to express;" and, as if foreseeing the failure of
this appeal to the friendship and justice of Brazil, the undersigned is ordered to say, in
conclusion, that, "conscious of our ability to protect all our national rights, we neither
importune nor menace any foreign state which may deem it fit to do us wrong; but
so fast as every such case matures we determine, with what prudence and firmness we
can, the course which the emergency requires."
Inasmuch as the Government of the United States has definitively closed all further
discussion of the affair of the pirate Sumter, either here or at Washington, nothing of
the kind is intended in this dispatch; its sole object being to point out to your Excel-334
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
lency that, so far from nothing having occurred to disturb the good feeling upon which
is based the friendly relations between the United States and Brazil, the whole course
of your predecessor in relation to the visit of the pirate Sumter to Maranham, and the
present attitude of Brazil towards the piratical vessels belonging to the rebel States
and to our national vessels, is considered by the Government of Washington untenable,
unjust, and "intolerable."
It is quite unnecessary for the undersigned to repeat his ardent desire to draw closer
and render more permanent the relations between the United States and Brazil, and
the establishment by them of an "American policy," in contradistinction to what is the
recognized policy of Europe, as is^being developed by interference with the internal
affairs of Mexico; and he is pained to see all his efforts in this regard, and all the wishes
of his Government, set at naughfby the perseverance of Brazil in a course declared by
the Government of Washington to be more unfriendly than that of any other foreign
power; and by ignoring every fact, sentiment, arid position taken in the Washington
dispatches of the 18th March and 3d of April, and utterly refusing to perceive or
admit that the United States feels aggrieved by the conduct of Brazil, and confidently
expects that she will not persevere in maintaining a position more unfriendly than
that of any other maritime power. Adherence by Brazil to her present unfriendly
attitude is deprecated by the undersigned, not because he believes such a course calculated to cause a disruption of the peaceful relations existing between the two countries ; there exists no such danger. The Government of the United States has deraon-
stratedto the world that while struggling for its national existence against a gigantic
rebellion, it can submit with grace and a not unbecoming humility to the irritating
assaults made upon it in the hour of adversity, whether they emanate from ancient
enemies or professed friends. But nations, like individuals, while they frequently forgive injuries, do not always forget them. And it is because perseverance in her present
course by Brazil may. induce the people of the United States to forget the friendly feelings upon which the existing peaceful relations between the two countries are based
that the policy of your predecessor is deprecated.1
The discussion on this subject was revived in the ensuing year by the
arrival of the Alabama, and shortly afterward the Plorida and Georgia,
in Brazilian ports. The first-named ship took two American vessels
within Brazilian waters and burned them there. Notwithstanding which
•her commander was allowed to go on shore at the island of Fernando'
Nbronha, and there to obtain supplies for the vessel and to land the
prisoners. For this the officer commanding at Fernando de Noronha
was displaced. The Florida was allowed to enter the port of Pernam-»
buco, and these to refit and coal, in despite of the protest of the United
States consul that the Florida was a pirate and the consort of the Alabama, which had just before violated the neutrality of Brazilian waters.
I Nevertheless," says Mr. Webb, in writing to the Marquis d'Abrantes
on the 21st of May, 1863—
Because her commander represented that the ship required repairs to her engine
which could not be done within the twenty-four hours, the governor, in a communication to the pirate, now before the undersigned/dated the 9th of May, informed the applicant that, inasmuch as he represented to him that a compliance with his order to
leave in twenty-four hours will compel him to do so in a distressed condition, because
the repairs to his engine, necessary to his safety, cannot be completed in that time, and
would be illiberal and inhuman, and expose him to danger, and Brazil to the consequences ; and inasmuch as he, the governor, does not wish to be inhuman or illiberal,
or endanger the safety of the pirate., or to lessen his means of defense, or to expose him
to imminent risks, therefore, believing the representation to have been made in good
faith, and' that he cannot in safety continue his Cruise, (against American commerce
bound to Brazil,) unless given time to repair his engine, the said governor, representing the sovereignty of Brazil, and recognizing the traitors in rebellion against the
United States as beUigerents, does accord to the commander of the pirate bearing their
flag all the time he asks for repairs, and privileges of taking in such coals and provisions as may place him in a condition to continue his depredations upon the commerce
of a friendly power. A grosser breach of neutrality has never come to the knowledge
of the undersigned.2
He adds:
At this moment the ports of Brazil are made harbors of refuge and places of resort
and departure for three piratical vessels, avowedly designed to prey upon the commerce
1 British Appendix, vol. vi,
2 Ibid., vol. vi, p. 49.
PP
40, 41.-—«*• .»
OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
335
of the United States. The waters of Brazil are violated with impunity in this piratical work, and after the imperial government had admitted and declared its indignation
at such violation of sovereignty, the guilty, party is received with hospitality and
jitiendship by the governor of Bahia, and instead of being captured and imprisoned,
and his vessel detained, he is fitted, a.nd supplied with the necessary provisions and
coal, to enable him to continue his depredations upon American-commerce. The
^■W-jMves and streets of Bahia and Pernambuco have been, for weeks past, swarmed
with American sailors and passengers from merchantmen trading with Brazil which
have been captured, and the persons on board robbed, by the pirates of the Alabama,
Florida, and Georgia, and they have been compelled, in the ports of a friendly nation,
to witness their clothing and jewelry,, and even family relics, sold on the wharves and
in the streets of Bahia and Pernambuco, by their piratical captors, at a tenth of their
_t$Lue; while the piratical vessels and all onboard were received and treated as friends,
and supplied with the necessary materials to continue their nefarious practices. The
scenes which history informs us were rife in the seventeenth century, in the islands of
the West Indies, are now being enacted in this nineteenth century in the ports of Brazil,
and that through no fault of the imperial government—which has already done its
whole duty as rapidly as circumstances have permitted—but because the governors of
Pernambuco and Bahia, in their sympathy with piracy and pirates, have neglected
their duty to Brazil, and brought discredit upon the civilization of the age.1
-As regards the Alabama, which at this time had come into the port
of Bahia, Mr. Webb insists that she should have been seized by the
governor for her violation of Brazilian neutrality:
I Your excellency will not for a moment deny that, having by your official acts, and
those of the governor of Pernambuco, recognized the fact that this pirate has violated
the waters and outraged the sovereignty of Brazil, it is your duty, when opportunity
offers, to vindicate your violated sovereignty, and. by his capture, if possible, remunerate the injury done to American commerce within your waters. And should the
pirate come into this port when the ability of Brazil to capture and detain him admits
of no question, beyond all doubt the neglect to do so would be not only an unfriendly
act toward the United States, but would render Brazil responsible for all and every
aggression which he might commit on American commerce after leaving this port.2
* * * At this moment, the ports of Brazil are made harbors of refuge and places of
resort and departure for three piratical vessels, avowedly designed to prey upon the
commerce of the United States. The waters of Brazil are violated with impunity in
this piratical work, and after the Imperial Government had admitted and declared its
indignation at such violation of sovereignty, the guilty party is received with hospi-
ItSflity and friendship by the governor of Bahia, and instead, of being captured and
imprisoned, and his vessel detained, he is feted, and supplied with the necessary provisions and coal, to enable him to continue his depredations upon American commerce.1
The Marquis d'Abrantes answers, as to the non-seizure of the Alabama, that the governor of Bahia had not sufficient information to warrant him in taking such a measure; as to the Florida and Georgia, by
going over the same topics as his predecessor had done and with equal
ability.
The government of. Brazil did not seize the Alabama; but it did exclude that vessel from its ports for the future, for having made prizes in
Brazilian waters, and applied the same rule to the Tuscaloosa as being a
tender of the delinquent vessel.
It was immediately after this troublesome correspondence that the
Imperial Government promulgated the rules contained in the circular of
'June 23,1863, (set out in the 7th volume of American Documents, p.
110,) which, in point of stringency, far exceed what any other nation had
ever thought it necessary to enact. The United States had never adopted
any such rules, nor can it for a moment be said that Great Britain ought
to be bound by them.
This is the country of which, in the argument of the United States it
is stated, I presume in compliment to our distinguished Brazillian colleague :
In the American Case, and the documents to which it refers, there is sufficient indica-
1 British Appendix, vol. vi., p. 51.
•   3 Ibid., p. 50,oob
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
tion of the loyalty and efficiency with which the Brazilian government maintained its
sovereignty-against the aggressive efforts of the confederates.1
A similar question arose with the Spanish government on the entry of
correspondence the Sumter into Cadiz, with a-requisition tohaverepairsdone
with Spain. an(j to gQ^   After difficulties raised by the United States
Bepresentatives, permission was given, though the repairs were limited to
what was absolutely necessary.2
The same question arose with the French government when the
Sumter put into«St. Pierre, in the Island of Martinque, in No-
Correspondence ^ -« ,-._-■»-_ ~i •____     -i    ^ ^ it
with French govem- vember, 1861, and was permitted by the governor to coal
which permission was afterward approved of by the French
government.3
It arose in a still more striking form when the Florida put into Brest
to repair and coal; as we shall see more fully hereafter when I come to
the case of that vessel. Mr. Dayton, the United States minister at the
court of France, objected to her being received or being allowed to have
repairs done to her machinery, but his protest is in the mo*e moderate
tone of a statesman and a man of the world: we hear no more about" pirates;'' his objection is that, being possessed of sailing power, the vessel
did not require the aid of steam—an argument which was, however, overruled by the imperial council.4
This question was raised between the United States and
with°BrrtUh w»2m- Her Majesty's government on the arrival of the Sumter, on
the 30th July, 1861, at Trinidad, where she was allowed to
coal and to remain six days in port. This was, in due course, complained
of to Her Majesty's government. Mr. Seward declaring that "the armament, the insurgent flag, and the spurious commission should have told
the governor, as they sufficiently prove to Her Majesty's government,
that the Sumter is and can be nothing else than a piratteal vessel."5 Of
course this argument did not prevail with Her Majesty's government
any more than it did with those of the Netherlands, France, or Brazil.
"It was obvious that the confederates having once been acknowledged*/
as belligerents, the admission of their ships of war to the neutral ports
and harbors followed as the necessary consequence.
The objection to the reception of these vessels took a somewhat different and more telling form in the case of the confederate ship the Nashville, which, having left the confederate port of Charleston, had been
allowed to coal at Bermuda on her voyage to England.
On that voyage the Nashville committed one of those acts which
stained this hateful warfare with eternal opprobrium—that of setting
fire to a harmless trading-vessel and making her crew prisoners of war.
This proceeding was made a ground by Mr. Adams, on the arrival of
the Nashville, for claiming that the vessel should no^ be received into
a British port. In terms of just and honest indignation he writes to
Earl Bussell:
The act of wilfully burning a private merchant-ship while pursuing its way quietly
to its destination in its own country seems in itself little to harmonize with the general
sentiment among civilized and commercial nations, even when it is committed* undei~
the authority of a recognized belligerent; but when voluntarily undertaken by individuals not vested with the powers generally acknowledged to be necessary to justify
aggressive warfare, it approximates too closely within the definition of piracy to receive
the smallest countenance from any Christian people.   The undersigned qannot permit
1 Page 67.
3 British Appendix, vol. vi, pp. 117-119.
«3 See British Case, p. 17, and letter of Britisn Consul Lawless to Earl Russell, British
Appendix, vol. i, p. 257.
* British Appendix, vol. vi, pp. 132,133.
•   8 United States Documents, voL vi, p. 193.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
65 I
himself to doubt that Her Majesty's government, which has voluntarily renounced the
authority to wage private war at sea, would not fail to visit with its utmost indignation
any attempts to seek shelter under its jurisdiction from the consequences of indulging
a purely partisan malice in unauthorized acts of violence on the ocean.1
Mr. Morse, the United States consul at London, only expressed the
public feeling when he wrote to Mr. Seward:
The leading event of the current week has been the appearance of the corsair Nashville, from Charleston, in European waters, and her wanton and malicious destruction
of an American ship by burning about seventy-five miles west of Cape Clear, off the
southern coast of Ireland, and her bold entrance into a British port for coal and repairs
the day following the committal of the barbarous act. It has, as a matter of course,
created much comment, and no little excitemeut here.
So far as I can learn aud judge, the public voice here is very strong and outspoken
in condemning and denouncing the act as malicious and piratical. It has taken the
English people by surprise, and is doing much to enlighten them as to the character of
the enemy with whom we are dealing.2
But such an act could not be held to be sufficient ground of exclusion.
However revolting such a system of warfare, it was still within the
stern principle of international law, relative to war, which justifies both
the seizure and the destruction of enemy's ships and goods at sea,,on
the principle that whatever tends to impoverish the enemy is allowable.
The practice had been sanctioned by the conduct of the United States
themselves, in their last war with Great Britain.
When the civil war was over, it occurred to the United States Government that, though Captain Semmes had been admitted to parol,as
a prisoner of war, and could not therefore be proceeded against criminally under the law relating to treason, he might, nevertheless, be made
amenable to the penal law for the destruction of ships and cargoes belonging to citizens of the United States. But the idea was abandoned,
and Mr. John A. Bolles, Solicitor to the Navy Department of the United
States, in an article bearing his name, iu the July number of the g Atlantic Monthly,"3 under the title of | Why Semmes, of the Alabama,
was not tried," has fully explained the reasons, and among them has
made us acquaiuted with the course pursued by the United States Government in the war with England in 1812 and 1813. The question,
whether Semmes should be prosecuted or not, seems to have been referred by the President to Mr. Bolles and the law-officer of the Department, who appear to have entered upon and conducted the inquiry with
a discrimination, ability, and sense of justice which do them infinite
honor. In the article referred to Mr. Bolles, in the first place, observes
that—
By establishing a blockade of confederate ports, our Government had recognized the
confederates as belligerents, if not as a belligerent State, and had thus confessed that
confederate officers and men, military or naval, could not be treated as pirates or guerillas, so long as they obeyed the laws of war; the same recognition was made when cartels for exchange of prisoners were established between the Federal and confederate
authorities'; and, above all, when the Federal Executive, after the eourts had declared
confederate priv'ateersmen to be pirates, had deliberately set aside those judgments,
and admitted the captured and condemned officers and men of the Savannah and the
Jeff Davis, to exchange as prisoners of war.4
549.
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 92.
2 United States Documents, vol. ii.
3 Page 89.
4 " The reluctance with which this recognition was granted does not affect its validity.
After having refused, again and again, President Davis's offers of exchange, the Federal Executive, being at last notified that fourteen Union prisoners—six colonels, two
lieutenant-colonels, three majors, and three captains—had been shut up in felons'cells,
to be hung whenever the confederate privateers were executed, concluded to regard
those 'pirates' as lawful belligerents entitled to exchange."
22 B_D_
>o
oo<
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
This premised, Mr. Bolles writes:
Without consulting publicist or jurisconsult, it was easily possible to see and show
that we. as a Government, could not afford to prosecute and punish as a criminal any
naval officer for capturing and destroying the enemy's trading-vessels, as fast as possi-^
ble, not only without jiny attempt to send them in for adjudication, but with a determined purpose and policy not to do so.
This conclusion was the result of a careful study of our own naval history, and of a
thoughtful examination of future possibilities in the event of war between the
United States aud some great commercial nation.
I will not dwell upon this last»division of the topic, but content myself with a reference to that past theory and practice of our naval warfare which rendered it impossible to punish Semmes for having learned and practiced so successfully the lessons
taught by our own instruction and example in the Revolutionary War, when we wefe
rebels, and in the last war (1812) with Great Britain.
The earlier records are imperfect; but enough can be gathered from our naval historian, Cooper, to show that many of the vessels captured in the war of the revolution were destroyed at sea.
Of the history and policy of the later period we have abundant proofs.   Not less
than seventy-four British merchantmen were captured, and destroyed as soon as captured, under express instructions from the Navy Department, and in pursuance of a'
deliberate purpose and plan, without any attempt or intent to send or bring them in
as prizes for adjudication.   The orders of the Department upon this subject are numerous, emphatic, and carefully prepared.   They deserve to be studied and remembered I
and they effectually silence all American right or disposition to complain of SemmesJ
for having imitated our example in obedience to similar orders from the secretary of
the confederate navy.
The instructions to which I refer were addressed to Captains David Porter and O. H.
Perry, each in command of a squadron ; to Captain Charles Stewart, of the Constitution, twice; to Captain Charles Morris, of the Congress; Commandant Lewis Warringg
ton, of the Peacock; Commandant Johnstone Blakely, of the Wasp;  Master Com-,1
mandant Joseph Bainbridge, of the Frolic; Master Commandant George Parker, of thS
Siren; Master Commandant John O. Creighton,.of the Rattlesnake; Lieutenant Wills-
iam H. Allen, of the Argus; Lieutenant James Renshaw, of the Enterprise;  and
Master Ridgely, of the Erie.
Extracts from tbe instructions of the Department, which led in these immediate
burnings of captured vessels, will best show the precise purpose and deliberate policy
of the Government. I will, therefore, quote brief passages from some five or six different orders as samples of all:
"The great object," says one of them, "is the destruction of the commerce of th^r
euemy, and the bringing into port the prisoners, in order to exchange against our unfortunate, countrymen who may fall into his hands." " You will, therefore, man no
prize unless the value, place of capture, and other favorable circumstances, shall render
safe arrival morally certain." " You will not agree to the ransoming of any prized
" Grant no cartel nor liberate any prisoners except under circumstances of extreme and
unavoidable necessity."
Iu another it is said: "You will, therefore, unless in some extraordinary cases that
shall clearly warrant an exception, destroy all you capture, and, by thus retaining your
crew and continuing your cruise, your services may be enhanced tenfold."
"I haye it in command from the President strictly to prohibit the giving or accept:-,
iug, directly or indirectly, a challenge to combat ship to ship."
Again: " Your own sound judgment and observation wiU sufficiently demonstrate to
you how extremely precarious and injurious is the attempt to send in a prize, unless
taken very near a friendly port and under the most favorable ciur-u instances.
Policy,- interest, and duty combine to dictate the destruction of all captures, with the
above exceptions."
Another:- " The commerce of the enemy is the most vulnerable point of the enemy
we can attack, and its destruction the main object; and to this end aU your efforts
should be directed. Therefore, unless your prizes should be very valuable and near a
friendly port it will be imprudent and worse than useless to attempt to send them in;
the chances of recapture are excessively great; the crew, the'safety of the ship under
your command, would be diminished and endangered, as well as your own fame and
the national honor, by hazarding a battle after the reduction of your officers and crew
by manning prizes. In every point of view, then, it wiU be proper to destroy what
you capture, except valuable and compact articles, that may be transshipped. This
system gives to one ship the force of many."
Another order says that "a single cruiser, if ever so successful, can man but a few
prizes, and every prize is a serious diminution of her force; but a single cruiser destroying every captured vessel has the capacity of continuing, in full vigor, her destructive power, so long as her provisions and stores can be replenished either from friendlyOPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
339
ports or from the vessels captured.       * *       Thus has a single cruiser, upon
the destructive plan, the power, perhaps, of twenty acting upon pecuniary views alone;
* and thus may the employment of our small force in some degree com
pensate for the great inequality [of our force] compared with that of the enemy."
Such Were the policy, and the orders of President Madison and of the Secretary of the
Navy in 1812, 1813, 1814; and such, beyond question, would be the plan and the instructions of any administration under .he circumstauces.1
In conclusion Mr. Bolles says:
It is evident that after it had been, as it soon was, resolved that neither treason nor
piracy should be charged against Semmes before a military or naval tribunal, and that
his methods of capturing, " plundering," and destroying vessels should not be treated
as offenses against public law aud duty, but that he should be dealt with as a belligerent naval officer, bound to obey the laws of war and entitled to their protection, it
was needless to inquire where or by whom the Alabama was built, manned, armed, or
commissioned, or whether a government without an open port can legitimately own or
employ a naval force. These inquiries, however interesting or important they might
be in other connections, were of no sort of interest.or importance as elements of a trial
for violating the laws of war in the conduct of a cruiser subject to those laws and protected by them.
In this way the field and the duty of inquiry were reduced to the two subjects of
cruelty to prisoners and perfidy toward Captain Winslow and the power he represented.
The two questions thus left are dealt with by Mr. Bolles in the following number of the same review, in a most interesting paper, the result
being wholly to exculpate Semmes of every charge of ill treatment or
cruelty to prisoners, to acquit him of any charge of perfidy during the
engagement with the Kearsarge, but to maintain that he was guilty
of a violation of military honor in not surrendering himself as a prisoner
of war after being taken off by the Deerhound.
The British government having thus decided on acknowledging the
Confederate States.as a belligerent power, and, as a neces- R_g_i_tio__ P.
sary consequence, on the admission of confederate ships of June1.1861-
war into British ports on the same footing as those of the United States,
it only remains to be seen whether the same treatment was afforded to
both which impartial neutrality would require.
On the 1st of June, 1861, Her Majesty's order was issued prohibiting,
as has not been unusual in the case of modern maritime wars, and has
been general with reference to privateers, the introduction of prizes by
the ships of either belligerent into British ports.2 Whatever may, generally speaking, be the motive of such a regulation, it was, in the present instance, obviously a measure the effect of which was to place the
confederate vessels in a position of considerable disadvantage, seeing
that, their own ports being strictly blockaded, they were thus left without any port into which to take their prizes. Accordingly, as reported
in a dispatch from Lord Lyons to Earl Bussell, of the 17th June, 1861,
it was hailed by Mr. Seward as "likely to prove a death-blow to southern privateering.?' As it was clearly at the discretion of Her Majesty's
government to adopt this regulation or not, it must be admitted that,
thus far, there was no manifestation of the partiality by which that
government has been said to have been animated.
Iu January, 1862, after the war had been going on for some months,
circumstances arose which made further regulations as to HWH of 31
the admission of the armed vessels of the two belligerents Janua~-y>1862-
into British ports necessary. Instructions, bearing date the 31st January, 1862, were accordingly issued by the Government.2 One of these
had reference to the ports of the Bahamas in particular, the others to
the ports and waters of Her Majesty's dominions in general.
1 Page 97.
2 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 18,°40
o
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
The following state of things had' arisen at Nassau.   As has been sa:
AsioK___„_.        often repeated, the port of Nassau had been made the entrepot for the blockade-running trade, the natural consequence of which
had been that the waters of the colony were watched by, and their immediate vicinity made the crnising-ground of, FederaTships.
In October, 1861, Mr. Adams forwarded to Lord Bussell an intercepted letter from a Mr. Baldwin, whom he stated to be in the service!
of the insurgents, addressed to a Mr. Adderley, of Nassau, from which
he said that it appeared tha^ Nassau had been made, to some extent,
an entrepot for the transmission of contraband of war from Great Britain to the blockaded ports.1 The matter was referred by Lord Bussell
to the colonial office, and by that Department to the governor of the
colony, and the latter forwarded, in reply, on the 20th November, 1861,
a report from the receiver-general at Nassau, stating that no warlike
stores had been received at that port either from the United Kingdom
or elsewhere, nor had any munitions of war been shipped from Nassau
to the Confederate States.2 This report, received by Lord Bussell on.
the 31st of December, was communicated to Mr. Adams on the 8th of
January, 1862.3
Upon this the Case of the United States makes the following remark:
The United States with confidence assert, in view of what has been already shown,
that, had Earl Russell- serieusly inquired into the complaints of Mr. Adams, a state 0$
facts would have been disclosed entirely at variauce with this report—one which,
would have impelled Her Majesty's government to suppress what was going on at
Nassau. The foregoing facts were all within the reach of Her Majesty's government,
although at that time not within the reach of the government of the United States.
The failure to discover them after Mr. Adams had called attention to them, was a neglect of the diligence in the preservation of its neutrally, whiffi was "due" from Great
Britain to the United States; and it taints all the subsequent conduct of Great BritainJ
toward the United States during the struggle.4
Further on. Lord Bussell's communication is described as the "announcement of an imaginary condition of affairs:"5 thus making it appear that, at the date of Lord Bussell's communication, the report received from Nassau and transmitted by him was an unfaithful one;
whereas the fact was that, at the date of the report, no vessel laden
with munitions of war had arrived at Nassau.
It was not till the 8th of December that a vessel, the Gladiator, with
a cargo.of arms, suspected of being intended for the Confederate States,
arrived at Nassau. The United States consul at once sent a message
to the commander of the United States naval forces at Key West to
request the presence of a cruiser.6 On the 13th of December he reports
the " most opportune" arrival of the United States war-steamer Flam- •
beau from New Tork, and adds that her commander " is watching intently the movements of the rebel steamers.^ From a letter addressed
by the governor to the British naval officii on the station it appears
that the Flambeau kept her steam up ready for instant movement, causing considerable alarm among the shipping in the port; and that a
rumor prevailed that her commander meant to cut out the Gladiator,
or, at all events, to seize that vessel immediately on her leaving.8
The dispatches reporting this state of affairs were received in Lou-
1 United^States Documents, vol. i, p. 52§_
2 British Appendix, vol. v, p. 26.
3 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 57.
< Case of the United States, p. 232.
sibf®., p. 234.
• 6 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 44.
iT Ibid., p. 47.
.8 British. Appendix, vol. v, p. 27.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
341
don on the 16th of January, and the attention of the British govern*
ment was necessarily called to the peculiar position of the Bahama
Archipelago. On .the one hand, it was obvious that it would form a
convenient place, of resort for confederate privateers; while, on the
other, it seemed likely that its ports and waters would be used by the
United States war-vessels for the purpose of watching and pursuing
confederate vessels or others engaged in trade with the blockaded ports,
so that collisions in the waters of the colony or in their immediate
neighborhood would be almost certain to result. To prevent this it was
necessary to provide some special regulation.
About the same time the Nashville confederate war-steamer having
put into the port of Southampton for repairs and coal, the United
States war-steamer Tuscarora, which had coaled at the same port, was
found to be closely watching her, for the avowed purpose of intercepting
and seizing her on her again putting to sea. By keeping his steam up,
and keeping slips on his cable, the commander of the Tuscarora was
virtually, keeping-the Nashville blockaded, thus plainlyi making, the
waters of the Solent the base of naval operations.1
Upon this M. Calvo, in the second volume of his well-known work,
"Le droit international," after stating the facts relative to the two
vessels, says: a La corvette federale la Tuscarora entra dans le mfime
port pour surveiller son ennemi, et l'attaquer des qu'il reprendrait la
mer. Devant cette attitude hostile les autorites locales intervinrent, et
la Tuscarora, abandonnant son post d'observatiou sans toutefois renoncer
k ses projets, resta pres d'un mois dans les eaux anglaises au inepris
des regies les moins contestees du droit international.''2
In the preceding November, after the reception of the Sumter at
Trinidad, Mr. Seward had, through Lord Lyons, pressed upon the British government the propriety of adopting the rule laid down, as
he said, by the other powers of Europe, not to allow privateers to
remain for more than twenty-four hours in their ports.3.
Such a rule, relating exclusively to privateers, was not one which Her
Majesty's government were at all called upon to apply to commissioned
ships of war such as the Sumter any more than the other maritime
powers had done—Mr. Seward being, in this respect, altogether mistaken, as was shown by the readiness with which the other maritime
powers received the confederate vessels of war into their ports and
allowed them to stay there. Still, when, to prevent the possibility
of hostile collisions in their own ports, the British government found it
expedient to apply this rule to vessels of war indiscriminately, they
might be assured that in doing so they would give cause of satisfaction
rather than' of complaint to the United States Government.
The instructions issued were to the following effect: 1. No ship of
war or privateer of either belligerent was to be permitted to enter any
port, roadstead, or water in the Bahamas except by special leave of the
lieutenant-governor, or in case of stress of weather; and in case such
permission should be given, the vessel was, nevertheless, to be required
to go to sea as soon as possible, and with no supplies except such as
might be necessary for immediate use. 2. No ship of war or privateer
of either belligerent was to be permitted to use British ports or waters
as a station or place of resort for any warlike purpose, or for the purpose of obtaining any facilities of warlike equipment. 3. Such ships
or privateers entering British waters were to be required to depart
1 British Appendix, vol ii, p. 120.
2 Vol. ii, p. 423.
3 United States Documents, vol. i, p. 342.342
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
within twenty-four hours after entrance, except in case of stress
of weather, or requiring provisions or things for the crew or repairs; in which cases they were to go to sea as sodn as possible after
the expiration of the twenty-four hours, taking only the supplies necessary for immediate use; they were not to remain in port more than
twenty-four hours after the completion of necessary repairs. 4. Supplies to such ships or privateers were to be limited to what might be
necessary for the subsistence of the crew, and to sufficient coal to take
the vessel to the nearest port of its own country, or to some nearer
destination; and a vessel that had been supplied with coal in British
waters could not be again supplied with it within British jurisdiction
until after the expiration of three months from the date of the last
supply taken from a British port.
With reference to the regulation concerning Nassau, the case of the
United States has the following remark:
An order more unfriendly to the United States, more directly in the interest of the
'iaiSurgents, could not have been made even if founded upon Heyliger's friendly intimations to the colonial authorities. Under the construction practically put upon it, the
vessels of war of the United States were excluded from this harbor for any purpose,-
while it was open for free ingress and egress to vessels of the insurgents, purchased-
or built and owned by the authorities at Richmond, bringing their cotton to be
transshipped in British bottoms to Eraser, Trenholm & Co., in Liverpool, and taking
on board the cargoes of arms and munitions of war which have been dispatched
thither from Liverpool.1
And in another place it is observed:
The instructions of January 31, 1862, forbade both belligerents alike to enter the
port of Nassau, except by permission of the governer, or in stress of weather. That permission was lavishly given to every insurgent cruiser, but was granted churlishly, if
at all, to the vessels of the United States.2
How devoid of all foundation are these complaints will appear from
the facts stated in the British Counter Case, where it is observed:
It will perhaps be a matter of some little surprise to the tribunal to -learn that,
whereas on two occasions only did vessels visit the port of Nassau as confederate cruisers, there are no less than thirty-four visits of United States ships of war to the Bahama
Islands recorded during the time that the regulation was in force. On four occasions,,
at least, vessels of the United States exceeded the twenty-four hours' limit, and took
in coal by permission ; one of them also received permission to repair; several were,
engaged in pursuit of vessels suspected of being blockade-runners, and did not in every
instance relinquish the chase within British limits. Two prizes appear, indeed, to
have been captured by them, one within a mile of the shore, the other almost in port.3
The tabular statement of visits of United States vessels to the Bahamas
during the civil war, which is printed in the British Appendix, abundantly bears out the answer thus given.4
The general regulations applicable to all Her Majesty's ports, which,
iu conformitv with the wishes of the United
as we nave
seen, were
States Government, though not intended by the British government to
have any operation more favorable to one belligerent than the other,
nevertheless could not fail to prove very prejudicial to the confederates,
the strict blockade of whose ports left their ships of war without any
ports to which they could resort for repairs or supplies, or into which
they could take their prizes. The rule forbidding them a greater supply of coal than would suffice to take them to their nearest port, and
prohibiting also a renewal of the supply within three months, was obviously calculated to place them at the greatest possible disadvantage.
Compelled, from having no ports of their own, to keep the sea, their
means of doing so were necessarily lessened, and the regulation, in itself
1 Page 228.
2 Page 316.
3Pagesl09,110.
4 British Appendix, vol. v, p. 224.1
OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
343
so unfavorable to the confederate vessels, was rendered still more so by
the strict construction put on it by Her Majesty's government, by whom
the governors of the different colonies were instructed that, in case of
any special application for leave to coal at a British port within the
three months, if it appeared that any part of the former supply had
been consumed otherwise than in gaining the nearest port, not even
stress of weather should form a ground of exception.1 As no confederate vessel could seek its nearest port, this was practically to prevent
the possibility of a renewed supply under any circumstances within
the three months.
The attempts on the part of the United States to show that,any favor
was extended to confederate cruisers which was withheld from their
own vessels, appear to me signally to fail.
The only specific instances in which any cpmplaint has been made
(and if there had been.any others we may be quite sure we should have
heard of them) are the cases of the Keystone State, Quaker City, and the
Dacotah. As to the first two, the answer given in the British Counter
Case, en the authority of a letter from the governor of Bermuda to the
secretary of state for the colonies, and which is further. borne out by
the letters of the commanding officers of the vessels themselves, is as
follows:
An allusion is made in a foot-note at page 324 of the Case of the United States, to the
failure of the United States vessels Keystone State and Quaker City to obtain coal at
Bermuda in December, 1861. At that time there was no restriction on the coaling of
belligerent vessels. All that happened was, that the British admiral declined to supply the two vessels mentioned from the government stores, not having a sufficient
stock for his own vessels. A similar answer had, in the foregoing October, been returned to the commander of the Nashville, who had supplied himself from private
sources, but this, on account either of the scarcity or the high price of coal iu the
colony, the United States officers did not do.2
As regards the Dacotah, which was allowed to supply herself with
coal at Nassau, but only on an engagement from her commander that
his vessel should not, within ten days after leaving the port, be found
cruising within five miles of any, of the Bahama Islands, Governor Bay-
ley, in a letter to the secretary of state for the colonies, of the 2d May,
1863, states:
I have no distinct recollection of the special reasons which induced me to impose
the restrictions mentioned by the consul in the Dacotah's coaling ; I can only suppose
that I did this in consequence of the pertinacity with which Federal vessels about
that time resorted to the harbor on pretense of coaling, but really with the object of
watching the arrival and departure of English merchant-vessels, supposed to be
freighted with cargoes for the southern ports. Had not such prohibition been issued,
the harbor would have become a mere convenience for Federal men-of-war running in
and out to intercept British shipping. And that such conditions as I thought it my
duty to impose were tempered by a proper feeling of courtesy and humanity will, I
think, be made evident by the accompanying letters from the American consul on the
subject of the Federal man-of-war, the R. Cuyler, and the memoranda of my replies
indorsed upon them by myself.
On the whole, I am satisfied that I have acted with perfect impartiality in all my
dealings with Federal and confederate men-of-war. But I am not surprised that my
conduct should have been misrepresented by so hot-headed a partisan as the late
American consul, Mr. Whiting, whose ingenuity in misconstruction is well illustrated
by his reply to my letter of the 29th of September, of both of which papers I inclose
copies, with the indorsation of the draught of my replies to his last communication.
I think that these inclosures will be sufficient to prove that, in my demeanor to the
Federal men-of-war,' I have generally preserved an attitude of fairness and impartiality.   And that if at any time I have appeared to assume an unfriendly or inhospit-
1 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 10.
2 British Counter-Case, pp. 115,116; British Appendix, vol. v, p. 7; ymted States
Documents, vol. vi, p. 52.ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
able mien, the charge can be fully explained and defended by my desire to maintain
the security of a British possession and the rights of British subjects.1
Another subject of complaint is that partiality, inconsistent with
paniaiity neutrality, was exhibited .toward confederate vessels by
reason that these, as in the case of the Sumter, were permitted to coal, while liberty to form a depot of coal at Bermuda, for
the supply of their ships of war, was. denied to the United States. I
cannot suppose that any member of this tribunal could be misled by such
a contention. It is obvious" that to allow one belligerent to have a suis
ply always stored up and* ready, and to leave the other to take his
chance of the public market, are things essentially different, and that,*
far from the refusal of such an advantage to the United States being a
violation of neutrality, the concession would have been so in the oppqg
site direction. Moreover, such an act involves a forgetfulhess of one of
the elementary principles of international law. . A neutral is only justified iu allowing to a belligerent vessel the use of his ports and access to
his shores to obtain the things which the belligerent may lawfully procure. He has no right to allow the belligerent the use of his territory
on shore for belligerent purposes, which the permission to form a depot
would necessarily involve.
The practical answer to all these complaints is to be found in the
striking facts, stated in the British Counter-Case, with reference to the
number of visits to British ports by the ships of war of the two belligerents, and to the quantity of coal received by them respectively. The
statement in question is as follows:
During the course of the civil war, ten confederate cruisers visited British ports.
-The total number of such visits was twenty-five, eleven of which were made for the
purpose of effecting repairs.   Coal was taken in at sixteen of these visits, and on six*!
teen occasions the limit of stay fixed by the regulations was exceeded.   In one of'
these cases, however, the excess was no more than two hours, and in another, the delay was enforced in order to allow twenty-four hours to elapse between the departure-
of a United States merchant-vessel aud that of the confederate cruiser.   On the other
band, the returns which have been procured of visits of United States vessels of war|
to ports of Great Britain and the colonies, though necessarily imperfect, show a.Q ag-'
gregate total of 228 such Visits.  -On thirteen of these repairs were effected ; on forty--
five occasions supplies of coal were obtained;  and the twenty-four hours' limit of-
stay was forty-four times exceeded.   The total amount of coal obtained by confed-.i
erate cruisers in British ports during the whole course of the civil war, though it can-*
not be ascertained with accuracy, may be estimated to have amounted to about 2,800
tons.   The aggregate amount similarly supplied to vessels of the United States cannot
be estimated, from the want of data as to the supplies in many cases, but those cases
alone in which the quantities are recorded, show a total of over five thousand tons; and"
this, notwithstanding the United States navy had free access to their own coaling de-.,
pots, often close at hand.   In one case a vessel of war of the United.States, the Vanderbilt, alone received 2,000 tons of coal at different British ports within the space of"
less than two months, being more than two-thirds of the whole amount obtained from
first to last by confederate vessels.2
The second head of complaint has assumed a more sensational and
supplies of arms effective form, in representing Great Britain as " the arse-
. obtained from Great i       , ■% -_-_,. < _-»   * t __.■_■_
Britain. nal, the navy-yard, and the treasury of the insurgents.77
Again and again has this highly colored representation been paraded.
Let us see what, when stripped of rhetorical flourish, it really amounts to.
Having determined to support their effort to establish their iudepen-.
dence by war, the confederates of course required arms and munitious of
war. Both were to be had in Great Britain in abundance. The commercial
relations of the Southern States had been principally with Great
Britain. It was natural that'in Great Britain that they should seek the
arms which were so essentially necessary to them.   But arms and ma-
British Appendix, vol. 1, p. 79.
3 Bage 118.
**^«__iOPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
345
o
nitions of war are not to be had for nothing. It was necessary, therefore, that arrangements should be made for the deposit'of funds in England to pay for the articles bought there. To carry on these operations
—to purchase the articles required, to pay for them, to ship them—
agents were, of course, necessary. Agents were accordingly established in England and provided with the necessary funds. Thus far, no
one can say that there was anything contrary to the law of nations, or
to the municipal law, or to obligations morally incumbent on a neutral
government or a neutral people. As Jefferson said more than three-
quarters of a century ago :
Onr citizens have been always free to make, vend, and export arms. It is the constant occupation and livelihood of some of them. To suppress their callings, the only
means perhaps of their subsistence, because a war exists in foreign and distant countries, in which we have no concern, would scarcely be expected. It would be hard in
principle, and impossible in practice. The law of nations, therefore, respecting the
rights of those at peace, does not require from them such an internal derangement in
their occupations. It is satisfied with the external penalty pronounced in the President's proclamation—that of confiscation of such portion of these arms as shall fall
into the hands of any of the belligerent powers on their way to the ports of their enemies. . To this penalty our citizens are warned that they will be abandoned, aud that
even private contraventions may work no inequality between the parties at war, the
benefit of them will be left equally free and open to all.
Substitute Her Majesty's proclamation and Her Majesty's subjects for
the American phraseology, and the cases are identically the same.
But had the United States no arsenal in Great Britain1? As we have
seen, arms and munitions of war were purchased by the United States
in Great Britain to the amount of £2,000,000 sterling. Several agents,
Colonel Thomas, Colonel Schuyler, Mr. J. B. Schuyler, Mr. Tomes, were
sent over to order aud select the arms, and forward them to the United
States.
It appears from the British Counter Case, and the documents therein
referred to, that—
Colonel Thomas, of the United States Army, was in England during the war, and
came over to England to superintend the purchases of military stores. Colonel G. L.
Schuyler was, in July, 1861, appointed by the President of the United States "a duly
authorized agent to purchase arms in Europe for the War Department." He received
his instructions from the Secretary of War, with a memorandum from General J. W.
Ripley, of the Ordnance Department at Washington, specifying the arms to be purchased,
viz, 100,000 rifle muskets with bayonets, 10,000 cavalry carbines, 10,000 revolvers, and
20,000 sahers. The financial arrangements for these purchases were to be made by the
Secretary to the Treasury with Messrs. Baring, financial agents for the United States
in London, and a credit of $2,000,000 was appropriated for the purpose.
In the summer or autumn of 1861, Mr. J. R. Schuyler and Mr. Tomes, of the firm of
Schuyler, Hartley & Graham, of New York, visited Birmingham, and, after communicating with the principal rifle, bayonet, aud sword manufacturers there, gave orders
for as many of those articles as their respective manufactories were capable of supplying, the goods to be paid for on delivery to them at a place to be subsequently named,
or on shipment. Messrs. Schuyler aud Tomes made no concealment of the fact thaij
these arihs were destined for the American Government, and they intimated their
intentiou of continuing unlimited orders for a period of two years. They took warehouses in Birmingham for the receipt of arms when completed, and shipped them
through the agency of Messrs. Baring Brothers, and Messrs. Brown, Shipley & Co., of
Liverpool. It appears from the returns made to Congress of arms purchased by the
United States War Department up to December, 1862, that 8,650 rifles and 232 revolvers
of English manufacture had at that time been supplied by Messrs. Schuyler, Hartley
& Graham ; but Mr. Schuyler is also believed to have acted as agent for the purchase
of arms for the State of New York. Messrs. Schuyler _ind Tomes were soon followed
to Birmingham, by Mr. Lockwood, of New York, who had entered into a contract
for the supply of rifles, bayonets, and swords to the War Department at Washington.
He also gave unlimited orders for such articles, acting, however, to some extent, in
concert with Messrs. Schuyler and Tomes, and shipping the goods through the agency
of the same houses at Liverpool. The effect of these orders was to raise the prices in
the Birmingham gun trade to the extent of 20 per cent.; indeed, the price of rifles
rose from 52s. to 75s. each.346
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
A Mr. Laumout Dupont also came to England, furnished with a credit '
of £82,800 on Messrs. Baring, and purchased and shipped saltpeter to
the amount of very nearly £80,000.
Messrs. Baylor, Vickers & Co., of New York, Liverpool, and London,
bought and shipped to the United States large^uantities of small-arms.
They were supplied from Birmingham alone with 156,000 rifles between
June, 1862, and July, 1863. They acted very extensively as agents of the
United States Government, and submitted to that Government large proposals from the Birmingham Small-Arms Company. The Assistant
Secretary of War at Washington, in a letter addressed to them on the
20th October, 1862, directly sanctioned an arrangement for the supply
of 100,000 rifles, and the acceptance of this order was duly notified to
the Secretary of War by a letter from Birmingham, dated November 4,
1862. The arms were sent to Liverpool for shipment.   In December,
1863, fifty 68-pounder guns were proved at the royal arsenal at Woolwich, at the request of Messrs. T. and C. Hood, and, after proof, were
taken away by Messrs. Naylor & Co., and shipped to New York. Mr.
Marcellus Hartley, of the firm of Schuyler, Hartley & Graham, already
mentioned, was also a large purchaser of small-arms in London during
the latter half of the year 1862.1
Warehouses were openly taken at Birmingham for the reception of
arms when completed, after which they were shipped through the agency
of Messrs. Barings and of Brown, Shipley & Co., and Wright & Co.,
of Liverpool.
Had the United States no treasury in Great Britain ? No less a one
than the great house of Baring Brothers, with whom large credits were
opened. The house appears to have been energetic in its efforts in furthering the United States armaments. "You will please express my
-acknowledgments," writes the United States Secretary of War to Mr.
Schuyler, "to Messrs. Baring Brothers & Co., for their prompt and patriotic action in facilitating your operations. The terms offered by
Messrs. Baring.Brothers & Co., namely, 1 per cent, commission and 5
per cent, interest per annum, as agreed upon by them with the Navy
Department, are approved." 2
Of course the " prompt and patriotic action" of Baring Brothers & Co.
was in perfect conformity with neutral duties. But, what would have
been said, if that great and wealthy house, its leading member having
an influential voice in the House of Commons, had undertaken and exhibited equally "prompt and patriotic action" in facilitating confederate operations on the terms of 1 per cent, commission-and 5 per cent,
interest ? or, was there to be one law for the United States and another
for the confederates'? Her Majesty's government did not think so, and
.Great Britain remained an arsenal for the latter as well as for the former.
Next as to Great Britain having been, as it is said, "the navy-yard
of the insurgents."
It was, of course, impossible to prevent the confederate government,
reduced to desperate straits by the blockade, and in want of
ships of war, from resorting to the ship-builders' yards of
Great Britain. It was impossible to^ prevent the ship-builders, who
looked upon the furnishing of such vessels as purely commercial transactions—the Messrs. Laird who built the Alabama having been perfectly
willing, as appears from their correspondence with a Mr. Howard, who
professed to have authority to enter into a contract with them, to baild
1 British Counter Case, pp. 52-54; British Appendix, vol. vi, pp. 153-160, 173,188-
193.
2 British Appendix, vol. vi, p. 154.
Ships obtained fro
Great Britain.OPINIONS   OP   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
347
Steps taken by the
British Government.
vessels for the Federal Government, to supply ships to the latter as well
as to the insurgents—and who appear to have thought that, so long as
the ships were not armed in British waters, such transaction would not
be within the foreign-enlistment act—from entering into such contracts.
All the government could do was to use reasonable care to see that the
act was not violated.
Two vessels of war, and two only, the Florida and the Alabama,
equipped in British waters, found their way into the hands of the confederates. Whether, in respect of them, the British authorities were
wanting in due diligence, will be matter for future consideration, when
these vessels come specifically under review. The most unjustifiable
charge that the government were willfully wanting in the discharge of
their duty from motives of partiality has, I hope, been already disposed
of. Every other vessel built or equipped in British waters for the war
service of the confederate government was prevented by the
act of the British government from coming into their hands.
Immediate and untiring attention was paid to the frequent applications
of Mr. Adams, which for the most part turned out to have proceeded
on erroneous information. It may have been that, in the cases of the
Florida and the Alabama, the local officers may have been somewhat
too much disposed to leave it to the United States officers to make out
the case against the vessels. But such, as we have seen, had been the
traditional view of the matter, not only iu England but in the United
States. These officers may have attached too much importance to the
fact that the vessels, though equipped for receiving arms, were not actually armed before leaving the port. In that they only shared the opinion
of two distinguished judges in the court of exchequer. But when the
authorities had become thoroughly alive to what was going on, no vessel of war to which the notice of the Government was called, and which
proved to be intended for war, was suffered to escape. An enumeration
of the instances on which inquiry was instituted by Her Majesty's government, with the results, will set this part of the case in its true light,
and show the flagrant injustice of the wholesale accusations which have
been so unwarrantably made.
The first case in which a representation was made by Mr. Adams as
to a vessel supposed to be fitting out in En gland for warlike
purposes against the United States, in violation of the foreign enlistment act, was that of the Bermuda. Mr. Adams's letter was
dated the 15th of August, 1861. The principal grounds of suspicion alleged against the vessel were that she was " ostensibly owned by the
commercial house of Fraser, Trenholm & Co., of Liverpool, well known
to consist in part of Americans, in sympathy with the Insurgents in the
United States;" that she was armed with guns, and had been for some
time taking in crates, cases, and barrels, believed to contain arms and
ammunition of all kinds ordinarily used in carrying on war. Mr. Adams
continues:
This cargo is nominally entered as destined to Havana, in the island of Cuba, but her
armament and cargo are of such a nature as to render it morally certain that the merchants who claim to be the owners can have no intention of dispatching her on any
errand of mercy or of peace.
I am informed that this vessel will sail in a day or two ; I therefore feel under the
highest obligation to submit the information I have obtained as the ground for application for a prompt and effective investigation of the truth of the allegations while
there is time. Not doubting the earnest disposition of Her Majesty's government faithfully to adhere to the principles of neutrality to which it has pledged itself, I ask, on
the part of the United States, for no more than a simple enforcement of the law, in
case it shall appear that evil-minded persons are seeking to set it at naught.1
The Bermuda.
m
m¥
348
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Mr. Adams, it would seem, entertained none of those notions of the
duty or the necessity of having recourse to prerogative force in order
efficiently to observe the obligations of neutrality, of which we hear so
much in the argument of the United States.
Inqillry was at once made by the government. The collector of customs at West Hartlepool, where the vesflfel was, reported the next day
as follows:
Finding, from a communicati<Jh wl$yph I had seen from the American consul at Leeds
to his broker here, that the steamer in question was suspected to be fitting out at this
port for the purpose of being used as a- privateer for the Confederate States, I have been
keeping an eye on her, but I see nothing to indicate such to be her object, either as
regards her external equipments, or the character of her crew, or anything in her ease
more than usual to give ground for remark, unless it be the circumstance "that a large
portion of her cargo consists of arms aud ammunition; and it is possible that, although
the destination of the vessel ostensibly is Havana, it may be the design eventually tp
run some if not the whole of the goods on board into the States referred to.9
The«rest of the information collected pointed to a similar conclusion,
and Mr. Adams was ac^rdingly informed, on the advice of the attorney
general, that the vessel did not come within the terms of the foreign?
enlistment act, (to which, in his letter, he had referred,) and that there
was no ground for any interference with the clearance or departure.
The Bermuda turned out, in fact, to be a blockade-runner. She sailed
from Liverpool with cargo for Savannah, and succeeded in entering that
port and returning to Liverpool. On her second voyage she was captured by a United States ship, and condemned as prize.
The next cases in order of time to which Mr. Adams called the attention of the British government were those of the Oreto or Florida^
and of the Alabama, originally known as No. 290.   As I shall havetffl
enter in detail into the facts connected with these vessels further on,
I will not here allude to them more particularly.
On the 16th January, 1863, Mr. Adams made a representation to Earl
Bussell respecting the Georgiana, a vessel built at GlasgovjS
and then fitting out at Liverpool, which he stated he " ha#
reason to believe was intended to pursue a similar course with that formerly called No. 290—to wit, the destruction of the commerce of the
United States." Mr. Adams inclosed a letter from the United States:
consul in Loudon, "giving," as he said, the "particulars based upon
credible information received by him, the authority for which it is not
in his power to disclose," and he thus concludes his letter:
I therefore solicit the interposition of Her Majesty's government, at least so far as
to enable me to procure further evidence to establish the proof of the allegations here
made in season for the prevention of this nefarious enterprise.9
Lord Bussell informed Mr. Adams on the following day, the 17th,
that he had communicated copies of his letter and its inclosure to the
ISp-aTd of treasury and to the secretary of state for the home department without delay, and had requested that orders might be sent by
telegraph to the proper authorities at Liverpool, enjoining them to take
such steps in the matter as might legally be taken.   He added:
I think i t right, however, to observe that Her Majesty's government cannot be an?
swerable for any difficijOljjy which may bo experienced in oarrying out those orders, in
consequence of the evidence ou^which the statement of the United States consul Ijj_
made being withheld I'rmn 11u-m.'
Inquiries were accordingly made, both by the customs officers and by
the detective police at ^Liverpool, but it was found that the vessel was
not in any way adapted for warlike purposes, and that from the nature
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 134.
9 Ibid., p. 14f9$*
3 Ibid., p. 14f|£j
The Georgiana.OPINIONS  OP  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
349
Vessels afGlasgow.
of her build, her cargo, and other attendant circumstances, she seemed
to be intended to run the blockade; and such, in fact, proved to be the
case.
On the 21st of March, 1863, Lord Bussell wrote to Mr. Adams " with
reference to a report that vessels of war were being built
at Glasgow for the so-styled Confederate States; that it
appeared from information collected by the commissioner of customs
that there were only two large steamers in course of construction at the
yard of Messrs. Thompson & Co.; that one of them had the appearance
of being constructed to receive armor-plates, but that the bottom was
not more than half plated, and that the planking of her top-sides had
only just commenced." The other, Lord Bussell wrote, was a screw-
steamer intended to be employed in the Mediterranean trade, but
neither of these vessels could be completed for several months.1
In forwarding this letter to Mr. Seward, Mr. Adams stated :
It is proper to mention that the investigation appears to have been initiated by his
lordship upon information not furnished from this legation, aud that Lord Russell's
communication to me was perfectly spontaneous.2
Mr. Adams's letter of acknowledgment to Earl Bussell is as follows:
My Lord: I had the honor to receive your lordship's note of the 21st instant, apprising me of the preparations making in the yard of Messrs. Thompson & Co. of a
vessel evidently constructed for hostile purposes.
Information of the same nature received from other sources has led me to a belief
that this is one of a number intended to carry on the piratical species of warfare practiced by the insurgents against the commerce of the United States, in accordance with
the plans laid down in the intercepted correspondence which I had the honor some
time since to lay before you. It is a source of much gratification to me to learn that
this proceeding is exciting the attention of Her Majesty's government.3
The intercepted correspondence alluded to by Mr. Adams had been
forwarded by him to Earl Bussell on the 9th of February, 1863.4 It
related to arrangements for the issue of a loan in England, on account
of the confederate government, for the export of munitions of war to
the Confederate States, and also to a supposed contract made by the
confederate navy department with a Mr. Sanders, for the construction
in England of six iron-clad steamers, combining the capacities of freighting and fighting ships, iu a manner which could enable them to force
the blockade. A correspondence ensued in which Lord Russell denied
that the papers proved any overt acts against the law which warranted
a criminal prosecution of the parties concerned. He added, however,
in a note of the 2d of April, 1863, that—
In view of the statements contained in the intercepted correspondence, Her Majesty's
government have renewed the instructions already given to the custom-house authorities of the several British ports where ships of war may be constructed, and by tbe
secretary of state for the home department to various authorities with whom he is in
communication, to endeavor to discover and obtain legal evidence of any violation of
the foreign-enlistment act with a view to the strict enforcement of that statute when?
ever it can be readily shown to be infringed, and Her Majesty's government would be
obliged to you to communicate to them, or to the local authorities at the several ports,
auy.evidence of illegal acts which may from time to time become known to you.fi
On the 26th of March, 1863, Mr. Adams wrote to Earl Bussell, forwarding an extract of a letter from Mr. Dudley, the United   The Phantom and
States consul at Liverpool, on the subject of two vessels, So"therner-
the Phantom and the Southerner, which the consul believed to be intended for confederate cruisers.6   The principal reason for Mr. Dud-
1 United States Documents, vol. ii, p. 203.
9 Ibid., p. 704.
3 Ibid., p. 703.
* Ibid, vol. i, pp. 562-574.
6 Ibid., p. 590.
6 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 167.350
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
ley's suspicions seems to have been the connection of the firms of Fraser, Trenholm & Co., and Fawcett, Preston &, Co., with these vessels.
He says at the end of the letter: " 1 suppose it will be impossible for
me to obtain legal evidence against these two vessels, and nothing short
of this will satisfy this government." Even of the information furnished by Mr. Dudley, part—namely, that the last-named of these two
vessels, the Southerner, had arrived at Liverpool—was erroneous, and
was corrected by Mr. Adams in his note, according to later advices
received from Liverpool.
Mr. Adams was informed on the following day that immediate inquiry
would be made on the subject, and inquiries were accordingly at once
made, as in the case of the Georgiana, both through the customs authorities at Liverpool and by means of detective poliee officers, as to
these two vessels. They failed to produce any evidence against them,
and indeed one of them turned out to be a blockade-runner, and the
other was afterwards engaged in trade in the Mediterranean. Iu acknowledgment of the steps which had been taken, Mr. Adams wrote as
follows to Earl Bussell on the 6th of April, 1863 :
It is a source of great satisfaction to me to recognize the readiness which Her Majesty's government has thus manifested to make the investigations desired, as well as
to receive the assurances of its determination to maintain a close observation of future
movements of an unusual character that justify suspicions of any evil intent.1
On the 28th March, 1863, Mr. Dudley, the United States consul at
The Alexandra. Liverpool, wrote to the collector of customs at that port, forwarding six depositions relative to a vessel called the Alexandra, and
applying for her seizure. Copies of these depositions were also forwarded to Earl Bussell, by Mr. Adams, on the 31st of March; and after
further inquiry by the authorities, the ship was seized on the 5th of
April. Mr. Adams, being informed of this step, wrote on the 6th of
April to Earl Bussell to express his "lively satisfaction."2
The history of this vessel is well known.   The proceedings which
_/ i o
were instituted by the government in the proper court, failed, under the
direction of the lord chief baron to the jury that, to establish the intention that the vessel had been equipped for the purpose of war, it was
necessary that she should have been armed, as well as fitted for the
reception of guns. The jury having given a verdict against the Crown,
the application to the court of exchequer for a new trial, on the ground
of misdirection of the judge in so directing the jury, failed by reason
of the judges of that court being equally divided iu opinion. Writing
to Mi.. Adams after the verdict had been given, Mr. Seward says:
You are authorized and expected to assure Earl Russell that this Government is entirely satisfied that Her Majesty's government have conducted the proceedings iu that
case with perfect good faith and honor, and that they are well disposed to prevent the
fitting out of armed vessels in British ports to depredate upon American commerce
and to make war against the United States.
This Government is satisfied that the law-officers of the Crown have performed their
duties in regard to the case of the Alexandra with a siucere conviction of the adequacy of the law of Great Britain, and a sincere desire to give it effect.3
An appeal was made to the court of exchequer chamber, but it
turned out that, owing to an omission in the act constituting the latter,
no provision had been made for such a case.
After a detention of a year, pending the trial and appeal, the Alexandra was liberated.
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 171.
2 Ibid., p. 231.
3 United States Documents, vol. ii, p. 291.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
QC
51
She went first to Bermuda, then to Halifax, and.from thence to Nassau, where, after repeated investigations, she was again seized, in December, 1864,'on a fresh charge of an intention to employ her as a ship
of war in the confederate service, and though the proceedings in the
vice-admiralty court there ended in an acquittal, the decision did not
take place till the end of May, 1865, when the civil war was at an end.
The costs and damages incurred by the government on account of the
two seizures amounted to over £4,000.
On the 6th of April, 1863, a dispatch was received from the British
consul at New York, in which allusion was made to a report The south Carolina:
which had appeared in the newspapers of that city, that the Georgiana,
which, as I have already said, was no more than a blockade-runner, and
which is so denominated in the United States Documents,1 was intended
to be armed as a confederate cruiser, and that a similar vessel, called
the South Carolina, was building in the Clyde. The matter was referred
to the commissioners of customs, and the latter reported, on the 13th
of April, as follows:
On the receipt of the said letter, we referred the same to our collector at Glasgow
for his inquiry respecting the South Carolina; and it appears from the report of the
measuring surveyor of shipping at that port, which has been forwarded to us by the
collector, that there are about forty ships building at the present time in the port, and
it may be intended to give one of them that name; that the only ship apparently designed, for a ship of war is the one building in the yard of Messrs. Thomson, referred
to in our report to fonr lordships of the 11th -ultimo, and that she is still in a very unfinished state. The measuring surveyor adds that he is giving his closest attention to
this vessel, and will take care to keep the collector fully informed of her progress from
time to time. *
A report having appeared in the "Daily News," on the 17th of
March, 1863, that the Gibraltar, which, after acting as a gThe Gibraltar or
confederate ship of war under the name of the Sumter, had Sumler-
been sold to private owners, and had arrived at Liverpool in the previous month, was fitting out at Birkenhead as a vessel of war, Lord Bus-
sell at ouce requested that inquiries might be made on the subject, and
communicated the result to Mr. Adams. I shall have subsequently to
go fully into the case of this vessel also, which was an object of constant vigilance during her stay at Liverpool, arid which was not permitted to leave until the authorities were satisfied that there was no
intention of again equipping her as a confederate cruiser.
On the 7th of July, 1863, Mr. Dudley forwarded to the collector of
customs at Liverpool several depositions relative to two iron-} Iron.cfad9 i Bir.
clad steamships building in Messrs. Lairds' yard at Birken- kenhead-
head, which were alleged to be intended for the service of the Confederate States, one only of which had at the time been launched, the other
being still in process of construction. Bepresentations were also made
on the subject by Mr. Adams, and a lengthened correspondence ensued.
A strict watch was from the first kept upon the vessels, and inquiries
made as to their character and destination. It was at first reported that they were built for the government of France. Subsequently
they were claimed by a M. Bravay, of Paris, who produced a legal instrument, froni which it appeared that the vessels had, in fact, been built
to the order of Captain Bullock, (the confederate agent who had been
instrumental in obtaining the Florida and Alabama for the confederate
government,) but that Bullock had transferred his interest in them to
Bravay.   M. Bravay stated that he had purchased them for the Viceroy
772
1 Vol. i, p. 77
2 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 163.352
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
The Canton (
pero.
of Egypt; but the Yiceroj', on inquiry, disclaimed any intention of acquiring them.
On the 9th of September, 1863, a letter was addressed to the builders, Messrs. Laird, informing them that the government could not permit the vessels to leave the Mersey until satisfactory evidence could be
given of their destination, or until the inquiries then being prosecuted
on the subject should be brought to a conclusion; and, on the 9th of
October following, both vessels were seized and given over into the care
of the captain of Her Majesty's ship Majestic, then stationed at Liverpool. A commission was seut to Egypt for the purpose of procuring
evidence with a view to their condemnation, but the result appearing
doubtful, it was decided by the government to purchase them, though
it was not in want of them, rather than run the risk of their passing
directly or indirectly into the hands of a belligerent. They were accord--
ingly purchased in May, 1864, for the sum of _£220,000.x
Mention has already been made of the inquiries instituted by the
am-government as to vessels supposed to be building for the
Confederate States at Glasgow. On the 17th of October,
1863, Mr. Adams wrote to Earl Bussell, stating that, in addition to a
formidable steam-ram in process of construction at that port, there was
also another steamer ready to be launched, called the Canton, having
all the characteristics of a war-vessel, which was about to be fitted out
and dispatched with the same intent from the same place. Mr. Adams
iuclosed some extracts from a letter from the United States consul at
Glategow, who, he said, entertained no doubt as to the destination of the
vessel, although, from the secrecy used in the process of construction
and preparation, he had been slow in gainiug evidence on which to base
a representation.2
Directions were at once given to the proper authorities to make inquiries and to take any measures which might legally be possible. Thej
investigations remained for some time without any definite result. The
vessel was carefully examined. It appeared that though in course of j
being fitted as a passenger-ship, she possessed some peculiarities of
construction which rendered her capable of being converted into a vessel serviceable for warlike use. The builders, however, and the firm
• through whom she had been contracted for, disclaimed any knowledge
of such an intention, and declared their belief that she was intended
for the merchant service. The evidence as to her being intended for
the confederate service, which was supplied by the United States consul, did not go beyond vague rumor and hearsay.
The vessel was launched on the 29th of October, 1863. On the 16th
of November the collector of customs at Glasgow reported that, as she
was being rapidly got ready for sea, he had. arranged with the captain
of Her Majesty's ship Hogue, then stationed in the Clyde, to prevent
the possibility of a departure pending the decision of the authorities ;3
and a week later a gun-boat was moored alongside of her to prevent any
chance of her leaving surreptitiously.4
By the end of November, the inquiries of the Government led to the
production of evidence snowing who were the real owners of the
vessel, and that they had coutracted to sell her to one Sinclair, calling
himself a citizen of the Confederate States. A letter from Sinclair was
produced, dated in the previous September, in which he said that " the
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, pp. 457-459.
2 Ibid., p. 467.
s Ibid., p. 499.
* Ibid., p. 503.OPINIONS   OF
;IR   ALEXANDER   COCKBURN,
dOO
The Rappahannock.
determination of the government to prevent the sailing of any vesse
, that might be suspected of being the property of a citizen of the Con-
[ federate States was made so manifest, that he had concluded it would
. he better for him to endeavor to close the contract and go where he
could have more liberal action ;"x and it appeared from the further cor-
[ respondeuce that he had agreed to do this, even on condition of forfeit-
i ing the cotton-eertificates which he had already deposited as security.
The Pampero was seized on the 10th of December, and legal proceedings were instituted, a verdict was entered againsther by default, and
she remained under seizure until some months after the termination of
[ the civil war.
As regards the other vessel building*in Messrs. Thompson's yard at
Glasgow, on which the authorities, as has been mentioned,    ||§§§ ram I
I were keeping watch, Mr. Adams, writing respecting the ms$m
seizure of the Pampero, reports as follows, (January 28, 1864:)
Oue good effect of these various proceedings has been to remove all further anxiety
resp'ectiug the destiuation of the formidable iron-clad ram in process of construction at
the same place.    Tbat she was ordered in the first instance by the rebels, I have no
| manner of doubt; she has now been purchased bjr the Danish government, as I learn
'■  from the Minister, M. de Bille.-'
In September, 1863, an old gun-boat named the Victor, being considered as rotten and unserviceable, was sold by the British
government to a private firm. The firm haviug afterward
applied for the masts and sails pf the vessel, the question of granting
: the application was referred to Earl Bussell, who advised, as a measure
' of precaution, that the masts and sails should for the present be reserved.3 On the 24th November, 1863, she suddenly left Sheerness, where
she was being prepared for sea, at midnight, and crossed ovCr to Calais.4
She was still in a condition quite unfit to go to sea, her rigging being
incomplete and her crew deficient. At Calais her commander declared
her to be a confederate vessel of war, though she was neither equipped,
manned, nor armed. She was allowed to remain, and to make such
repairs as were necessary to render her seaworthy, but the precautions
taken by the authorities to prevent her being made more serviceable for
warlike purposes rendered her practically useless for the confederate
service. It having been discovered that large additions had been made
; to her crew, the French government refused to permit her departure,
and ghe was eventually abandoned by her officers.5
" Contrast, again," says the Case of the United States triumphantly,
i% the course of the French government with that of the British government in like cases.. What vessel bearing a commission was ever disturbed by a British gun-boat,.no matter how flagrant might have been
her violations of British sovereignty ?" Had those who ask this question forgotten the case of a certain vessel called the. Canton, or Pampero, which was served exactly in the same manner, having first had a
\ gun-boat placed alongside of her and having been afterward seized ?
No information had been received by the government tending to
I throw any suspicion on the Victor before her departure. Evidence
; haying subsequently been furnished by Mr. Adams to Lord Bussell
| tending to implicate various persons in the fitting-out of this vessel and
f the obtaining a crew for her, prosecutions were iustituted against such
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 511.
- United States Documents, vol. ii, p. 225.
3 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 615.
4Ibid., p. 619.
6 Ibid., p. 672; United States Documents, vo
vi, p. 174.
23 BI
354
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
of them as seemed to have rendered themselves liable to punishment, I
and several of them were convicted or pleaded guilty. Among others,,
proceedings were taken against Mr. Bumble, an officer in the government dock-yard at Sheerness, and, though he was acquitted, the government marked their displeasure at his conduct by dismissing him from
his appointment and placing him upon half-pay, as an officer in whom
they could no longer put any confidence.1
In consequence of the events connected with the Bappahannock, the
British government at once gave orders that no more ships should be
sold out of the navy duriug«the continuance of the war.
An advantageous offer having been made to the admiralty, in December, 1863, for two vessels (the Beynard and Alacrity) which it wasj
thought desirable to dispose of, the matter was referred to Earl Bus-
sell, who gave as his opinion that | it would be much better at the
present time not to sell any vessels to private firms, as it is impossible to
obtain any sufficient assurance in regard to what may be done with
vessels when sold out of the navy."2
It was also thought right to keep careful watch on another vessel, the
Amphion, which had already been sold to a private firm^j
and the police authorities were directed to make inquiries
ou the subject in January, 1864.3   The vessel was at that time lying
dismantled and dismasted.   In March following Mr. Adams wrote to,
call Lord Bussell's attention to the subject, and a constant watch was;
kept on her by the police.    She seems to have been in a state quite unfitted for war purposes, and her destination was stated to be Copenhagen.   She was eventually stranded on the British coast a few months;
later, and broken up.4
On the 1st April, 1864, the suspicious of the customs collector at
Glasgow having been excited by certain peculiarities of con-
The Hawk. *->*-? SBr__8    ____________■
struction in a vessel recently built at Benfrew, and named
the Hawk, he referred the matter to the authorities in London. Pending their decision he refused the application made for a pass to enable,
her to leave for the latter port.5 On the 16th of the same month.Mr.
Adams addressed a representation to Lord Bussell on the same subject.
The Hawk shortly afterward left for London, as was at first believed,
without a clearance, and the owner was called upon for explanations.
The vessel was also subjected to strict examination by the police and
customs authorities. The explanations of the owner proving satisfactory, and no evidence appearing to justify further measures, she Was
allowed to depart—went to the West Indies, and returned, and was
never employed for any warlike purpose.
Four other vessels formed the subject of representations by Mr.
Th_A.in_.theH._- Adams at the commencement of the year 1865—the Ajax,
■ S_ii_3«i_bJ_eFai the Hercules, the Virginia, and the Louisa Ann Fanny.   As
ny- to the first of these vessels, investigations had already been'
made by the customs authorities at Dublin, while she was lying in
Kingston Harbor. In each case inquiries were made not only by the
home authorities, but by the governors of Bermuda and Nassau. None
of the vessels in question were ever used for other than commercial
purposes. *
I have only further to mention the case of the flotilla of gun-boats
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 674.
>Ibid., vol. v, p. 201.
3 Ibid., vol. ii, p. 566.
* Ibid., pp. 568, 571, and 572.
»Tbid.. op. 539-541.r
355
Anglo-Chinese lie
OPINIONS   OP  SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
procured for the Chinese government by Mr.  Lay, which it was intended should be manned and officered by British sailors
under the command of Captain Sherard Osborn.
On the 28th of February, 1863, a letter was addressed to Mr. Lay, by
Earl Bussell's directions, requesting him to give the particulars of the
vessels obtained by him for that purpose, and the information given by
Mr. Lay was communicated to Mr. Adams, to whom it was likely to be
of service in distinguishing the vessels really destined for the service
of the Emperor of China from those reported to be so, as a pretext for
other purposes connected with the confederate service.
On the arrival of the fleet in China, a difference arose with the Chinese government as to the terms on which the command of the fleet
should be held, and Captain Osborn eventually declined the appointment.
Under these circumstances the British minister at Peking was of
opinion—an opinion which was shared by his American colleagues—
that if the fleet was allowed to remain in the hands of the Chinese government, there was great danger of the vessels being bought for employment as confederate cruisers. It was therefore arranged that Captain Osborne should take back part of the fleet to Bombay and part to
England, and there dispose of them for the Chinese-government: and
the vessels were brought back accordingly.
On hearing of this arrangement the British government gave orders
that every precaution should be taken to prevent their passing into the
hands of any belligerent power. The sale of one of the vessels at
Bombay was stopped; but as she was merely an unarmed dispatch-
boat, the prohibition was subsequently removed. The other ships were
held in the custody of the government, and the law-officers having advised that the sale within the British dominions of armed ships of war,
already equipped for a different purpose, was not contrary to the foreign-enlistment act, the government determined upon taking upon
themselves the responsibility of detaining them unsold. A committee
was accordingly appointed to assess the values of the vessels, and the
Chinese government were assured that they should not ultimately lose
by any delay in the sale. Several overtures for the purchase of one or
other of the ships fell through in consequence of the stringent nature
of the guarantees required against their employment by belligerents,
or from other causes; and they were in consequence not disposed of
till after the close of the war. The delay and consequent deterioration
of the vessels caused a loss of over £100,000, which was made
the British government to that of China.
It thus appears that, during the whole course of the civil war, two
ships only were built in Great Britain for, and actually
employed in, the service of the confederates. Four others
were intended to be built and equipped, but were arrested while
in the course of construction. Four merchant-vessels, though not
adapted for warlike purposes, were converted into vessels of war by
having guns put on board, but out of the jurisdiction of the British
government—two of them in confederate ports—and this by reason of
the impossibility of getting ships of war built, owing to the active vigilance of the authorities. And it is upon this foundation that Great
Britain is represented as having been "the navy-yard of the insurgent
States," and that men who must be supposed to have a conscientious
appreciation of what is just and right, accuse Earl Bussell and Her
Majesty's government of ''a consistent course of partiality toward the
insurgents," and of "a want of diligence bordering upon willful negligence."
good by
General result.%
>d6
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
In the United States argument the proceedings  of other govern-
rroceedin.s..f menfs are compared with those of Great Britain, to the.
other governments,   disparagement of the latter.   Thus, of Brazil, it is said:
We beg leave to refer this high tribunal to the administrative regulations of the
Brazilian Empire for the enforcement' of neutrality in all the ports of
iira.il. the empire, in the amplest manner, by efficient action on the part of the
imperial ministers, and of the provincial presidents.
In the American case, and the documents to which it refers, there is sufficient indi-
cationof the loyalty and efficiency with Which the Brazilian-government maintained'^
its sovereignty against the aggressive efforts of the confederates.
After the correspondence which I have already inserted, I may very
well say that not even with Her Majesty's government or officers did
the correspondence of the United States Government assume so angry
a tone as that which pervades the letters between the American minister and the Brazilian government.1
Portugal is referred to in the American argument in these terms :
As to Portugal, we refer to the correspondence annexed to the American Counter •
Case, to show that she also never pretended that her neutral duty was con-
I'ortugai. A fined to the execution of the provisions of her penal code. She also put
fortMihe executive power of the Crown to prevent, repress, or repel ag-
gressi vi: acts of the- confederates in violation of her hospitality, or in derogation of
her sovereignty. Nay more, the government of Portugal, finding its own naval force
inadequate to prevent, the confederates from abusing the right of asylum in the West-1
ern Islands, expressly autliflfized the American Government to send a naval force
there for the purpose of defending the sovereignty and executing the law of Portugal.2
On turning to the documents referred to, I find that Portugal did
what, as a neutral power, it was bound to do, narflely, interfere to prevent the Azores from being made a depot of munitions of war or coal
for the confederate cruisei||||
With reference to the authority given to the United States Government to send a naval force to the Azores, all that appears is, that when
3Ir. Harvey, the United States minister, informed the Viscount Sa da
Bandeira, the minister for war, then acting as minister for foreign affairs,
what was going on at the Azores, the minister said, I that the islands
in question had been used and abused bj* corsairs and pirates during
centuries; that they were exposed and unprotected, and therefore
might be so employed again, and that the best plan would be to send a
sufficient force there to protect American ships against threatened depredations, and to punish criminal'offenders."" In other words, the Americans were to take care of themselves. This is dignified by the name of
| defending the sovereignty and executing the law of Portugal." I may
add that when the confederate steamship Stonewall was at Lisbon
she was allowed to supply herself with coal, notwithstanding the remonstrances of the American consul. In conformity with the general
rule she was required to leave in twenty-four hours.
The American argument informs us that—
When attempts were made by the confederates to construct and equip cruisers
in the ports of France, on complaint being made by the minister of
the United States, the construction of these vessels was arrested; and
when a builder professed that vessels under construction, with suspicion of being intended for the confederates, were in fact intended for a neutral government, the French
ministers required proof of such professed honest intention, and carefully watched these
vessels to make sure that they should not go into the service of the confederates. On.,
this point we quote the language of the minister of marine, as follows :
" The vesssels of war to which you have called our attention shall not leave tbe
ports of France until it shall have been positively demonstrated that their destination
does not affect the principles of neutrality, which the French government wishes to
rigidly observe toward both belligerents."3
1 United States Argument, p. 66.
£ Ibid., p. 67.
3Ibid..' p. 63.~"***^§£SiWj£.
OPINIONS   OF   SIR   ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
60 1
The documents annexed to the Counter Case of the United States do
not contain more than a small selection of the correspondence relating to
this subject, which is given in greater detail in the memoire and documents submitted by' the United States to the French courts of justice
in the "Affaire Arman," documents which, to quote the words of the
memoire itself, "show most clearly the dangers to which M.-Arman
and his associates exposed the maintenance of peace between France
and the United States."1
The suit in question was instituted in November, 1867, on the part of
the United States against MM. Arman, Voruz, and others, for the recovery of moneys disbursed by Bullock, acting as agent of the Confederate States, for the construction of six vessels of war in France.
After explaining that the measures taken by the British government
in respect of the seizure of both the Alexandra and Pampero, and the
detention of the Birkenhead rams, had compelled the confederates " to
seek in France the market they were losing on the other side of the
channel,"2 the memoire proceeds to relate that their choice fell on M.
Lucien Arman, (member for Bordeaux in the French legislative assembly,) " whose official positiou seemed calculated to secure greater
freedom and certain i mpunity for the execution of these orders." An agreement was accordingly entered into with Arman by Bullock, who stated in
the contract that " with a view to establish regular communications by
steam between Shanghai, Osaca, Yedo, and San Francisco, he wished
to procure in France lour steamers of great speed, fitted to carry from
ten to twelve guns, for their protection in those distant parts."3
Arman undertook to build two of these steamers in his own yards at
Bordeaux, and sub-let the building of the other two to 1 another depilty
of the corps legislatif," M. A'oruz, of JNantes. Besides these four steamers
he further entered, on the 16th July, 1863, into a fresh agreement with
Bullock "for two iron-clad steam-rams."
One difficulty had to be removed before the final ratification of these
contracts, and that was the restriction placed by the royal ordinance of
1847 on the exportation of arms and munitions of war.
It has been already shown that this enactment had no reference to
the special subject of neutrality, and simply formed part of that general
legislation by which the state in France has frequently sought, in its
own interest, to place restraints upon private commerce in articles of a
warlike character. In the present instance, however,. its practical
effect was to interfere with the arming of the vessels. Accordingly, M.
Arman applied to the government for permission to arm the four ves
sels, whi(
ch we
re building ostensibly for service in the China Seas, and
this was readily granted, on the faith of his assurance, by the Marquis
de Chasseloup-Laubat, the minister of marine j
In the following September the knowledge of these facts was betrayed
to Mr. Bigelow, then United States consul at Paris, by a clerk of M.
Arman, who furnished him, at the same time, with the originals of the
deeds drawn up between his employer and the confederate agent, Bullock, as well as of the correspondence exchanged between the parties,
and other papers, which placed beyond possibility of doubt the existence of an intention on the part of Arman to violate the neutrality of
France.
Mr. Dayton at once brought the matter under the notice of M.
Drouyn de Lhnys, then minister for foreign affairs, and followed up his
1 Memoire pour les Etats-Unis d'Amerique, p. 5-1.
: Page 4.
'Ibid., n. 6.«r*
■oco
oob
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
first representations with a formal demand, ou the 22d September, that
" the permission to arm the vessels should be withdrawn, the manufacture of the guns and shot suspended, and if already completed, that
the delivery should be prevented." He called on the French government to " take such steps as it might deem best calculated to stop the
building or departure of the above-mentioned vessels."
Writing on the 9th October, to express his approval of the course
adopted by Mr. Dayton, Mr. Secretary Seward says:
It is hardly necessary to inform'you that the President awaits with much solicitude
the decision of His Imperial Majesty's government upon the application you have
made, and cannot but regard an adverse decision as pregnant with very serious
consequences.
On the 1st of jSTovember Mr. Seward writes again to Mr. Dayton,
expressing his disappointment at the indirect and inconclusive answer
received from the French government, and relying on Mr. Dayton's
endeavors to obtain a more satisfactory reply.
The minister of marine withdrew the permission to arm the vessels,-
but justified the course he'had taken in granting it " on the builder's
declaration." This measure, however, the memorial informs us, "did not
put a stop to the construction or fitting out of the vessels," which
Arman continued, possibly in the hope of disposing of them to the
confederates; but this the measures taken by the French government
prevented, except in the case of one of the steam rams building at
Bordeaux.
The history-of this vessel, originally known as the Sphinx maybe thus
summed up from the memoire aud correspondence annexed
The Stonewattgl , *■ L
thereto:
On the 4th February, 1864, M. Drouyn de Lhuys informed Mr. Dayton that Arman had given him the most positive assurance that he had
sold the two iron-clads, viz, the Sphinx and her sister-vessel, the Cheops,
to the Danish government.1 Mr. Dayton made inquiries at Copenhagen,
which resulted in a formal contradiction of the fact by the Danish
minister for foreign affairs. M. Arman next represented to M. Drouyn
de Lhuys that he had sold them to Sweden, and M. Drouyn de Lhuys
repeated to Mr.. Dayton, on the 7th of April, this new statement of
Arman, (which, however, was almost immediately afterward contradicted by the Swedish foreign minister,) declaring himself " satisfied
that the sale had been completed."2 Mr. Dayton did not place the same
■confidence in Arman's assertions, and continued, in obedience to the
instructions of his Government, to make serious representations to M.
Drouyn de Lhuys on the subject of the rams. On the 8th June he
writes to Mr. Seward:
I had already informed M. Drouyn de Lhuys of the very serious character of these
C[uestious, and the probable consequences which would result from the completion.and
delivery of these vessels to the confederates. I have, on all occasions, used strong
language when applied to these questions. I told him to-day that, in expressing the
views of the President on this subject, I could scarcely speak with the necessary earnestness aud directness, without trenching on that respectful forbearauce of language
to which I desired at all times to limit myself in our official intercourse. I told him
that should these vessels pass iuto the hands of the confederates, become armed and
commence a system of depredation on our commerce, the exasperation would be such
that the Government, if so disposed (which 1 did not intimate that it would be) could
scarcely keep the peace between the two countries.
In the mean time, Arman had succeeded in defeating the vigilance of
the French authorities in the following manner:  In March, 1864, he
' Mr. Dayton to Mr. Seward, April 7, 1864.
2 Memoire, p. 28.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
359
had concluded a contract of sale with the Danish government, then at
war with the German Confederation, but the conditions of the contract
not having been observed, the Danish officer, to whoih the Sphinx was
to have been handed over at Bordeaux, refused to receive her. Arman,
however took advantage of this contract to get the vessel out of French
waters under the name of the Stoerkodder, and sent her to Copenhagen
under the pretence of again submitting her to inspection there. The
Danish government having persisted- in their refusal to purchase the
vessel, he obtained permission to bring her back, rechristened as the
Olinde, under Danish colors to Bordeaux. On arriving in French
waters, off the island of Houat, on the coast of Brittany, she stopped
to receive from another steamer, by a preconcerted arrangement, a crew,
with an armament of artillery and munitions of war, hoisted the confederate flag, and, changing her name for the third time to that of the
Stonewall, left the French waters for Ferrol, in Spain, where she obtained permission to remain and make some necessary repairs.
These proceedings were the subject of energetic remonstances at Paris
and Madrid, and would, in all probability, have given rise to much more,
had not the close of the civil war deprived the question of any practical
interest it might otherwise have had, the Stonewall having been unable
to commit any acts of warfare. The American Government wisely
preferred to drop its grievances, as Mr. Seward explains in a letter to
Mr. Bigelow, United States minister at Paris, dated 13th March, 1865:
Le gouvernement a dijk, contre les puissances maritimes impliqu^es dans cette
.affaire, des causes de plainte assez nombreuses et assez graves. II prefere neanmoins
entretenir la paix, l'harmonie et l'amitie' avec ces puissances, plutdt que de rechercher
■de nouvelles occasions de querelle, et il s'estimera tres-heureux si les apprehensions que
l'affaire actuelle a souleve~esne sont pas justifies. Les circonstances semblent d'ailleurs
favoriser les voeux du gouvernement a cet endroit. Nos derniers avis te"16graphiques
nous affirment que le Stonewall est absolument hors d'etat de tenir la mer, et que, pour
cette raison et pour d'autres, les criminels qui le possedent cherchent a s'en d6bar-
rasser.
From this narrative it will be seen how very different was the view
taken of these circumstances by. the Government of the United States,
at the time when they occurred, from the color now sought to be put
upon them by the American argument.
The running of the blockade, as it is termed, by British vessels, and
the use of the Bahamas and Bermuda and other islands, as ^H§wB of
places by means of which the blockade-running might be bi»<*ade-run_ing.
facilitated, were, throughout the war, the cause of unceasing and loud
complaint on the part of the.United States Government. No doubt it
was a very great annoyance to the United States; but it in reality
afforded no legitimate cause of grievance.
That, when the arms and munitions of war necessary to the confederates had been purchased in Europe,.means should be sought to convey
them to the purchasers was in the nature of things. That the high
rates of freight which, owing to the vital importance of obtaining these
supplies, the confederate government were willing to pay, should have
induced ship-owners to run the risk of capture and confiscation, and
that the high premiums for insurance which the owners of ships and
•cargoes engaged in this traffic were willing to pay, should have tempted
insurers to undertake the risk of insuring them, cannot, knowing as we
do the boldness of mercantile speculation and enterprise, at all surprise
us. Accordingly, from a very early period of the war, vessels were employed to run the blockade with cargoes of articles of warlike use.
Before long a systematic traffic of this description became regularly
established.   As the nature of the southern coast and the local peculi-360
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
n
arities of its ports made it extremely difficult for ocean-going vessels to
avoid pursuit and capture in endeavoring to enter them, advantage was
taken of the proximity of the Bahama Islands and Bermuda to the
southern ports to transship the cargoes sent from England, at these
places, into fast steamers of light draught, which, taking advantage of
shallow waters into which they could not easily be pursued, could thus
find *neans of eluding the hostile cruisers. By these means, though ships
and cargoes to the value, it is said, of £8,000,000 sterling fell into the
hands of the Federals, a very large quantity of arms and articles, contraband of war, found theirVway. to the confederate government.
The first question which presents itself is, was the traffic unlawful?:
So far unlawful undoubtedly, by the law of nations, as between the
rader and the blockading belligerent, that if the belligerent could catch
the vessel in the act of breaking the blockade, vessel and cargo would
become lawful prize; but by the law of nations involving no ulterior
liability. By the municipal law not prohibited, and therefore not unlawful—not even sufficiently so, as has been lately held by Lord West-
bury in the case of ex parte Ohavasse in re Grazebrook,1 and by Dr.
Lushington in that of the Helen,2 to avoid a contract made in contemplation of such a transaction. How as between the blockading belligerent and the country of the blockade-running trader ? Clearly and indisputably without consequence of any sort.
It has never been contended by any one that a neutral state incurred
any responsibility by the generafipbw of nations by reason of any violation of neutrality by it^Rubjects,lii carrying on trade with a blockaded
port/ It is therefore clear that a neutral government is not bound to
prohibit such trade by its municipal law. With the single exception
of Denmark, if my memory does not deceive me, no European state has
prohibited it.   The United States have no law which does so.
Such being the state of the international law of the civilized world
and'the municipal law of Great Britain on the breaking out of the war,
not only was it not incumbent on Great Britain as a duty to alter its,
law, with a view to prohibiting its subjects from trading with the blockaded ports, but to have done so would- have been, as it seems to me, in
direct contravention of a fundamental principal of neutrality—namely,
that a neutral power shall not, with a view to a pending war, except so
far as may be necessarpfor the fulfillment of its own obligations as a
neutral, alter its law, or make new regulations, having the object or
effect of favoring one belligerent at the expense of the other. But that
such wouid have been the effect of an alteration of the law, as desired
by the United States, by passing an act tomiake blockade-running penal,
is manifest. The United States, as between them and theis adversaries,
were masters of the seas, and had their ports open, and could, therefore,
freely receive the cargoes of arms and munitions of war which were
being daily supplied to them. To the confederate government the blockade-runner afforded the only means of obtaining the arms with which
he was to fight for independence. An alteration of the law would have
been to place him helpless in the power of his enemy. Would it have
been consistent with neutrality to alter the law at such a time, and with
the certainty of such a result? The right of a belligerent to exclude
the commerce of a neutral from a blockaded port is too well established
to be shaken; but it is the most odious and arbitrary form in which the
freedom of the neutral can be interfered with, and I can see, therefore,
111 Juris. N. S., p. 400.
|1 Law Rep., Adm. and Eccl., 1.OPINIONS   OF   SIR   ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
361
no reason why a government should interfere to make the exercise of
the power more productive of detriment to the commerce of its subjects
than it necessarily carries with it at present. But if any alteration of
the law is to take place, it should be in time of peace, not when the
change would prove fatal to one of the combatants, and insure victory
to the other.
Earl Bussell put the matter on the right footing when, in answer to a
remonstrance of Mr. Adams, on the 17th of May; 1862, he replied:
If the British government, by virtue of. the prerogative of the Crown, or by authority
of Parliament, had prohibited and could have prevented the coiiveyance in British merchant-ships of arms aud ammunitiou to the Confederate States, and had allowed the
transport of such contraband of war to New York and to other Federal ports, Her
-Majesty's government would have departed from the neutral position they have assumed and maintained.
If, on the other hand, Her Majesty's government had prohibited and could have prevented the transport of arms and ammunitiou to both the contending parties, they
would have deprived the United States of a great part of the means by which they
have carried on the war.   The arms and ammunition received from Great Britain, as
*Vell as from other neutral countries, have enabled the United States to fit out the formidable armies now engaged in carrying on the war against the Southern States, while,
by means of the blockade established by the Federal Government, the Southern States
'. have been deprived of similar advantages.
The impartial observance of neutral obligations by Her Majesty's government has
thus been exceedingly advantageous to the cause of the more powerful of the two contending parties.1
The same reason applies to the frequent use of the ports of the Bahamas and Bermuda as entrepdts for the blockade-running cargoes, and
the transshipment of the latter into lighter craft. There was nothing
in all this in any way contrary to law. Vessels with cargoes of arms
intended for the Southern ports had a perfect right to enter, remain,
and quit, when and as they thought proper. If this traffic, suddenly
springing up, soon assumed such large dimensions, the cause was to be
found in the forced interruption of the trade With the Southern ports
through the blockade. Here again a neutral government could not be
called upon to make new laws to prevent the neutral trader from availing himself of such means, not inconsistent with law, as circumstances
placed at his disposal in seeking to compensate himself for the restraints imposed on his commercial freedom. When the ordinary course
of things is disturbed by intervening force, the tendency is always, in
some shape or other, to a restoration of the equilibrium. Unfortunately, instead of seeing in all this only the natural effect of commercial
speculation and enterprise, the United States Government, in the excitement of the time, saw in it nothing but hostility to the cause of the
Union. Impressed with this idea, Mr. Seward writes to Mr. Adams, on
the 11th of March, 1862 :
Information derived.from our consul at Liverpool confirms reports which have
reached us that insurance companies in England are insuring vessels engaged in running our blockade, and even vessels carrying con.raba.nd of war. This is, iu effect, a
combination of British capitalists, under legal authority, to levy war against the
United States. It is entirely inconsistent with the relations of friendship which we,
on our part, maintain toward Great Britain; and we cannot believe that Her Britannic Majesty's government will regard it as compatible with the attitude sf neutrality
proclaimed by that government. Its effect is to prolong this struggle, destroy legitimate commerce of British subjects, and excite in this country feelings of deep alienation.
Pray bring this subject to the notice of Earl Russell, and ask for intervention in some
form which will be efficient.
Our consuls in London and Liverpool can furnish you with all the information you
will require.l
1 United States Documents, vol. i, pp. 536, 53v
- United States Documents, vol. i, p. 720.ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
After mentioning the different steamers engaged in
Mr. Adams, in a letter to Lord Bussell of the 30th of December, 1862,
complains in earnest language:
It is a fact that few persons in England will now be bold, enough to deny, first, that
'Teasels have been built iu British ports, as well as manned by Her Majesty's subjects,
with the design and intent to carry on war against the United States; secondly, that
other vessels owned by British subjects have been and are yet in the constant practice
of departing from British ports, laden with contraband of war and many other commodities, "with the intent to break the blockade and to procrastinate the war; thirdly,
that sucli vessels have been and are insured by British merchants in the commercial
towns of this SSngdom, with the/understanding that they are dispatched for that illegal purpose. It is believed to be» beyond denial that British subjects have been, and
continue to be, enlisted in this kingdom in the service of the insurgents, with the intent to make war on the United States, or to break the blockade legitimately estab-
i islicd, and to a proportionate extent to annul its purpose. It is believed that persons
high in social position and in fortune contribute their aid, directly and indirectly, in
building and equipping -ships of war as well as other vessels, and furnishing money a_
well as goods with the hope of sustaining the insurgents in their resistance to the Government. To that end the port of Nassau, a colonial dependency of Great Britain, has
been mada^knd still continues to be, the great entrepdt for the storing of supplies whichs
are convejaH. from thence with the greater facility in evading the blockade. In short,'
so far as the acts of these numerous and influential parties can involve them, the
British people maybe considered as actually carrying on war against the United States.
Already British property valued at eight millions of pounds sterling is reported to have
been captured by the vessels of the United States for attempts to violate the blockade,
and property of far greater value has either been successfully introduced or is now
stored at Nassau awaiting favorable opportunities. -
But that these were commercial speculations, and had no reference
to any political sympathies, is plain, from the following letter from Mr.
Sferse, the United States consul-general, to Mr. Adams, of the 24th of
the same month.
the blockade-running, he says:
The ownership of these steamers, the cargoes they carry out, and the manner of conducting the trade, is a question of much interest to Americans. During the early
stages of the'war the trade" was carried on principally by agents sent over from the
Confederate States/-aided by a few mercantile houses and active sympathizers in this
country. These agents, with their friends here, purchased the supplies, and procured-
steamers, mostly by charter, and forwarded the goods.
But by fai the largest portion of the trade, with perhaps the exception of that in
small-arms, is now, and for a long time has been, under the management and control of
British merchants. It is carried'on principally by British capital, in British ships, and
crosses the Atlantic under the protection of the British flag.
Parties come from Richmond with contracts made with the rebel government by
which they are to receive a very large percentage above the cost in confederate ports
of the articles specified. British merchants become interested in these contracts, and
participate in their profits or loss. I have seen the particulars of one such contract
drawn out in detail, and have heard of others.
There are good reasons for believing that a large portion of the supplies more recently
sent to the aid of the insurgents has been sent by merchants on their own account. Several
will join together to charter a steamer, and make up a cargo independent of all eon--
tractors, each investing as much in the enterprise as he may deem expedient, according
to his zeal in the rebel cause, or his hope of realizing profit from the speculation.
Again: some one will put up a steamer to carry cargo to a rebel port at an enormous
rate of freight, or to ports on the Atlantic or Gulf coast, such as Bermuda, Nassau,
Havana, Matamoraf., &c, at a less freight, to be from there reshipped to-such Southern
ports as appears to afford the best opportunities for gaining an entrance. Ships bound
on these voyages are, of course, not advertised, or their destination made knownto
the public. Their cargoes are made up of individual shipments, on account and risk
of the shippers, or go into a joint-stock concern, on account and risk of the company,
each member thereof realiziug profit or suffering loss in proportion to the amount he
invested in the adventure. Both steamers and cargoes are often, if not generally,
insured in England " to go to America with liberty to run the blockade."1
The views of Her Majesty's Government were set forth in a letter
from Earl Bussell to Mr. Adams :
With regard to the "systematic plan" which you say has been pursued by Her Maj-
1 United States Documents, vol. i, p.
2 Ibid., p. 731.
729.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
363
esty's subjects " to violate the blockade by steady efforts," there ai-e some reflections ■
which I am surprised have not occurred to you.
The United States Government, on the allegation of a rebellion pervading from nine
to eleven States of the Union, have now, for more than twelve months, endeavored to
maintain a blockade of three thousand miles of coast. This blockade, kept up irregularly, but when enforced, enforced severely, has seriously injured the trade and manufactures of the United Kingdom. Thousands of persons are now obliged to resort to
the poor-rate for subsistence, owing to this blockade. Yet, Her Majesty's government
have never sought to take advantage of the obvious imperfections of this blockade, in
order to declare it ineffective. They have, to the loss and detriment of the British
.nation, scrupulously observed the duties of Great Britain toward a friendly State. But
when Her Majesty's government are asked to go beyond this, and to overstep the existing
powers given to them by municipal and international law for the purpose of imposing
'arbitrary restrictions on the trade of Her Majesty's subjects, it is impossible to listen
to such suggestions. The ingenuity of persons' engaged in commerce will always, in
some degree, defeat attempts to starve or debar from commercial intercourse an extensive coast inhabited by a large and industrious population.
If, therefore, the Government of the United States consider it for their interest to
inflict this great injury on other nations, the-utmost they can expect is that European
powers shall respect those acts of the United States which are within the limits of the
law. The United States Government cannot expect that Great Britain should frame
new statutes to aid the Federal blockade, and to carry into effect the restrictions on
commerce which the United States, for their own purposes, have thought fit to institute,
aud the application of which it is their duty to confine within the legitimate limits of
international law.1
It is hardly worth while to dwell on the attempts made to show partiality and unfair conduct on the part of the authorities at Nassau.
A Mr. Heyliger appears to have been sent there as the agent of the
confederates, and a letter from him to the confederate government of
December 27, 1861, is quoted in the case of the United States,2 in which
it is said, " We have succeeded iu obtaining a very important modification of the existing laws, viz, the privilege of breaking bulk and transshipment.'1   It is said in the case of the United States—
That modification was all that the insurgents wanted. That privilege converted the
port of Nassau into an insurgent port, which could not be blockaded by the naval
forces of the United States. Further stay of the Uuited States vessels of war was
therefore useless. The United States ask the tribunal to find that this act, being a
permission from the British authorities at'Nassau, enabling a vessel chartered by the
insurgents, and freighted with articles contraband of war, to diverge from its voyage
and to transship its cargo in a British port when not made necessary by distress, was a
violation of the duties of a neutral.
' I pass by the admission contained in this passage that Nassau was
being used by the United States vessels of war as a post of observation
for the detection and pursuit of vessels carrying contraband of war to
the South; in other words, as a base of naval operations.
The explanation of the passage in Mr. Heyliger's letter, which I find
in the British counter case and appendix, is simple enough. The customs regulations of the colony forbade the transshipment of goods in its
ports or waters, unless they were landed for examination by the customs
officers. There was nothing, however, to prevent their being at once re-
shipped in other vessels after being so landed and examined, and the
receiver-general of the colony,had power to grant permission for dispensing with the landing of the goods if he thought fit. It would seem
that this permission had been customarily granted, as a matter of
course, in the case of goods in transit. In conformity with this practice
Messrs. Adderly & Co., of Nassau, applied to the receiver-general,
shortly before the date of Mr. Heyliger's letter, for permission to transship the cargo of the Eliza Bonsell, stated to consist of assorted merchandise, to another vessel, the Ella Warley, bound ostensibly for St.
John's, New Brunswick.
1 United States Documents, vol. i, p. 723.
2 Page 226.Tl
364
ARBITRATION "AT   GENEVA.
The receiver-general, having regard probably to the destination of
the Ella Warley, St. John's being the port for which blockade-running j
vessels were in the habit of taking clearances, refused to give the usual !
permission unless authorized by the governor. Thereupon Messrs. Ad-
derly wrote to the governor explaining that all they asked for was to be
dispensed from the formality of landing the goods on the whar^ and
then'reshipping them, a requisition which had on previous occasions
been done away with by the customs authorities; and stating that
the'receiver-general admitted that he had no ground for his objection,
I being fully of opinion that the object of the law could be carried out,
and the cargo as easily checked from one vessel to another as if landedJ|
The governor, with the consent of his council, granted the permission,
and indeed there seems no sufficient reason why he should have refusea-
it. He could not in any case have prevented the goods being put on
board the Ella Warley; he could only insist on their being landed on the
wharf in transitu. Mr. Heyliger, who had but just arrived in the colonyfe
probably misunderstood the nature of the concession, and may not havf.;
been sorry to exaggerate it to his superiors. The permission having
been granted in the case of the Eliza Bonsell, may possibly have also
been given in other cases, but it is difficult to understand on what principle it can be alleged to constitute a "violation of tbe duties of a
neutral."
Complaint is made that the vessels engaged in running the blockade,
and leaving Nassau for that purpose, were allowed to clear out for St.
John's, New Brunswick, though it was well known that their destination
was a southern port. But there is no means of controlling vessels in
this respect. The nature and operation of a clearance is explained in
the British case:,
Clearance signifies the'final official act by which the proper officer of customs notifies
that all has been done which the law requires to be done before the departure of shib|
and cargo. It is purely for customs purposes, the main objects being to-protect the
revenue, and to secure statistics as to the number of ships and quantity of merchandise
entering and leaving British ports. As there are in ordinary times no restrictions or
duties on the export of articles of any kind from the United Kingdom, no rigid inspect
tion is exercised by the customs authorities over the general nature of the goods shipped
on board vessels in British ports. The attention of the authorities is mainly directed
to the shipment of those articles on which an exemption from import duties otherwise
payable, or a remission of import duties already paid, is claimed on the ground of their
exportation abroad. The object of the inspection is to ascertain that the goods of this
nature stated to be thus exported are really shipped and carried away on board the.
vessel. The agents who ship such goods'furnish the customs department with statements in the form of shipping-bills, of the amount and nature thereof, and it is the
duty of the examining officer to ascertain that the packages placed on board the vessel
■ correspond with these statements. Before starting .on his voyage the master of the
vessel is bound to produce a paper called a content, giving the number and description
of any packages of merchandise shipped on board; on which exemption from or remission of duty is claimed, but merely specifying any other articles as a sundry packages
of free goods." The master has also to produce a victualing bill, enumerating the
amount of stores liable to duty, (such as tea, spirits, tobacco, and the like,) which he
has shipped for the use of his crew. These papers are compared with the shipping
bills and certificates already in the possession of the customs authorities, and if they
are found to tally, a label, signed and sealed by the examining officer and collector, is
affixed to the victualing bill and certificates, and these papers are delivered to the
master as his clearance.
It is true that, for statistical purposes, the agents to the master of the vessel are required to furnish to the customs department a list, called a manifest, giving the number
and description of all packages of goods, whether liable to duty or not, shipped on
board the vessel, and the shipping ageuts or exporters are also required to furnish specifications of all goods, described -by the master on his content as "sundry packages of
free goods," and. subsequently further described in his manifest; but the law does not
1 British Appendix, vol. v, p. 30.OPINIONS  OF
ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
365
require that these particulars should be given before tbe vessel sails; it is complied
with provided they be furnished within six days after she has cleared.
.Ci'reviously to the year 1867, no penalty was attached by law to the departure of a
vessel for foreign ports without a clearance provided she was in ballast, and had on
board no stores except such as were free or had paid duty. Since that date, however,
clearance has been required in these as well as in other cases.
A clearance may not be granted until the master of the ship has declared the nation
to whifeh he affirms that she belongs; and a ship attempting'to proceed to sea without
a clearance may be detained until such a declaration has been made. The officer, however, cannot question, or. require proof of, the truth of the declaration. As to the destination of ships sailing from the United Kingdom, the officers of customs have little,
or no means of ascertaining this beyond the information which the master or owner
gives on entering outwards. It frequently happens that a vessel entered outwards for
a specified destination changes her course when at sea, and proceeds to a different destination.   There are no means of preventing this.1
If these vessels had cleared out for a confederate port, they must
equally have been allowed to leave. It has been argued that the vessels
employed in conveying contraband of war for the use of the confederate
government should have been considered as transports, and therefore as
contravening the foreign-enlistment act, and therefore that they should
have been stopped. If this is meant to be said figuratively, it comes to
nothing. If it is meant that the vessels were actually built or fitted'out
for, and made over to, the confederate government, to be used by them
as transports—in which case only they would come within the foreign-
enlistment act—the answer is, that there is not only no evidence of anything of the kind, but there is every reason to .believe that the contrary
is the case, and that they remained the property of the original owners,
who found tbe employment of them in this trade profitable, notwithstanding that many of them fell into the hands of the blockading ships.
It is plain, from the letter before cited, that this is the view that Mr.
Consul Morse took of the matter.
Angry complaints are made in the American documents of the sympathy exhibited at Nassau, and in several other British col- Hflmnffi
onies, toward the confederate cause. omes-
When it is asserted, in particular instances, that this favorable feeling toward the insurgent States led to partiality, inconsistent with a
clue observance of neutrality on the part of the authorities, it will be
.better to deal with these charges when I come to the particular cases
in which it is alleged to have occurred. As regards the inhabitants of
these places generally, it seems to me that it was quite natural that, at
the Bahamas and Bermuda, and possibly in the other West India
Islands, the tide of public feeling should run strongly in favor of the
confederates. These colonies lay more or less contiguous to the southern coast. What trade they had had before with the United States
was principally with the South. But what was more likely to operate
in favor of the latter was the active trade which the transmission of
ships and cargoes to the southern j>orts suddenly brought to them.
Human nature is pretty much the same at Nassau as it would be under
similar circumstances at London or New Tork. We are apt to look
with favor on those who bring us business or promote- our wealth, or
who in any way cause the sun of prosperity to shine upon us. No government can control, or ought to endeavor to control, or to interfere
with, public feeling in such cases, if leading to no violation of the law.
Independently, however, of any influence exercised by local interest,
I cannot doubt that, as the great contest went on, and while the inferiority of the means of upholding it on the part of the South became
more and more manifest, their gallantry and courage shone out the
more brightly in continuing the unequal struggle, there did arise the366
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
sympathy which enduring courage struggling with adversity never fails,
to inspire. And I cannot help thinking that the haughty and offensive
tone assumed by many of the representatives of the United States,
helped greatly to turn the tide of public feeling in favor of their opponents. Men refused to see in the leaders of the South the " rebels |
and the ipirates" held up by the United States to public reprobation,
and thus the effect which a more generous appreciation of the position
and qualities of their adversaries might have had in neutralizing the
feeling in their favor, tended onlv to increase it.
Be this as it may, I assert that, whatever individual persons may
have thought or felt, Great Britain as a nation was throughout the
contest between the Northern and Southern States honestly desirous
that perfect neutrality should be" maintained, and that the Queen's gov- *
ernment, from the beginning to the end, were animated by the honest
desire faithfully to discharge the duty which their position as the ministers and servants of a great sovereign, pledged to neutrality in the
face of the world, imposed upon them.
Having thus passed in review the general heads of complaint put
Appiicatibntopar- forward in the pleadings of the United States, for the pur-
ticuia. vessels. pose of vindicating the British government and British authorities from what appear to me unfounded and unjust aspersions, I
proceed to the cases of the individual ships, as to the equipment of
which it is alleged that the British government were wanting in diligence.
But it is here, when we proceed to apply, practically, the test of due
diligence to the conduct of the government, that the anomaly of the
present position, to which I adverted in the outset, makes itself sensibly felt. As I have shown upon- abundant authority, the equipping
of a ship for sale to a belligerent, iu the way of trade, was at the
time in question no offense against the law of nations, or a violation of neutrality, though it was an offense against the municipal law of
Great Britain. The government of Her Majesty, though like every other
government it was bound to prevent any known violation of the law,
was under no obligation to a belligerent to enforce the law for his ben-"
efit, and incurred no liability to such belligerent for not doing so, so
long as the law was not enforced'against the latter anymore than
against his enemy. Any hostile expedition permitted to leave the shores
of Great Britain, which the government, by the exercise of reasonable
diligence, could have prevented, would have amounted to a breach of
neutrality, for which it might have been held responsible. But for the
mere equipping of a vessel, by ship-builders, in the way of trade, though
intended for a belligerent, the government would not be responsible;
and though every government is no doubt bound to prevent infractions
of the law, .so far as it knows of them and can prevent them, still this
general duty which it owes to its own country is obviously a very different thing from the responsibility it incurs as representing the state, in
relation to a foreign power. In the one case, the maintenance of the
law is left to the ordinary authorities, and to the individuals who have
occasion to seek protection or redress from its operation; in the other,
the action of the government by its immediate officers becomes necessary for its own protection. No doubt, as a matter of comity, and from
a sense of justice, a government would pay ready attention to the representatives of a belligerent power complaining of an infraction of the
municipal law in a matter in which the interests of the belligerent were
affected—more especially in a matter lying, as it were, on the confines
of municipal and international law—and would call into action the pre-OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
36'
ventive powers it possessed, to keep the law from being broken. But.
under such circumstances, it might fairly leave to the representative of
the belligerent to make out a case for the application of the law, just as
it is left so to do to an ordinary individual who desires to put the law
in motion in order to obtain redress on his own behalf. Hence, no
doubt, had arisen the practice, common to the governments both of the
United States and Great Britain, of requiring the representative of a
belligerent power, invoking the aid of the government, to produce evidence by which the action of the executive, when brought to the test of
judicial inquiry, can be justified and upheld.
It is obvious that the degree of active diligence which could reasonably be expected from a government under such circumstances, is very
different from what it would be bound to exercise in order to prevent a
violation of neutrality according to the law of nations, for which, as a
government, it would be properly responsible to a belligerent state.
It seems to me that though by the treaty of Washington it must be
taken that Great Britain was bound to use due diligence to prevent the
equipping of ships as a matter of neutral obligation, and not as a mere
matter of municipal law, yet that, in determining whether due diligence
was then applied or not, we must look to the relative position of the parties at the time, and insist on no more than would have satisfied the.
exigency of obligations then existing. Morally, in judging the conduct
of the government of that time, we are assuredly bound to do so.
CASE  OP THE FLORIDA. HfflH
The following are the facts relating to the Florida, as they are
to be gathered from the cases, counter cases, arguments,
and printed evidence supplied to the tribunal:
This vessel, originally named the Oreto, was no doubt built for war.
The contract for her construction was made by Bullock, who, it has since
become known, (though at the time the fact was altogether unknown to
Her Majesty's government,) was an agent of the Confederate States,
with Fawcett, Preston & Co., of Liverpool, by whom the contract for
the construction of the hull was again sublet to Miller and Sons, shipbuilders at that port. The attention of Mr. Dudley, the United States
consul at Liverpool, was attracted to the vessel as early as the end of
January, 1862. In dispatches to Mr. Seward, of the 24th of January and
•4th of February, he calls attention to this steamer under the name of
the Oritis, or Oretis. In the letter of the 24th of January he says: j She
is reported for the Italian government, but the fact of the machinery
being supplied by Fawcett & Preston, and other circumstances connected with it, make me suspicious, and cause me to believe she is intended for the South."1
On the 4th of February he writes to Mr. Seward as follows :
In my last two dispatches I called attention to the iron screw steam gun-boat Oreto,
or Oritis, being built at Liverpool, and fitted out by Fawcett, Preston & Co. She is
now taking in her coal, and appearances indicate that she will leave here the latter
part of this week without her armament. The probabilities are she will run into some
small port and take it and ammunition on board. This of itself is somewhat suspicious.
They pretend she is built for the Italian government; but the Italian consul here informs us that he knows -nothing about it, has no knowledge whatever of any vessels
being built for his government. There is much secrecy observed about her, and I have
been unable to get anything definite, but my impressions are strong that she is intended
for the Southern Confederacy. I have communicated my impressions and aU the facts
to Mr. Adams, our minister at London. She has one funnel, three masts, bark-rigged,
eight port-holes for guns on each side, and is to carry sixteen guns.3
1 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 214.
2 Ibid., p. 215.368
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
It thus appears that, by the 4th of February, Mr. Dudley had put Mr.5*1
Adams in possession of such infornfation as he possessed concerning
this vessel.   The letter of Mr. Dudley to Mr. Adams has not been pub-
lished among the American documents; but it is evident that Mr. Adams
did not consider the information communicated to him sufficient to warrant any application to Her Majesty's government, for none was made.
by him on the subject of this vessel till the receipt of another letter from
Mr. Dudley, a fortnight later.   Indeed, Mr. Dudley expressly states that
he was unable to get anything definite about the vessel.   He speaks^
only of suspicions and impressions.    He had nothing to communicate
beyond reports and rumors.
Amongst other things stated by Mr. Dudley, he mentions that he had
made inquiry of the Italian consul at Liverpool, who had told him that
he knew nothing of the vessel. But if, as was stated by the builders,/,
the order for the vessel had been given by Thomas Brothers, of Palermo,
the Italian consul at Liverpool might have remained without informal
tion on the subject; and Mr. Dudley, while mentioning what had passed
between him and the Italian consul to Mr. Seward, does not appear to
have mentioned it to Mr. Adams. The fact was unknown to Her
Majesty's government.
On the 17th of February, Mr. Dudley again writes to  Mr. Adams
about the Oreto as follows:
She is making a trial trip in the river to-day.
nut up a second smoke-stack since I wrote
The gun-boat Oreto is still at this pffi^P!
No armament as yet on board.   She has
you. She therefore has.two funnels, three masts, and is bark-rigged. I aih now informed that she is to carry eight rifled cannon, and two long swivel-guns on pivots so
arranged as to rake both fore and aft. No pains or expense has been spared in her construction, and when fully armed she will be a formidable and dangerous craft : in
strength and armament quite equal to the Tuscarora, so I should judge from what I
learn.
Mr. Miller, who built the hull, says he was employed by Fawcett, Preston & Co.,
and that they own the vessel. I have obtained information from many different
sources, all of which goes to show that she is intended for the Southern Confederacy.
I am satisfied that this is the case. She is ready to take her arms on board. I cannot
learn whether they are to be shipped here or at some other port. Of course she is in-'
tended as a privateer. When she sails, it will be to burn and destroy whatever sbe<
meets with bearing the American flag.1
In a postscript he adds, U The gun-carriages for the Oreto, I have just;
learned, were taken on board on Friday night last, in a rough state, and
taken down in the hold. Fraser, Trenholm & Co. have made advances
to Fawcett, Preston & Co., and Miller the builder."
This statement as to the gun-carriages was wholly incorrect.
Having received the letter of Mr. Dudley, Mr. Adams writes, inclosing it to Lord Bussell, as follows:
Legation of the United States,
London, February 18,18(12.
My Lokd : I have the honor to submit to your consideration the copy of an extract-*
of a letter addressed to me by the consul of the United States at Liverpool, going t^,.
show the preparation at that port of an armed steamer evidently intended for hostile,
operations on the ocean.    From the evidence furnished in the names of the persons
stated to be concerned in her construction and outfit, I entertain little doubt that the
intention is precisely that indicated in the letter of the codsuI, the carrying on war.
against the United States.   The parties are the same which dispatched the Bermuda,*
laden with contraband of war at the time, in August last, when I had the honor of
calling your lordship's attention to her position, which vessel then succeeded in running
the blockade, and which now appears to be about again to depart on a like errand.
Should further evidence to sustain the allegations respecting the Oreto be held ne-
British Appendii, vol. i. p. 1 : United States Documents, vol. vi. p
J16OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
369
cessary to effect the object of securing the interposition of Her Majesty's government,
. I will make an effort to procure it in a more formal manner.
I have, &c,
Charles francis adams.1
It is clear that, in the information thus conveyed to Lord Bussell,
there was, so far, nothing that could justify the seizure of the vessel.
Whether Mr. Dudley communicated to Mr. Adams the details of the information, to whieh he refers in general terms in his letter of the 17th,
or not, it is certain that no details were communicated to Her Majesty's
government. Nothing was specifically stated beyond the names of the
parties for whom and by whom the vessel had been built, and that the
former were the same as had, in the preceding August, dispatched the
Bermuda laden with munitions of war, with which she had succeeded in
running the blockade. Beyond this, all is suspicion, or, at best, the belief of two zealous servants of the United States Government, with
only a general reference to information received by one of them from
■ many different sources," no details of which are given, or means
afforded of testing its accuracy or trustworthiness. It is obvious that,
if upon such a representation the Government had proceeded to seize
the vessel, no court could have condemned her; she must inevitably have
been released. Indeed, Mr. Adams himself seems to have been conscious
that his representation was not one on which the Government could act
without further materials; for he ends his letter by saying, " Should
further evidence to sustain the allegations respecting the Oreto be held
necessary to effect the object of securing the interposition of Her Majesty's government, I will make an effort to procure it in a more formal
manner."
It is plain from this that, as late as the 18th of February, Mr. Adams
was not in possession of evidence on which he felt he had a right to call
for the interposition of the Government.
Nor does Mr. Dudley appear to have succeeded in obtaining any more
reliable information.    On the 19th he writes again to Mr. Seward:
I do not think there is any doubt but what she (the Florida) is intended for the so-called
Southern Confederacy. Information from many different sources all confirm it, and
some of the Southern Agents have admitted it. On Friday night last, her gun-carriages, in pieces, and some in a rough state, were taken on board and put down in the
hold. It is understood that her guns are at the foundery of Fawcett, Preston & Co. It
is probable they may be taken on in boxes, and mounted after they get out to sea ;
but I have nothing to warrant this supposition, except the fact of the gun-carriages
|eing taken on board in the night-time, and in the manner they were. She will be
quite equal in strength and armament to the Tuscarora when completed. She made a
trial trip of twenty miles yesterday. I have made this vessel the subject of two dispatches to Minister Adams, and communicated to him aH the particulars."2
Here again, when Mr. Dudley professes to be in possession of the important fact that sdme of the Southern Agents had admitted that the
Oreto was intended for the Southern Confederacy, he communicated the
fact only to Mr. Seward. No such information is given to Mr. Adanis,
still less to the Government or to the local authorities, by whom, had it
been imparted to them, the information might have been followed up.
Both in this and his former letter Mr. Dudley's information as to
the gun-carriages having been conveyed on board the Or^to, with the
additionally suspicious circumstance of this having been done by night,
proved altogether mistaken. The report made by the custom-house
officers of Liverpool on the 21st of February shows that the vessel had
no gun-carriages on board.   It further appears by reports made at a
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 1; United States Documents, vol. vi, p
2 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 218.
24 B
216.370
ARBITRATION
GENEVA.
later period that she had no gun-carriages on board when she finally
left Liverpool.   She had none on board when she arrived at Nassau.
All that under the circumstances could possibly be asked for, on the
information conveyed to the government by Mr. Adams, was inquiry;
and this Her Majesty's government at once proceeded to institute.
Immediately on the receipt of Mr. Adams's letter, Earl Bussell took
the necessary steps for causing local inquiries as to the Oreto to be made
by the officers to whose department it appertained to investigate such,
a matter. No clew havingjbeen given to the secret sources of information which Mr. Dudley may have possessed, these officers could only
apply in the first instance to the builders of the vessel. The result of
their inquiries, as shown in the reports made by them, appeared perfectly satisfactory. The commissioners of customs, on the 22d of February, report to the treasury as follows:
On receipt of your lordship's reference, we forthwith instructed our coUector at.
Liverpool to make inquiries in regard to the vessel Oreto, and it appears from his report that she has been built by Messrs. Miller & Sons for Messrs. Fawcett, Preston &
Co., engineers, of Liverpool^ and is intended for the use of Messrs. Thomas Brothers,
of Palermo, one of that firm having frequently visited the vessel during the process of
building.
The Oreto is pierced for four guns ; but she has, as yet, taken nothing on board but
coals and ballast. t She is not, at present, fitted for the reception of guns, nor are the
builders aware that she is to be supplied with guns while she remains in this country.';
The expense of her eonstruction has been paid, and she has been handed over to Messrs.
Fawcett & Preston. Messrs. Miller & Sons state their belief that her destination is
Palermo, as they have been requested to recommend a master to take her to that port,
and our collector at Liverpool states that he has every reason to believe that the vessel is for the Italian government.
We beg further to add, that special directions have been given to the officers at
Liverpool to watch the movements of the vessel, and that we wiU not fail to report
forthwith any circumstance which may occur worthv of your lordship's cognizance.
THO. F. FREMANTLE.
GRENVILLE C. L. BERKELEY.1
The statement of the, commissioners was based on the following reports which they had received from their officers at Liverpool:
Mr. Edwards to the commissioners of customs.
Liverpool, February 21, 1862. ;J
Honorable Sirs : The builders of the vessel Oreto are Messrs. Miller & Sons. Mr.
Miller is the chief surveyor for tonnage. By their note inclosed the vessel is correctly
described, and I have every reason to believe that she is for the Italian government,
and nqt for the Confederates.
It will bfe seen by thb note of the surveyor, Mr. Morgan, which I annex, that, as yet,
she has nothing in her, so that the information furnished to the government is, so far,
incorrect.
Special directions have been given to the officers to observe the movements of the
vessel, so that whatever takes place can
Respectfully, &c.
Mr. Mil
be made known to the board at any time.
S. PRICE EDWARDS.
to Mr. Edwards.
Liverpool, February 21, 1862.
Sir : We have built the dispatch-vessel Oreto for Messrs. Fawcett, Preston &, Co.,
engineers, of this town,- who are the agents of Messrs. Thomas Brothers, of Palermo, for
whose use the vessel, we understand, has been built. She is pierced for four guns; she
has taken nothing whatever on board except coals and ballast; she is in no way fitted
for the reception of guns, as yet; nor do we know that she is to have guns while in
England. Mr. Thomas, of the firm at Palermo, frequently visited the snip while she
was being built.
We have handed her over to the engineers, and have been paid for her.   According to
the best of my information the present destination of the vessel is Palermo; and we
have been asked to recommend a master to take her out to Palermo.
I remain, &c,
T. MILLER.
British Appendix, vol. i, p. 2.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
371
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Edwards.
February 21, 1862.
now lying in Toxteth Dock,
Sir: I beg to state that I have inspected the Oreto,
agreeably with your directions issued to-day.
She is a splendid steamer, suitable for a dispatch-boat; pierced for guns, but has
not any on board, nor are there any gun-carriages. Coals and ballast are all that the
holds contain.
Respectfully, &c,
C. MORGAN, Collector.-'
. Here, therefore, was the assurance of a respectable firm of ship-builders, by .whom the vessel had been built, that it was understood by them
to have been built for Thomas Brothers of Palermo, whose agents Fawcett & Co. were, and that Mr. Thomas, a member of the Palermo firm, had
frequently visited the ship while she was in the course of construction.
There was the statement of Mr. Edwards, an officer possessing the confidence of the governnent, that he had every reason to believe that the
vessel was built for the Italian government, and not for the confederates.
And from the report of Mr. Morgan, another government officer, as well
as from the statement of Mr. Miller, it further appeared that the representation of Mr. Dudley, that the vessel " had received her gun-carriages and wasreadyto takeherarms on board," was altogether incorrect,
there being no gun-carriages on board, or preparation of any sort for
the reception of guns. ■
If, prior to the receipt of these reports, the evidence was insufficient
to justify the seizure or detention of the vessel, assuredly after them
Her Majesty's government would have acted most improperly if they
had directed their officers to adopt so arbitrary aud unwarranted a proceeding.
It may be said that further inquiries should have been instituted.
But of whom ?   Mr. Dudley, to whom every one who had conceived
any suspicions about the vessel, or heard any rumors respecting her,
appears to have run, and who  of course was naturally disposed to
listen to any statements of tSe kind, made a point of not giving up the
names of his informants.   No facts were ever communicated by Mr.
Dudley, either to the officers of the port or to the police of Liverpool.
The reports received from the commissioners of customs by the government were at once communicated to Mr. Adams.    I cannot help
thinking that then was the time for putting Her Majesty's government
• in possession of any information which had been obtained by Mr. Dudley from so "many different.sources," if that information could have
been made available, and for procuring the evidence which Mr. Adams
had expressed himself willing to make an effort to obtain.   But nothing
further was heard from that gentleman till the 26th of March, (upwards of a month later,) when the vessel had actually sailed.   Either
Mr. Adams felt, after the reports made to the government by its officers,
that the zeal of Mr. Dudley had led him to form hasty conclusions,
or the information, though derived  from " many different sources,"
turned out to be such as could not be relied on, or the evidence was
found not to be forthcoming.  Even Mr. Dudley, whose untiring industry
and zeal in the discharge of his duty is certainly entitled to admiration, does not appear to have supplied Mr. Adams during the whole of
this period with any evidence of importance, or to have been required
by Mr. Adams to procure evidence upon which the government could
be called upon to act.   It appears to me, under these circumstances,
singularly inconsistent and unjust to impute as matter of blame to Earl
Bussell, as is done in the case of the United States, that he did not call
British Appendix, vol. i, p. 159.372
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
updn Mr. Adams to furnish further evidence. The government were
satisfied with the reports of their officers, having received which they
might reasonably, and without being liable to any imputation of want
of due care, be of opinion that they ought to rest content, at all events
till something more should be brought forward. There was no reason
why they should doubt the written statement of Messrs. Miller, a firm
of known respectability, and one of the members of which was a government officer at the port. All the firms mentioned had carried on
business at Liverpool previously to the war, and it neither is, nor can
be, suggested that after the war had begun they had no business dealings or transactions except with the Confederate States. At the same
time, as there was no doubt that the vessel was one which was capable
of being adapted to the purpose of war, it was right at such a conjuncture
that a watchful eye should be kept on her. Directions to this effect
were accordingly given by the commissioners of customs, and the vessel was diligently watched until the hour of her departure. If evidence had been forthcoming to show that the government officers were
deceived, it was for Mr. Dudley, who professed to know where it was to
be found, to produce it. He would have been wholly wanting in his
duty if, being possessed of, or enabled to obtain such evidence, he had
failed to produce it. The fact that neither Mr. Dudley nor Mr. Adams
made any communication to the government till after the vessel had
sailed is, as it seems to me, very strong to show that no such evidence
was to be had.
If Mr. Dudley, to whom everybody appears to have resorted who had
anything to communicate, could find nothing on which his superior,
Mr. Adams, ever ready to address requisitions or remonstrances to
Earl Bussell, could call for the intervention of Her Majesty's government, it seems unreasonable to reproach the government with want of
due diligence in not making inquiries which, there is every reason to
think, could have led to no profitable result.
That the government were sincerely de^rous of ascertaining the true •
character of this vessel, lest, possibly, any violation of neutrality should
be contemplated, is shown by this, that instead of resting satisfied with
the inquiries of the local officers, a belief haying been expressed that
the vessel was being built for the Italian government, Lord Bussell, on
the 26th of February, telegraphed to Sir James Hudson, the British
minister at Turin, desiring him to " ascertain and report whether a vessel •
called the Oreto, now fitting, out at Liverpool, is intended for the use of
the Italian government."1   Sir James Hudson having referred to Signor
Bicasoli, the minister for foreign affairs, telegraphs, in answer: " Bica-
soli tells me he has no knowledge whatever of the ship Oreto, but will
cause inquiry to be made."2   As the construction of such a vessel would
belong to the department of the marine, the fact of Signor Bicasoli
being unaware of any order having been given for its construction
would, of course, not be conclusive.   Indeed, Signor Bicasoli would not
take upon himself to negative the fact, but promised to make inquiry
on the subject.    Unfortunately the result of the inquiry, which was that ,
the vessel had not been built for the Italian government, was not communicated to Sir James Hudson till the 25th of March, by which time
the Oreto had actually sailed.3   The delay is believed to have been
owing to a change in the Italian ministry, which occurred about the
period in question; for the answer to Sir James Hudson was given not
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 3.
2 Ibid.
3 Ibid., p. 6.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
373
by Signor Bicasoli, but by Signor Batazzi, who had succeeded him as
-minister for foreign affairs. The delay is certainly not one for which
Her Majesty's government can in any way be held responsible. Until
the final answer to Sir James Hudson's inquiry had been given, the uncertain answer of Signor Bicasoli could not, for the reason already
given—namely, that the matter was not one belonging to his department—suffice to warrant the seizure or detention of the vessel. The ignorance of the Italian consul at Liverpool, who would not necessarily be
informed of an order given by the Italian government, especially if the
order had been given to Thomas Brothers of Palermo, could not make
it unnecessary to wait for Signor Batazzi's answer. But the alleged
ignorance of the Italian consul was never communicated to the government or to the local authorities. The information was given by Mr.
Dudley to Mr. Seward alone: in other words, was thrown away.
Mr. Dudley continued to keep a watchful eye on the Oreto. On the
27th of February he writes to Mr. Seward:
I have positive evidence that the Oreto gun-boat is intended for the southern confederacy. She is to carry sixteen guns, is intended as a privateer, and, from present appearances, looks as if she would start on her cruise direct from this port. She has
taken on board, this morning, seventy barrels of pork and beef, sixty sacks of navy and
six barrels of cabin bread, together with other provisions. The guns are to be shipped
at some other port in England.x
Again on the 1st of March:
The day before yesterday I wrote the Department that I had obtained evidence that
the gun-boat Oreto was intended as a privateer, and that she was taking on her provisions, <&c. Since then she has been quite busy in taking on provisions. She has a
very large quantity, enough for a long cruise. They are getting as many southern
sailors as.they.can. They want 130 men if they can procure them. The pilot has been
told they would leave to-day; they are only waiting for the arrival of the West India
boat at Southampton. The captain who is to command her is to come by this boat. A
man by the name of Duguid, a Scotchman, is to take her out of this port as an English
vessel. Her transfer will be made outside. The pilot thinks she wiU not come back
to Liverpool after her trial trip. He is given to understand that she will go to the Isle
of Man, then to Holyhead, and some other-ports, in one of which her guns will be
placed on board, and then she will enter at once on her cruise, and sail to the Mediterranean. I have made arrangements by which I think intelligence of her movements
will be communicated to nie. Yesterday I addressed letters to the consuls on the Mediterranean, and sea-port^ of Spain, Portugal, and some others, advising them of this
vessel, and requesting them to report her if she should visit the port. The programme,
as laid down to the pilot, may not be carried out, but it looks very probable when
^taken in connection with the large supplies of provisions she has received on board.l
The programme was not carried out. The Oreto neither went to the
Isle of Man, nor Holyhead, nor the Mediterranean; nor did she get any
southern sailors.
In the foregoing letters Mr. Dudley says he has 1 positive evidence "
that the gun-boat Oreto was intended as a privateer, and for the southern confederacy. If so, one is naturally induced to ask how it was that
this evidence was not communicated to Mr. Adams, by whom it might
immediately have been made available, instead of being only spoken of,
and that only in general terms, to Mr. Seward, who, being on the other
side of the Atlantic, could not, of course, make use of it to stop the vessel. Is not the fair inference to be drawn from this and the other letters of this gentleman, when we see how little resulted from them, that
anxious to show his zeal in the best light, he was more disposed to
address himself to the Secretary of State than to the minister in London, and was somewhat apt to boast of possessing evidence, when, in
fact, he had nothing more than reports and conjectures, which, though
not inconsistent with probability, possessed no substantial or available
1 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 220.374
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
reality ?   Or was it that his information was obtained by secret means
which would have stamped it with discredit if produced I
On the 5th of March Mr. Dudley again writes Mr. Seward:
Owing, as it is alleged, to the authorities here, the Oreto has been compelled to register as au English vessel, and be regularly entered, &c. She entered on Saturday
last for Palermo, in Sicily, and Jamaica, in the West Indies, W. C. MiUer as owner, and.
Duguid as commander. Her guns are not on board. She shipped her crew on Monday
last. Inclosed find a copy of an agreement given by the captain to one of the men.
By it you will see .hat, while Muler is the owner, Fawcett, Preston & Co. pay
the men. I have this document temporarily in my possession. The transfer of the •
vessel to the southern confederacy will not be made here, but at some place outside;
it may be at Palermo or Bermuda, but most likely at some place in the Mediterranean,
as the pilot and all the men are now given to understand that they are first to go there. I
The foreman in Fawcett, Preston & Co.'s told a young man, formerly in the employ of
that company, that the guns for the Oreto were to be shipped to Palermo, and put on.
board at that place; while another person in their foundery told one of my men that
the guns had been' sent on in the steamer Bermuda, and were to be landed at Bermuda, and that the Oreto was to call there for them. Which of these, or whether either
of them, is true, I cannot tell; but what gives some strength to the latter statement is
the fact that on Saturday morning last, while the Bermuda was in the river, and jnst
before she sailed,(several large cannon were placed on board of her. Both of these persons in the employ of Fawcett, Preston & Co. stated that she was intended for the
confederates. The report is that she is to stop at Holyhead. I have sent a man there
to watch her, and made arrangements with one of the crew to give information from
time to time; made her the subject of a number of communications to Mr. Adams, and
on Friday addressed a cif§|ilar to all our consuls in the Mediterranean, requesting I
them to look after and report to the Department in case she should visit the port. The
provisions of the Oreto are of the very best kind, and very ample, (the pilot says
enough to last a year,) with abundance of wines and liqnors for the officers. She.
sailed from here last evening—the bill of entry says for Palermo and Jamaica in bal-Jj
last.   Her crew shipped consists of fifty-two men.1
The conflicting statements set forth in this letter show how uncertain
and unreliable were the reports which were conveyed to Mr. Dudley by
persons who gave their conjectures as facts, as well as how little reliance can be placed on the information of Mr. Dudley, and how readily
that gentleman accepted unauthentic rumors and reports as the foundation of his statements. Mr. Miller was not registered as owner, but, as
we shall see iu a moment, Mr. John Henry Thomas, a merchant connected with Palermo. In the agreement with the crew, printed in the
British appendix, the firm of Fawcett, Preston & Co. are mentioned
as " managing
owners;" no mention is made of Mr. Miller, either as;
registered or managing owner.
The guns for the Oreto, which it was asserted were to go out in the
Bermuda, did not go out in that vessel.
Here, agafn, I cannot but repeat the observation that while facts
which, if true, were no doubt of importance, are communicated to Mr.
Seward, no information respecting them is given to Mr. Adams, by
whom they might have been turned to good account, or to the local
authorities, to whom they might have afforded a clue to get at the truth.
The statements made by the foreman and workmen of Fawcett, Preston,
& Co., if mentioned, in the proper quarter,- might have led to important
revelations.
The attention of the local authorities at Liverpool had not been withdrawn from the vessel. They insisted, as appears from Mr; Dudley's
letter to Mr. Seward, of the 5th of March, that the ship should be registered, no doubt as the condition of her clearance, and on the 3d of
March, she was registered accordingly, in the name of § John Henry
Thomas, of Liverpool, in the county of Lancaster, merchant," apparently either a member of or connected with the Palermo firm—the said
United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 221.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
375
John Henry Thomas
to the usual form :
sen making the following declaration,
according
I, the undersigned John Henry Thomas, of Liverpool, county of L ancaster, merchant, declare as follows : I am a natural-born British subject, born at Palermo, in
the island of Sicily, of British parents, and have'never taken the oath of allegiance to
any foreign state. The above general description of the ship is correct. James Alexander Duguid, whose certificate of competency or service is No. 4,073, is the master of
said ship. I am entitled to be registered as owner of sixty-four shares of the said
ship. To the best of my knowledge and belief no person or body of persons other than
such persons or bodies of persons as are by the merchant shipping act, 1854, qualified
to be owners of British ships, is entitled, as owner, to any interest whatever, either
legal or beneficial, in the said ship. And I make this solemn declaration, conscientiously believing the same to be true.
JOHN H. THOMAS.
Made and subscribed the 1st day of March, 1862, by the above-named John Henry
Thomas, in the nresence of—
J. C. JOHNSTONE, Jr.,
Registrar of Shipping, Port of Liverpool.1
of Mr. Thomas, who thus declared himself to be a native of
The fac
Palermo, being registered as the owner, and his declaration that no per
son or body of persons, other than such* as were by the merchant shipping act qualified to be owners of British ships, was entitled, as owner,
to any interest, legal or beneficial, in the vessel, were of course calculated to give support to the statement that the vessel was intended for
the firm of Thomas Brothers of that place.
On the ensuing day, the 4th, the Oreto cleared out for Palermo and
Jamaica.
Attention is called in the case of the United States to the fact that,
I notwithstanding the alleged belief of the Liverpool officers that the
vessel was intended for the King of Italy, she was allowed to clear for
Jamaica in ballast." In fact, she cleared for Palermo and Jamaica; not,
as would appear to be thus represented, for Jamaica alone. And it is to
be observed that the belief of Mr. Edwards, the collector, on this head
had been expressed as much as a month before, without, as it would
appear, any definite grounds ; and that, on the other hand, Messrs. Miller had stated that she had been built for the Palermo firm, and that
this statement had received confirmation from the registration of.
Thomas as her owner.
Though represented as destined to be handed over to the Italian government, as a dispatch-boat, yet, if built.in the first instance for a private firm, if was not impossible that it might be intended that she should
make a voyage to the West Indies before being parted with. Even if
her being cleared for Jamaica, as well as Palermo, had been deemed a
circumstance of suspicion, it would not have justified a seizure of the
wessel, unless there was something to show that the clearance was fictitious and fraudulent. It was only by subsequent events that this was
made to appear.
Attention is invited in the case of the United States to what is called
the I easy credulity " of these officicals, "who to the first charges of
Mr. Adams replied by putting forward the belief of the builders as to
the destination of the vessel, and who met his subsequent complaints
by extracting from the custom-house records the false clearance which
Bullock and Fraser, Trenholm & Co. had caused to be entered there."2
This representation appears to me very unfair. These officers, on receiving instructions from the commissioners of customs to make inquiry _
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 10.
*. Case of the United States, p. 337.376
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
had no one to resort to on the first occasion but the builders. They
could report no other than what the builders stated, which was that " to
the best of their information " the present destination of the vessel .was
Palermo, as it had been built for the firm of Thomas Brothers, of that
place, and they had been asked to recommend a master to take her out
to Palermo. When it is said that on the second occasion the officers
extracted from the custom-house records the false clearance which Bullock and Fraser, Trenholm & Co. had caused to be entered there, it is
again to be borne in mind that it was their duty to communicate the
entry of the ship's clearance to their superiors, according as it stood on
the register; besides, there is no evidence of the entry having been
made by Bullock or by Fraser, Trenholm, & Co. Indeed, that Bullock
can have been a party to the clearance is impossible. The recklessness
of the assertion is apparent from the fact that the clearance was effected,
and the entry of it made on the 3d of March; whereas Bullock did not
arrive at Liverpool in the Annie Childs till the 11th.1 If Fraser & Co.
were parties to the clearance the fact appears to have been unknown to
Mr. Dudleyj no suggestion of the kind is anywhere made by him. Still
less is there any ground whate"«er for supposing that the officers had any
knowledge or reason to suspect that the entry had been made by these
parties, or was in any respect false. The slur attempted to be cast on these
officers, who are said to have been deceived only " because they wished
to be deceived," appears to me, I must say, wholly unfounded, and one
cannot but regret to see imputations of this kind introduced into a case
stated on the part of the American Government.
But the question, it must never be forgotten, is not whether these
officers were unduly credulous; the question on which the liability of the
British government must depend is whether there were facts ascertained,
or capable of being ascertained, upon which they would have been justified in taking possession of this vessel. It seems to me that there
were not.
Upon wlu
the seizure, or asked
court of law ?
It is here all essential to keep in mind what it was which in a court of
law it would have been incumbent on the public prosecutor to establish,
in order to the condemnation of the vessel under, the foreign-enlistment
act.   He would have had in the first plade to show that the vessel, was
equipped for war.   As to this, it is true there would have been no difficulty.   The vessel was pierced for guns, and had the necessary fittings
for war; she was represented as a dispatch-boat, which means a.vessel
capable of being'armed, and therefore of being used for war.   But it
would have been further necessary to prove that the vessel was intended to be used against a belligerent with whom Great Britain was at
peace.   Here lay the difficulty; for on this head the evidence totally
failed.   Beyond surmises, suspicion, rumor, there was nothing, at least
nothing tangible or that could be made practicably available.   According to the safe and sound rules of evidence, which happily prevail in an
English court of justice, as also in those of America, (for the procedure
is the same in both,) the suspicions and impressions of Mr. Dudley would
have been wholly inadmissible; the reports received by him from persons who could not be brought forward would have been rejected as
mere hearsay; the gossip of the docks or the shipwrights' yards would
have been at once excluded;  insinuations, imputing to respectable
vidence could Her Majesty's government have supported
for the confiscation of this vessel in amEna'lish.
1 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 223.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
377
officers abandonment of duty and complicity in crime, recklessly made
and unsupported by proof, would have been treated with proper disregard. But, beyond this, what was there to show that this vessel was
intended for the service of the Confederate States ? Positively nothing;
while, on the other hand, there was the fact that an apparently respectable merchant, a native of Palermo, had registered himself as the owner;
that the vessel had cleared for Palermo and Jamaica, and that her crew
had signed articles for a voyage to those places.
A circumstance to which the officers at Liverpool appear to have attached considerable importance, was that the vessel, though pierced for
guns, had not even gun-carriages on board, and was wholly unarmed
and destitute of munitions of war. It might indeed be surmised by Mr.
Dudley that the vessel would receive her armament elsewhere, and the
sequel proved that his suspicions were well founded; but on his own
showing he was whdlly without evidence to prove that such was to be
the case. ISTor must it be forgotten that the Florida was the first vessel
of war built in England for the Confederate States, and that the artifices
and tricks, to which the unscrupulous cunning of the confederate agents
did not hesitate to resort in violation of British neutrality, had not till
then been brought into play. The officers therefore finding, after having unceasingly watched the vessel, that no attempt was made to arm
her, may hot unreasonably have been satisfied that she was leaving on
an innocent vojTage; or, at all events, without there being any intention
of arming her in British waters. To some minds this may seem " easy
credulity."   To others, less astute, it may seem natural enough, and not
to be justly imputable to want of proper dili
"I CffXYt f» A
nee 01
intentional
neglect of duty
If, indeed, the officers had become aware that another vessel had been
at that time taking on board gun-carriages and guns capable of being
put on board the Oreto after she had left the port, such a circumstance
would have been well calculated to excite suspicion that the professed
voyage to Palermo and Jamaica was but the pretended destination vof
the vessel.
But nothing of the kind existed. M. Staempfli, who has insisted on
such a fact as one of the main grounds of a decision against the British
government, has here fallen into a very serious error. Instead of the
guns and their carriages being brought, as he has imagined, from Hartlepool to Liverpool and there shipped, they were, in fact, in order to avoid
suspicion, transmitted by railway, unknown to the authorities, from
Liverpool to Hartlepool,' a port on the opposite coast of England, and
there shipped j so that, while the officers at Liverpool knew nothing of
the shipment of the guns, the officers at Hartlepool knew nothing of the
sailing of the Oreto. To this it may be added that, though Mr. Dudley
was aware of the sailing of both the ships, and also of the transport of
guns and munitions of war from Liverpool to Hartlepool by Fawcett'&
Co., to form part of the cargo of the Bahama, it never occurred to him
to imagine that there was any connection between the two vessels.
While he believed that the Oreto was about to proceed to the Mediterranean, his letters show that he believed that the guns and munitions
of war sent to the Bahama were intended to run the blockade or be
taken to Bermuda or Nassau, to be there transshipped for that purpose.
On the 7th of March he writes to Mr. Seward :
Some three weeks ago I was credibly informed that the same parties who had purchased the Herald had bought the steamer Bahama; that they would load her with
munitions of war for the so-called southern confederacy, and either run the blockade
or else land her cargo at Bermuda and run it into Charleston on smaller vessels.   I378
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
made inquiries to find her, and wrote to different consulates without obtaining any'
information about her, or any vessel of that name. Yesterday we discovered that Fawcett, Preston & Co. were shipping, by rail, cases containing shells and shot, also cases
supposed to contain cannon and rifles, directed to | Pickford & Co., West Hartlepool,
for shipment per steamer Bahama, for Hamburg." This Hartlepool is the same place
where the Bermuda, on her first trip, received a portion -of her cargo. I have written
to the consuls at Leeds and London, and will endeavor to learn something more about
this business.1
On the 12th of March :
The vice-consul at Newcastle whites me that there is a steamer, called the Bahan_a>>
loading at West Hartlepool. He ho doubt will advise the Department and give all the
particulars in reference to her. Fawcett, Preston & Co. are sending large quantities
of munitions of war to this vessel. They have already sent from.Liverpool five hundred cases of shot and shells, upward of twenty tons of cannon, and about four tons
of gun-carriages. This vessel will either run the blockade or land her cargo at Bermuda or Nassau, and have it ferried over in smaller vessels.2
When Mr. Dudley himself had not the shadow»of a suspicion that
the guns sent over to Hartlepool to be loaded in the Bahama were intended for the Oreto, it would be unreasonable, even independently of
the mistake I have adverted to, to expect that the Liverpool officers
should have seen through the contrivance.
jNow, indeed, we are enabled to see these things by the light of sub->
sequent events and since-acquired knowledge. We now know that the
Oreto was ordered by Bullock for the Confederate States, and that Bullock was an agent of those States. But at that time these facts were
entirely unknown to Her Majesty's government, and the first of them,
at least, equally so to Mr. Dudley himself. Subsequent events have
shown that the suspicions entertained by Mr. Dudley and others were
well founded; but though these suspicions may have had more or less;
of probability, they were but suspicions, and were, therefore, incapable
of being made practically available. It is easy to be wise after the
event. ilJEventus stultorum magister," 'says the adage. The tribunal
must be on its guard against the impression likely to be produced by
the adroit way in which, in the United States pleadings, the story of
these vessels is told without distinguishing what was formerly known,
and what is now known about them. But obviously nothing can be
more irrational or unjust than to say that Her Majesty's government
were bound to have seen things then as we see them now, or to seek the
condemnation of the Oreto on such evidence as was then forthcoming,
because subsequent events have made manifest what was then incapable of being proved.
The inability of Mr. Dudley to obtain any evidence as to the destination of the vessel becomes the more remarkable from the fact that,,
owing to an accident, an additional three weeks from the clearing out
of the Oreto was afforded him for discovery. The vessel in going out,
after she had cleared, sustained some injury, and had to put back for
repairs, and was detained till the 22d of March, when she finally sailed.
Notwithstanding this favorable circumstance Mr. Dudley appears to
have been unable to obtain any proof of the vessel being intended for
the confederate service.
On the 12th of March he writes to Mr. Seward :
The steam gun-boat Oreto put back into the river yesterday again. This is the third
time she has come back. She is now anchored in the stream. I am quite unable to
account for her conduct. She, no doubt, is either waiting for her guns or some person.-
I was told, some two weeks ago, that a southern naval officer was to come over to take
command after they transferred her; it is possible they are waiting for his arrival.1
1 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 222.
2 Ibid., nage 223.
3 Ibid.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
379
Again, on the 15th, he writes:
The Oreto is stiU in the river, lying off Eggmont. She is evidently not ready for
sea, and is waiting for her guns or else for some person. I was informed yesterday
that her guns are to be placed on board before she leaves this port; that they are to be
boxed, taken over to Birkenhead, and there placed on tugs or lighters and conveyed to
the vessel. I have no means of verifying this statement. I have communicated it to
our minister at London.2
According to these letters, and that of the 5th of March, previously
quoted, Mr. Dudley had addressed several communications to Mr.
Adams on the subject of the Oreto. No new facts can, however, have
been communicated which Mr. Adams deemed worthy of being submitted to Her Majesty's government, for no communication was received from him. If Mr. Dudley was in possession of available information, and failed to communicate it to Mr. Adams, or if such information was communicated to Mr. Adams, but that gentleman omitted to
make Her Majesty's government acquainted with it, there would have
been a want of " due diligence " on the part of the agents of the United
States Government. But the known vigilance and assiduity of these
gentlemen renders such an imputation impossible.
On the 22d of March, the day the Oreto actually sailed, Mr. Dudley
writes thus to Mr. Adams:
The Oreto is still in the river. A flat-boat has taken part of her armament to her.
A part of the crew of the steahier Annie Childs, which came to this port loaded with
cotton, have just left my office. They tell me that Captain Bullock is to command the
Oreto, and that four other officers for this vessel came over with them in the Childs.
The names of three are Young, Low, and Maffet or Moffit, the fourth'was called Eddy;
the first two are lieutenants, and the two last named midshipmen. They further state
that these officers during the voyage wore naval uniforms; that they came on the Childs
at a place called Smithville, some twenty miles down the river from Wilmington; that
it was talked about and understood by all on board that their object in coming was to
take command of this vessel, which was being built in England for the southern confederacy. They further state that it was understood in Wilmington, before they left,
that several war-vessels were being built in England for the South. As they were
coining up the river in the Childs, as they passed the Oreto, she dipped her flag to the
Childs. I have had this last from several sources, and the additional fact that the
same evening, after the arrival of this steamer, a dinner was given in the Oreto to the
officers who came over in the Childs. I understand she will make direct for Madeira
and Nassau.2
Here was, indeed, information of importance, but unfortunately it
came too late; nor was it communicated to the Government or to the
local authorities till the ship had sailed. Had Mr. Dudley, instead of
contenting himself with writing to Mr. Adams, at once put the collector
of customs in communication with the part of the crew of the Annie
Childs to whom he refers in his letter, the statement thus made, had it
appeared to be such as could be depended on, might have made it incumbent on that officer to detain the vessel. But this obvious course
does not appear to have occurred to Mr. Dudley. He contented himself with writing to Mr. Adams. The opportunity was lost and the
vessel left.
It is further to be observed that a considerable portion of this information turned out to be untrue. In what is stated in the foregoing letter as to Captain Bullock and four other officers being intended for the
Oreto, Mr. Dudley was again misled by his informants, whose names as
usual are not given. Only one of these parties, a Mr. Low, went out in
her. Her master and crew were English, and shipped, as we have seen,
for the voyage to Palermo and Jamaica.
1 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 224.
2 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 228; British Appendix, vol. i, p. 5.380
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
On the 25th of March, having received Mr. Dudley's letter of the
22d, Mr. Adams, for the first time since his letter of the 18th of February, a period of five weeks, again writes to Earl Bussell on the subject of the Oreto:
Mr Lord : I have the honor to submit to your consideration the copy of a letter
received from the consul of the United States at Liverpool, tonching the case of the
steam gun-boat Oreto, which I have already made the subject of a communication
some time ago. It is with great reluctance that I am driven to the conviction that thcJtv
representations made to your losdship of the purposes and destination of that vessel^;
were delusive, and that though at first it may have been intended for service inSicily,
yet that such an intention has been long since abandoned in fact, and the pretense
has been held up only the better to conceal the true object of the parties engaged.
That object is to make war on the United States. All the persons thus far known to
be most connected with the undertaking are either directly employed by the insurgents in the United States of America, or residents of Great Britain notoriously in
sympathy with and giving aid and comfort to them on this side of the water.1
The letter, which is of considerable length, then quits the subject <M
the Oreto, and goes into the question of the assistance derived by the
insurgent States from England. It is so far important to the present
purpose, that it shows that, while making general complaints ou the
part taken by British subjects in what was going on, Mr. Adams had no
specific complaint to make on the score of the Oreto. He nowhere
complains of the Oreto not having been seized, nor had he ever called;
upon the Government to seize her; nor has his complaint reference tof
the insufficiency of the existing municipal law to meet such a case as;
that of the Oreto; the Complaint relates to the assistance derived by
the confederates from Great Britain in other ways—such as blockade,
running and importation of contraband of war and other articles—and
not to the special subject of the Oreto, or the foreign-enlistment act.
At this time Her Majesty's government were not aware that the
Oreto had, in fact, sailed. Earl Bussell, therefore, on receiving the
letter of Mr. Adams of the 25th, immediately directed that the treasury
and customs should be requested to take such steps as might be necessary to ascertain whether the Oreto was equipped for the purpose of
making war on the United States, and if that fact could be proved, to
detain the vessel.2 He informed Mr. Adams that he had done so. In
reply to the general complaints of Mr. Adams, he observes:
You have not yourself hitherto furnished me with evidence that any vessel has
received a hostile or warlike equipment in British waters, which has been afterward
used against the United States.   The care that was taken to prevent the warlike!'
equipment of the Nashville in British waters must be familiar to your recollection.3
The reference to the commissioners of customs led to the following'
report of April the 4th:
Your lordships having referred to us the annexed letter from Mr. Hammond, trans
mitting, by desire or Earl Russell, a copy of a further letter, addressed by the United
States consul at Liverpool to Mr. Adams, the United States minister at this court, U£
which it is again affirmed that the Oreto is being fitted out as a vessel of war for the
southern confederacy, and various statements are reported in support of that assertion, and requesting that your lordships would instruct this board to give directions,
that the Oreto might be vigilantly watched, and that, if any armament prohibited by
the foreign-enlistment act should be discovered, the vessel might be at once detained;
We report—
That, on the receipt of your lordships' reference, we directed our collector at Liverpool immediately to inquire into the farther allegations made in regard to the Oreto,
and to govern himself in accordance with the instructions contained in Mr.
Hammond's letter, and, having received the report of the collector, we find that the
1 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 227; British Appendix, vol. i, p. 4.
8 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 5.
3 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 6; United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 30.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
381
vessel in question was registered on the 3d ultimo, in the name of John Henry Thomas,,
of Liverpool, as sole owner; that she cleared on the following day for Palermo and
Jamaica in ballast, but did not sail until the 22d, the day on which the American
consul's letter is dated, having a crew of fifty-two men, all British, with the exception
of three or four, one of whom only was an American. She had no gunpowder, nor
even a single gun, and no colors, saving Maryatt's code of signals and a British ensign,,
nor any goods on board except the stores enumerated on the accompanying copy of
her victualing bill.
With regard to the statements in the letter of the consul, the collector farther
reports that it is clear the passengers brought by the Annie Childs, the vessel therein
mentioned, which has recently arrived from one of the Southern States, were not
intended to form any portion of the crew of the Oreto, inasmuch as they were still in
Liverpool, and that the dipping of the ensign on board the latter vessel on the arrival'
of the Annie Childs, as far as the collector had been enabled to ascertain, was intended
as a compliment to one of the Cunard steamers and another vessel which saluted the
Annie Childs- pn her arrival, the masters of the several vessels being known to one
another.
THO. F. FREMANTLE.
GRENVILLE C. L. BERKELEY.1
It further appears from statements made afterward in August, 1862,
by the officers of customs at Liverpool, when evidence was being collected, to be used in the proceedings instituted against the Oreto at
Nassau, that those officers never lost sight of the Oreto to the time of
her final departure; and it also appears, from their statement and that of
the pilot who took the vessel out of the Mersey, that her condition was
to the last wholly incompatible with any present purpose of war.
Statement of Mr. Edward Morgan.
I am one of the surveyors of customs at this port. Pursuant to instructions I received from the collector on the 21st of February in the present year and at subsequent
dates, I visited the steamer Oreto at. varioas times, when she was being fitted out in
the dock, close to the yard of Messrs. Miller & Sons, the builders of the vessel. I continued this inspection from time to time until she left the dock, and I am certain that
when she left the river she had no warlike stores of any kind whatever on board.
After she went into the river she was constantly watched by the boarding officers,.
who were directed to report to me whenever any goods were taken on board, but, in.
reply to my frequent inquiries, they stated nothing was put in the ship but coals.
EDWARD MORGAN, Surveyor.
Statement of Mr. Henry Lloyd.
In consequence of instructions received from Mr. Morgan, surveyor, I, in conjunction
with the other three surveyors of the river, kept watch on the proceedings of the vessel
Oreto from the time she left the Toxteth Dock, on the 4th March last, till the day she
sailed the 22d of the same month. On one occasion I was alongside of her, and spoke to
Mr. Parry, the pilot, and the chief mate. Neither I nor any of the other river surveyors
saw at any time any arms or warlike ammunition of any kind taken on board, and we
are perfectly satisfied that none such was taken on board during her stay in the river.
H. LLOYD, Examining Officer.
Statement on oath of Mr. William Parry.
I was the pilot in charge of the ship Oreto when she left the Toxteth Dock on the
4th March, 1862. I continued on board to the day of her sailing, which was the 22d
of the same month, and never left her save on Sunday, when all work was suspended,
I saw tbe ship before the coals and provisions were taken into her; there were no
munitions of war in her, that is to say, she had no guns, carriages, shot, sheU, or pow.
der; had there been any on board I must have seen it. I piloted the ship out of the
Mersey, to Point Lynas, off Anglesea, where I left her, and she proceeded down channel, since which she has not returned. From the time the vessel left the river until I
left her she held no communication with the shore, or with any other vessel, for the
purpose of receiving anything like cargo on board. I frequently saw Mr. Lloyd, the
tide survevor, alongside the ship while in the river.
WM. PARRY.2
Sworn before me at the custom-house, Liverpool, this 23d August, 1862.
S. PRICE EDWARDS, Collector.
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 7; United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 231..
2 British Case, p. 58; British Appendix, vol. i, p. 34.
L382
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Upon the facts to which I have been referring, it seems to me impossible to entertain a serious doubt that if the cause had been brought
into a court of justice, the case of the government must have broken
down hopelessly, and the vessel must have been forthwith released. In
discussing the legal questions bearing on this part of the case, I have al-
already given my reasons for thinking that under such circumstances a government would not be j ustified in instituting legal proceedings: I reiterate
that opinion here. I think it would have been useless, and therefore
wrong, to seize, and take proceedings to condemn, the Oreto.
The deficiency of proof, up to the time of tbe departure of the Florida!
from Liverpool, as to the vessel being intended for the Confederate
States, is now sought to be made good by a general and sweeping state-.,'
ment as to the i notoriety " of the fact.   "All the facts about the Florida," it is said, | and about the hostile expedition which it was proposed
to make against the United States, were'open and notorious at Liver-:
pool."1   Of course nothing is more easy than to make a general assertion of this kind; but such' an assertion ought not to be made without
some evidence to support it.   The only proofs to which we are referred
are the dispatches of Mr. Dudley during the period in question; but hav-3
ing gone carefully through these dispatches, almost all of which I have§
hereinbefore set out, I find nowhere any reference whatsoever to the "notoriety" which, on the authority of these dispatches, is thus boldly asserted
to have existed.   I find, however, strong proof of the contrary in the
statement of Mr. Dudley himself, as to the great secrecy that was main--'
tained about the vessel, and his consequent inability to obtain any
I definite information" concerning her, as well as in the fact that in all
his statements respecting her he seldom adduced any definite or specific
information, which did not afterward turn out to be incorrect.   The
British government is, therefore, as it seems to me, well warranted in asking, where is the proof of these assertions ?   Where is the proof that even
the American consul at Liverpool, whose activity in hunting for secret information appears to have been indefatigable, and to whom every one
resorted who had information to disclose, knew of the contract with
Bullock, or of the dispatch, cargo, and destination of the Bahama?
And if he knew them, why did he not either communicate his knowledge
and the proofs in his possession to the British government, or himself
lay an information on oath against the ship?2
But there is an important fact, which appears .to me conclusive to disprove the alleged notoriety thus positively asserted. The- crew of the
Oreto had shipped at Liverpool for what they believed to be a mercantile voyage to Palermo and Jamaica. By the time they had arrived at
Kassau, they began to suspect the true character of the vessel, and that
she was intended for a vessel of war for the Confederate States, where-
iupon they refused to continue in her, and insisted on their discharge.
It is plain that these men, coming from the port of Liverpool, had been
wholly unaware of what is now represented to have been there matter
of open notoriety. _STo one acquainted with the habits of seamen, and
aware of the interest this class of men take in the character of a vessel
in which they are about to ship for a long voyage, can be credulous
enough to believe, upon the mere credit of an assertion unsupported by
proof, that a crew of fifty men could have shipped on board of this vessel
in utter ignorance of a fact alleged to have been notorious to every one
at the port; and which, if knoWn to them, would, as the sequel showed,
1 Case of the United States, p. 335.
2 British Counter Case, p. 7*1.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
OOO
at once have deterred them from taking service in her. It is impossible
to believe in anything so unlikely.
But even if this alleged notoriety had existed, it would have availed
nothing toward proof of the facts to be established. If facts are notorious, they can the more readily be proved. But if notoriety rests, not on
proof capable of being adduced, but on common talk and rumor,
evidence of such notoriety is inadmissible in an English court. It would
have availed the government nothing to allege that the destination of
the Oreto to the confederate service was matter of notoriety at Liverpool,
even had the fact that such notoriety existed been true, which, however,
appears not to have been the case.
The substance of the facts to be gathered from the correspondence, as
stated in the British Counter Case, appears to me, after a careful examination, to be so accurately stated, that I have no hesitation in transcribing it and giving the sanction of my confirmation:
It is clear that Mr. Dudley himself was in ignorance of the facts which, in the case
of the United States, are asserted to have been open and notorious to all. His attention
had been caUed to the Florida, then in the builder's yard, as early as November, 186L
On the 24th January, 1862, he writes that " she is reported for the Italian government;"
but the fact of the machinery being supplied by Fawcett & Preston, and other circumstances, make him " suspicious," and cause him to believe she is intended for the
South. On the 4th February the circumstances are still." somewhat suspicious."
" There is much secrecy observed about her, and I have been unable to get anything
definite, but my impressions are strong that she is intended for the southern confederacy. I have communicated my impressions and all the facts to Mr. Adams, our
minister in London." At that moment the ship was taking in her coal; and " appearances indicate," he wrote, " that she will leave here the latter part of this week." He
makes, however, no representation to the government, nor does Mr. Adams make any.
On the 12th he writes to Mr. Seward that everything he sees and hears confirms him in
the belief that the vessel is intended for the confederacy; but he mentions no fact,
except that Miller (the builder) had said that Fawcett, Preston & Co. gave him the
contract. Still no representation is made. On the 17th, he has " obtained information
from many different sources," which ". goes to show " that she is intended for the Confederate States. Nevertheless, the solitary fact mentioned is that Fawcett, Preston &
Co. are said to be the owners, with the addition that advances are said to have been
made to them, and to Miller by Fraser, Trenholm & Co. Afterward he tells Mr. Seward
that he has " no doubt," and has " positive evidence that she is for the South ;" and, on
the 5th March, that two persons in the employ of Fawcett, Preston & ,Co. had said so.
But up to the time when she left Liverpool, his correspondence mentions not a single
circumstance proving, or tending to prove, for what purpose she was intended, beyond
some rumors as to her probable movements, which turned out to be erroneous. With
the " notorious fact" that she had been ordered by Bullock he is evidently quite unacquainted. As to the Bahama, so far is he from being aware of the " notorious fact "
that she was about to take out the Florida's armament, that up to the 6th March he is
making fruitless inquiries about that vessel, and can obtain no information about her,
or any vessel of that name. Several days afterward he learns that she is loading with
cannon and other munitions of war at Hartlepool, and " will eitiier run the blockade, or
laud her cargo at Bermuda or Nassau, and have it ferried over in smaller vessels." He believes her, in short, to the last, to be merely a blockade-runner laden with articles contraband of war, and has no idea of her having any connection with the Florida.'
But it is said that Her Majesty's government ought not to have remained satisfied with the inquiry made by its officers ; that it should
have pushed its inquries further; and that had it done so with
due diligence, it might haVe obtained means to establish the fact
of the Oreto being intended for the confederate service. But we are not
told where such further inquiry could or should have been made, or
where this supposed evidence could have been obtained. Weknowfrom
Mr. Dudley that.the greatest secrecy was observed, so that even he could
discover nothing definite. The secret would, of course, be confined
to a very few persons; and though surmise and conjecture may
have soon sprung up and given rise to the rumors and pretended
information which found their way to Mr. Dudley, the persons really384
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
possessed of the secret would be little likely to reveal it. However
pressing the inquiry, the same story would in all probability have been
persisted in. The builders had already been applied to, and had given
an apparently satisfactory answer. Mr. Adams himself appears (from
his letter of the 25th of March) to have believed at one time that the
vessel might at first have been intended for .service in Sicily, andi
that such an intention had afterward been abandoned. The firm by
whom she had been built was a respectable one, and it could hadly be
assumed that they would knowingly lend their names to an intentionallyl
false statement. It is now plain that the statement then made was untrue; but there was no reason to believe so then. Possibly the firm
were themselves misled. Mr. Thomas and the Palermo firm may have
been introduced for the purpose of deceiving Miller & Sons into the belief that in building the vessel they were doing nothing wrong. Be this
as it may, the question is, what means the government then had of
knowing or discovering that the Oreto was not meant for the firm of
Thomas Brothers of Palermo, but for a belligerent state. Of whom else
is it suggested that the authorities could have inquired and ascertained
the truth ?
It may be said that it would have been better if the government had
again telegraphed to the British minister in Italy, but a period of upward of a month had elapsed since anything had been heard from Mr.
Adams about the Oreto; the vessel was still unarmed, nor had the
government reason to suppose she was about to leave. It may, perhaps,
be said that inquiry should have been made of Fawcett, Preston & Co.;
and I agree that it would have been better if that course had been taken,
but I greatly doubt whether it would have produced any other answer
than that which had been given by Miller & Sons.
It must not be forgotten that the persons who carried information,
more or less entitled to credit, to Mr. Dudley, communicated with him
in confidence and insisted on secrecy. Mr. Dudley more than once states,
that the information having been given in confidence, he is not at liberty
to disclose the names of his informers. It is obvious that these parties-
would not be likely to give similar information to the authorities, who
certainly would not have treated it as confidential. While aspersions
are cast on the officers for omitting to make inquiry, I look in vain for a
suggestion as to where such inquiry should have been made.
And here it is necessary to point out what perhaps will appear strange
to those who are unacquainted with English procedure, which in this
respect is identical with that of America; namely, that persons against
whom a prosecution, or proceeding to recover penalties, is either pending or about to be instituted, cannot be interrogated; nor, if persons are called on to give evidence as witnesses, can any questions be
put to them which have a tendency to implicate them in any brea'ch of
the law.
Still less is it in the power of the government to institute any compulsory inquiry with a view to establish a breach of the law, except according to regular process of law; or to search a person's premises, or
to insist on explanations from persons suspected of having committed
an offense against the law. The government had, therefore, no possible
means of obtaining information, except from those who might be voluntarily disposed to give it. If Mr. Dudley had opened any of his secret
sources of information, supposing him really to have possessed such, a
clew to the truth might possibly have been discovered; but he kept
them to himself, and those who were ready to furnish information to
him kept aloof from imparting it to the authorities.\
OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
385
Lastly, there is not in England, any more than in America, any system of espionage or secret police' to pry into men's secret actions or
obtain information for 'fche government by underhand and unworthy
means.
Can it be contended that Great Britain should have abandoned principles and rules of public conduct, hitherto held sacred, for the benefit
of other nations embarked in quarrels and wars in which she herself had
no concern—at all events before experience had shown that her existing
law was insufficient ?
When, therefore, a member of this tribunal states as the principal
ground of a judgment adverse to Great Britain that, notwithstanding
the complaints, of Mr. Adams, the English authorities did not take the
initiative; that they did not insist on its being proved what was the
true destination of the ship, who was the true owner, who had given the
orders for it, and who was to pay for it, and did not insist on the true
position of Fraser, Trenholm & Co. being shown by legal proof, or upon
being positively informed as to the crew of the vessel; I am at a loss to
know whether he means that the law of England was such as that the
government could have exercised the powers whicli he says they ought
to have used, or whether he means to say that Great Britain ought to
have changed the tenor of her law and the course of her procedure,
before the necessity of such a change had become apparent, simply
because war had broken out between the Northern and Southern States
of the American Union. If the former, the proposition appears to me
untenable; if the latter, I must be allowed to express my regret that
Great Britain should have to suffer by reason of a judgment founded
upon an apparent misconception of her law.
If it is really meant to be said that Great Britain is to be held
responsible because her law ought to have been other than it was, and
ought to have been such as to give power to the executive to insist
on proof of the innocent destination of this vessel, and to detain her
till such proof was given, or to" enable it to exercise inquisitorial powers as to her character, I fall back on the.position I asserted some
time since, and say that not only could no such thing reasonably be
expected, but that, inasmuch as the Government of the United States
possessed no such power—for their assertion that they did possess it
is, as I have shown, but a pretense—and therefore, if the position of
the two governments had been reversed, could not have done for Great
Britain what they now say Great Britain should have done for the
benefit of the United States, they can have no claim in justice or equity
for such an exercise of power on the part of the British government.
After a careful review of the whole case, my opinion is that upon the
then existing state of facts, and with the amount of evidence they then
possessed, Her Majesty's government were guilty of no want of due diligence in suffering the Oreto to leave the port of Liverpool, and, on the
contrary, would not have been justified in detaining her. •
Further, I am" of opinion that Her Majesty's government were not
wanting in due diligence in not procuring the evidence necessary to
insure the condemnation of the Oreto, for the simple reason that I am
satisfied that there were no means whatever in their power of obtaining it.
I am very far from saying that officers to whom is committed the duty
of guarding against any infraction of this part of the law are justified
in considering themselves merely as the recipients of evidence to be
furnished by the agent of a belligerent government, aud that they may
remain inactive till the latter has made out a complete • case against a
25 bARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
vessel, as to which a violation of the foreign-enlistment act is Suspected
to have taken place. If reasonable grounds of suspicion appear, it becomes their duty to make inquiry, according to/the best of their ability,
and to take active measures to prevent a breach of the law. On the
other hand, it is the duty of a foreign agent, if information comes to his
knowledge of which the authorities are not possessed, to set them in
motion, and to aid them in their proceedings, more especially if he
happens to have access to secret sources of information not open to
them. Here Mr. Dudley either had information which could be made
available, or "he had not. If he had, he ought to have given the authorities some clew whereby they might have got at the truth. Had he informed them, or Mr. Adams, of the facts which, transmitted to Mr.
Se^a-rd alone, became useless, inquiries might have been instituted
which might have led to the detention of the vessel. If Mr. Dudley had
available informatipn and neglected to communicate it iii the proper
quarter, the fault was his, and Her Majesty's government ought not to
be held responsible for the default of an agent of the United States,
when the latter are seeking damages at their hands. If he, with his
superior opportunities, was unable to obtain such information, it ought
not to be imputed to the authorities as negligence that they were unable to do better.
To sum up the matter in a word :
The equipping of this vessel not amounting to a violation of neutrality, but simply to a breach of the foreign-enlistment act, the government
had no authority to seize it by the mere exercise of the prerogative of
the Crown, or by virtue of any executive power. Its powers were
derived from the act of the 59th of George III, the foreign-enlistment act.
There was not evidence on which to seize this vessel and to ask for
her condemnation under the foreign-enlistment act.
There were no means of obtaining such evidence except by the exercise of inquisitorial powers which the government did not possess.
It was not incumbent on the government of Great Britain to ask for,
or on Parliament to grant, powers inconsistent with the established
principles of British law and government and with the general institutions of the country.
It cannot properly be imputed to the government, as want of due diligence, that it did not endeavor to obtain such powers when the existing law had hitherto proved sufficient.
It would be in the highest degree inequitable and unjust to hold the
contrary in favor of the United States, when the law of the latter was;!
substantially, if not absolutely, the same as that of Great Britain, aud
therefore could have afforded no more efficacious means of prevention
than that of Great Britain.
I pass on to what may be termed the second stage in the history of
this vessel, namely, the events which took place on her
arrival.at the Bahamas.
Having left Liverpool on the 22d of March, she arrived at Nassau on
the 28th of April.1 On the 29th she quitted the part of the harbor
which is adjacent to the town of Nassau, and proceeded to Cochrane's
anchorage, a station distant from the town about fifteen miles. It was
stated that this was done by the advice of the pilot who had charge of
her, for the reason that there was not room for her in the harbor;2 but
it is probable that this was only a pretext.
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 58.
8 Ibid., p. 63.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
387
Ten dsys afterward, namely, on the 9th of May, Mr. Whiting, the
consul of the United States at Nassau, writes to Mr. Bayley, the governor of the Bahamas, as follows:
I have the honor to communicate to your excellency several facts of importauce,
deeming it to be my duty so to do, as representative of the Government of the United
States of America.
The tug Fanny Lewis, which arrived here from Liverpool on the 6th instant, has on
board, I am credibly informed by letters received from that port, a large quantity of
powder for the rebel States of America, or for the so called Confederate States.
On the 28th ulffimo the steamer Or eo also arrived off this port from Liverpool, and
now lies at Cochrane's anchorage, where, it is believed, and so reported by many residents here, that she is being prepared and fitted out as a confederate privateer, to prey
on the commerce of the United States of America.
I inclose for your excellency's perasal a slip from, the Wilmington, North Carolina,
paper of the 20th April.
• I cannot but think that your excellency will consider it proper that some inquiry
should be made, to ascertaiu how far the vessels alluded to are preserving the strict
neutrality so earnestly enjoined by Her Majesty's late proclamation, and I am confident
that I pay but a deserved tribute to your excellency's high character when I express
my firm belief that no illegal steps will be allowed to tho.se who seek to subvert the
Government which I have the honor to represent.1
As the colonial authorities of the Bahamas, including, of course, the
governor and his legal adviser, have, in the case of the United States,
been publicly accused of | open partiality to the cause of the South,"
and of having been "actively friendly to the insurgents," and it is
directly imputed to them that, in the course they pursued with reference
to the Oreto, they were induced by these motives to depart from what
would have been the line of conduct which a sense of duty would have
prescribed, I deem it no more than is due to absent men. whose honor
is thus impugned, to call particular attention to the correspondence
which passed on this subject and to the facts which actually occurred.
On the receipt of Mr. Whiting's letter, the governor requested an immediate report from the receiver-general of the colony as to the truth
of the allegations contained in it, and received from him the following
reply, dated the same day :2
The British steamer Oreto entered at this office on the 28th April from Liverpool'
(England) with ballast.    She did not enter the harbor, and now lies at Cochrane's.
anchorage, and I have no information as to her future proceedings.
The British brig Fanny Lewis entered 7th May from Liverpool with I assorted cargo,
not to be landed!" She now lies near Potter's Cay, and I am confident that she has
not transferred any part of her cargo, as no permission to do so has been asked, aud
without a permit she would be subject to a heavy penalty. I cannot tell whether she has
any powder ou board, as no such article is mentioned in the manifest.
The matter was at once referred by the governor to the attorney-
general of the colony in the usual course. The attorney-general, on
the same 9th of May, reported as follows:
Assuming the cargo of the Fanny Lewis to be such as stated by the United States
consul, it is nevertheless one that can legally be imported here from the United Kingdom, and its future presumed destination does not invest it with any character of illegality which calls for or would authorize any action with respect to it on the part of
the executive or other authorities of the colony.
2. With respect to the Oreto, the consul's allegation is to the effect that it is be
lieved and reported by many residents here that she is being prepared and fitted out
where she now lies at Cochrane's anchorage, which is within the limits of the port of
Nassau, as a confederate privateer. Now if such is the fact, an offense against the
foreign-enlistment act has been committed, all parties implicated in which are liable
to be criminally proceeded against for misdemeanor, and the vessel may be seized by
any naval or revenue officer ; but to justify proceedings either against the parties or
thejvessel, the matter must not rest on repute or belief alone, but the authorities must
1 British Appendix, vol i,.p. 14.
3Ibid., vol. v, p. 35..388
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
have positive facts to ground their proceedings on, and unless the consul can adduce,
such, or they can be obtained through other channels, no steps can be taken either for
the arrest of the vessel or those on board of her.
G. C. ANDERSON.1
The attorney-general was perfectly right on both points. The governor had no power to prevent a merchant-vessel, sii|h as the Fanny
Lewis, with cargo, from attempting to run the blockade; he had no
power to seize or interfere j?rith a vessel as for a^reach of the foreign-
enlistment act, unless it could be shown not only that shev was equipped
for war, but also that she was destined for the service of a belligerent.
Upon the latter point, evidence was at this time wholly wanting, and
therefore, so far, all was right. At a later period the circumstances,
became materially altered.
On the 9th of May, Governor Bayley wrote officially to Adderley &
Co., a mercantile firm at Nassau, who were the consignees of the Oreto',
notifying to them that, "if they were arming or putting arms on board
that vessel, he should enforce the rules laid down in Her Majesty's,
proclamation; as, in such case, looking to the description of the vessel,
he must infer that she was a vessel of war, intended to act against the
United States;" adding that, "as Her Majesty's government had expressed their deliberate intention of observing and enforcing neutrality
in the Queen's possessions, he should use his strongest efforts to prevent either of the belligerent powers from arming or equipping vessels
of war in that port."2
The reply of Adderley & Co. appeared quite satisfactory. In positive terms they say: " We beg to state, for the information of his excellency the governor, that we have neither attempted to arm or put arms
on board of the British steamer Oreto, consigned to our firm; nor are'
we aware of there being any intention on the part of the owners to arm
that vessel."3
So matters remained till the 28th of the month, when Commander
McKillop, then commanding Her Majesty's ship Bulldog in the port of
Nassau, wrote to the governor as follows:
Several steamers having anchored at Cochrane's anchorage, I sent an officer yesterday to visit them and muster their crews, aud ascertain what they were and how
employed.
The officer reports that one steamer, the Oreto, is apparently _S6-ing and preparing ■
for a vessel of war ; under these circumstances, I would suggest that she should come
into the harbor of Nassau to prevent any misunderstanding as to her equipping in this,
jport, contrary to the foreign-enlistment act, as a privateer or war-vessel.4
On receipt of this letter the governor desired the advice of the
■attorney-general as to whether he had power, in point of law, to ordeft
the removal of the vessel from her then anchorage to Nassau, a question about which he might well entertain serious doubts.   Thereupon
that officer reported as follows:
Any British or foreign trading-vessel has a right, in carrying on her lawful commercial, pursuits, to use as anchorage-places any of the harbors, roadsteads, aud
anchorages in the colony; she can, however, only lade or unlade cargo at such
places as may be authorized for the purpose by the revenue department, and in
the presence of a revenue officer; and as the revenue department is, by the trade
act, 17 Vict., cap. 3, placed under the jurisdiction and management of "the governor,
and the executive council, it will be lawful for the governor, acting with the advice of the council, to prohibit the lading of cargo on board of the Oreto otherwise
than in.the harbor of Nassau; but beyond exercising the powers conferred on him by
the trade laws, his excellency has no power to compel the removal of the Oreto frontOPINIONS -OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
389
O
her present anchorage, unless some act has been done in respect of her which would
constitute a violation of law and subject her to seizure. This brings me to the question whether there is anything disclosed in your communication which would, iu a
court of law, justify the forcible removal of the vessel from her present position. The
information amounts to this, that the senior naval officer on the station has officially
reported to the governor that "this vessel is apparently fitting and preparing for a
vessel of war;" or, as stated in your note of yesterday, " has the appearance of a privateer arming herself." Now, unless Captain McKillop grounds the opinion formed
and reported by him on some overt act, such as the placing of arms or other munitions of war on board of the vessel without the sanction of the revenue department,
or some such similar act, evidencing an intention on the part of the persons in charge
of the vessel to fit her out as a vessel of war to be employed in the service of a foreign
belligerent power, the forcible removal of the vessel from her present position, merely
to guard against a possible infraction of the law, could not be justified. Such removal
would in fact constitute a " seizure," which the parties making would be responsible
for in damages, unless they could show a legal justification, which must be based upou
something beyond mere suspicion; but while mere suspicion is not sufficient to authorize the course of proceeding indicated in your letter, ffljis certainly sufficient to call for
precautionar3r measures, such as I advised in respect of this very vessel in my minute
on*the receiver-general's letter referred to me by the governor two or three days since,
namely, that the receiver-general should, ander the powers of his office, place a revenue officer on board of her to watch the proceedings of the parties on board, in order
that if any actual contravention of the law took place, it might be at once reported,
aud prompt measures taken by seizure of the vessel and otherwise to punish all parties implicated therein.1
So far, the opinion given by the attorney-general was perfectly
sound.
The letter of the receiver-general here referred to was one dated the
2Gth of May, in which that officer stated that he had every reason to
believe that the consignees of the vessel intended shipping large quantities of arms and munitions of war as cargo, and might probably apply
for permission to transship cargo to her from other vessels where she
lay.2
In a letter to the colonial secretary of the next day (May 30) the attorney-general writes:
or any attempt to arm, a vessel in contravention of the imperial
nown as the foreign-enlistment act, will subject the vessel to
Any act of arming
statute, commonly ]
seizure; and it is quite immaterial in what manner the violation of the law is ascertained, or by whose testimony it is established, the only necessary requirement being
that the facts testified to should be such as would be received in a court of law as legal
proof of the violation of the statute sought to be established.3
Having* received the attorney-general's report, the governor, on the
2d of June, thus writes to Commander McKillop :
I may say that it is quite impossible that the Oreto, or any other vessel, should be
allowed to arm herself for belligerent purposes within the jurisdiction of the harbor.
The Oreto is registered as a British vessel, and carries the British flag. Therefore
she would be guilty of piracy if, without changing her British nationality, she equipped
herself as a vessel of war. And were she to change her nationality and to be equipped
for the service of either of two belligerent states, with both of whom Great Britaiu is
at peace, she would, under the directions of Her Majesty's government, be precluded
from remaining more than twenty-four consecutive hours in our harbor.
But inasmuch as it is not yet proved beyond doubt that the Oreto is a vessel of war,
and as it is just possible that she may be only a merchant-ship, takiug arms and implements of war solely for exportation, it is desirable that a more special and minute
examination of her conditions and equipment should be made before she can be trea»||P
as a pirate, a privateer, or foreign man-of-war arming within our waters ; for, while
it would be in contravention of the foreign-enlistment act to arm an English vessel for
the service of a foreign belligerent power, and contrary to the positive orders of the
Queen's government to'allow a vessel of war belonging either to the Federal or confederate government to arm herself in an English port, it would be equally illegal on
our part to seize a merchant-vessel honestly and exclusively employed in the shipment
of cargo for the purpose of commerce.
1 British Appendix, vol. i,
2 Ibid., vol. v, pp. 35, 30.
3 Ibid., vol. i, p. 18.
p. 17.
1
1390
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Therefore I request that you will take such steps as in your professional opinion seem
best for the purpose of ascertaining the true character of the Oreto, aud the nature of
her equipment; and if, after inspecting her guns, her crew, and the general disposition of the vessel, you are convinced that she is in reality a man-of-war or privateer arming herself here, then it will become your duty either to concert measures for
bringing the Oreto down into this part of the harbor, or) what would be a safer course,
to remove your own ship to Cochrane's". anchorage, and there watch her proceedings
from day to day.
I should much regret to disarrange your plans in any way, or to impose on yon any
irksome duty, and I hope the necessity of either may be averted. But I am sure you
will concur with me in thinking that all considerations (except that of affording due
protection to the harbor) must give way to the obligation of observing the strictest
neutrality in our dealings with the two contending American federations, and carrying
out the Queen's orders with the most perfect good faith."1
Can it be doubted that the governor in thus writing was acting according to an honest sense of duty %
It appears that about this time a man of the name of Jones, who had
come out as boatswain of the Oreto, together with two of the crew, having got on shore, had refused to return to the vessel; whereupon, he
and his companions had been, at the instance of the captain, apprehended and sent to prison, as having deserted from a British vessel.
This man, Jones, put himself in communication with Mr. Whiting,
the United States consul. On the 4th of June Mr. Whiting forwarded
to the governor the following letter from Jones to himself:
Nassau Prison, June 4,1862.
Sir : The ship I am from is the Oreto, built by W. C. Miller, in Liverpool, after the
model of the English navy gun-boats, with magazine, shot-lockers, ports and bolts for
twenty guns. Everything is rigged, and ready for mounting; even all the articles
necessary for seamen, such as hammocks, bedding, kettles and pans, with three years'
provisions. In short, she is a perfect man-of-war. Captain, James Duguid; chief
officer, William Duggin; second officer, Hudson; I, sir, was third officer aud boatswain ; the chief steward and purser, who refused duty, are in jail here.2
This letter only confirmed what was already known, namely, the capacity of the vessel for the purpose of war. No evidence of her belligerent destination was afforded in it, or in the report of Commander
McKillop to the governor of the 6th of June, wherein he says that he
" has visited the screw-steamer Oreto and examined her, and that she
is fitted out in every way for war purposes—magazines, shell-rooms,
and other fittings, totally at variance with the character of a merchant-
vessel. She has no guns or ammunition on board. The captain does
not deny that she is intended for a war-vessel."3
On this, taking the same view as before, the attorney-general reports :
There are no facts set forth in the within letter which would, in my opinion, authorize the seizure of the Oreto. They constitute only circumstances of suspicion, which,
if coupled with some actual overt act, would doubtless materially strengthen the case
against the vessel, but which do not in themselves form a ground of seizure.4
In a note of the 8th of June, Commander McKillop again adverts to
the warlike character of this vessel, and states his opinion " that she
was not capable of taking in any cargo, having no stowage; adding
that, should she take in guns or ammunition, he should consider it his
duty to seize her."5
On the 12th of June Mr. Whiting again calls the attention of
the governor to the Oreto. " One of her officers," he says—I presume
he refers to Jones, the boatswain—" testifies to her Avarlike character
and equipment, with everything that marks a vessel of war—ports,
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 18.
2 Ibid., p. 19.
3 Ibid., p. 20.
* Ibid,
sibid., p. 21.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
3^
91
magazines, shot-lockers, &c. He avers that shells were transferred
from the steamer Hero to the Oreto at Cochrane's anchorage, an act
which, I suppose, would warrant her seizure and detention. The steamer
Melita, from England, landed here last Sunday Captain Semmes and
officers of the pirate Sumter, and I have no doubt they are here to join
the Oreto and pursue their maritime depredations."|
The colonial secretary replies:
His excellency has been assured by the agents of the Oreto that it is their intention
to clear her in ballast for Havana; and he has received from the treifiprer (as collector of the colonial customs) an application to give her this clearance, an application
to which he has accorded his assent.
His excellency has, therefore, no right to assume that she is now equipping herself,
or will leave this port equipped, as a privateer.
While his excellency is bound by his instructions to observe the strictest neutrality
between the United States and the Confederate States of North America, he has no
power whatever to act on general suspicion or hearsay. He is bound to give the
twenty-four hours' notice to any known privateer or man-of-war belonging to either
of the belligerent States which may put into this port for indispensable supplies, but
he is not bound to detain or obstruct any vessels professing to be engaged on a commercial voyage, unless he has evidence strong enough to satisfy the court of admiralty that she is in fact a belligerent vessel, proceeding on a belligerent mission.
Not having any proof which would warrant the condemnation of the Oreto by a competent court of jurisdiction, or which would connect her with any privateering enter-,
prise, his excellency feels that it is as yet out of his power to interfere with this vessel,
or prevent her presumably peaceful and innocent voyage to Havana.2
It would appear that, in the first days of June, the consignees of the
Oreto had applied to the receiver-general of the colony for permission to
load the vessel with cargo for a voyage to Saint John's, New Bruuswick,
that port being the usual destination for which vessels intending to run
the blockade ostensibly cleared. The receiver-general, before acceding
to this request, referred the matter to the governor. The permission
to ship the cargo was granted, but, in consequence of the suspicions
attaching to the vessel, the following order was at the same time adopted
by the governor in council on the 4th of June :3
June 4, 1862.
At an executive council his excellency the governor, with the advice of the board,
was pleased to make the following order:
1. That the Oreto, if practicable,' should take in her cargo within the port of
Nassau.
• 2. That if, however, it be found impracticable, from the depth of water in port or
otherwise, that she canuot conveniently take in her cargo within the port, then that
she be permitted to do so at Cochrane's Anchorage, under the direct supervision of
officers of the revenue department, to be specially appointed for the purpose.
3. That, in consequence of the suspicions which have arisen respecting the character
of the Oreto, it is advisable^that a British vessel ol&var should remain at Cochraue's
Anchorage, in the immediate, vicinity of the Oreto, while she is taking in cargo, and to
prevent such vessel being detained at the anchorage an inconveniently long time, there
be imposed as a condition, for the permission for the Oreto to load without the port,
that she complete her lading at Cochrane's Anchorage, within a period to be designated
by the chief officer of the revenue department.
His excellency was further pleased to direct that a copy of the foregoing order be
furnished to the receiver-general and treasurer, and the commander of Her Majesty's
ship Bulldog, respectively, for their information and guidance.
This order having been communicated to the consignees, the latter
determined to remove the Oreto from Cochrane's Anchorage to the port
of Nassau, which she entered on the 7th of June. On the 9th she commenced taking in empty shells as cargo, of which upward of 400 boxes
were shipped.4
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 21.
2 Ibid., pp. 21, 22.
3 Ibid, p. 53.
4 Ibid, and vol. v, pp. 38, 40, and 47.392
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
In deference, however, as it seems, to the desire ~of the governor, the
consignees changed their purpose, and determined to clear the vessel
in ballast for Havana, and the shells were therefore discharged.1
In the mean time Mr. Whiting continued his communications with
Jones, and on the 13th June drew up the statements of the latter in the
form of an affidavit, in which all that had taken place since the vessel
had left Liverpool was detailed, and the true character of the vessel
placed beyond a doubt.
The following is the affidavit:
I, the undersigned, Edward Jones, late third officer of the steamer Oreto, do solemnly'
swear to the following facts, viz :
1. That, on the 3d day of March, 1862, I shipped on board the steamer Oreto at Liv.
erpool, as boatsWain; the articles specifying that the vessel was bound to the port of'
Palermo ; thence, if required, to any port in the Mediterranean or the West Indies,
and back to a final port of discharge in the United Kingdom; the term of service not
to exceed six months.
2. That the Oreto was expressly built for a man-of-war, and was said to be destined
for the King of Sardinia; that she has twenty ports, magazine of 5t> tons capacity,
shot-lockers, &c.; that on her passage to this port, breecbings and gun-tackles were
fitted and everything got in readiness for mounting guns.
3. That the Oreto was supplied withtwo suits of sails, spare wire rigging, a large
quantity of provisions, said to be sufficient for three years' supply for seventy-five
men, &c, &c.
4. That after leaving the channel the courses were frequently altered, and that my'
suspicions were then aroused as to her true destination as a rebel privateer, and I
refused duty; that on the thirty-fifth day out, we anchored off the port of Nassau, New
Providence, Bahamas, and the next day proceeded to Cochrane's Anchorage ; that soon
after I left the Oreto, and was imprisoned as a deserter at Nassau, for two weeks,
when, after sending a petition to the governor, I was at last released.
5. I also testify to the fact that, for several nights prior to our arrival at Nassau, the
lights on board the Oreto were ordered to be put out, and the smoke-stacks were reefed,
while look-outs were kept at the mast-heads, and great anxiety was manifested and
expressed by the officers lest they should fall in with American cruisers.
I do also solemnly swear that the Oreto is, to my certain knowledge, owned by the
so-called Confederate States of North America, and that she is intended for one of
their men-of-war, or armed privateers; which facts I stated in my petition to Governor
Bayley while I was in prison at Nassau.2
Mr. Whiting committed the unpardonable mistake of sending off this
affidavit to Mr. Seward, instead of making it known to the local government.
In the mean time, Captain McKillop having gone on other service,
his place had been taken by Captain Hickley of Her Majesty's ship
Greyhound. On the 10th of June Captain Hickley, having previously
had a conversation with the governor and the Attorney-General, relative to the Oreto taking in warlike stores for the purpose of becoming
an armed vessel, and perceiving lighters alongside of her, went with
competent surveying officers to examine her, after which he and the
other officers made the following report:
On going on board the Oreto this morning, the captain informed me that the crew
had refused to get the anchor up until they could be certain as to where the ship was
going, as they did not know what might become of them after leaving port, and that
the Oreto was a suspicious vessel. I then proceeded round her decks to note her fittings, &c, and to ascertain whether she had any warlike stores on board for her own
equipment, and I have the honor to make the following report:
TJhat the Oreto is in every respect fitted as a man-of-war, on the principle of the dispatch gun-vessels in Her Majesty's naval service.
That she has a crew of fifty men, and is capable of carrying two pivot-guns amidships and four broadside, both forward and aft, the ports being made to " ship and unship," port bars, breeching, side tackle, bolts, &c.
That she has shell-rooms, a magazine, and light-rooms, and "handing scuttles" for
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 24.
2 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 251.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER' COCKBURN,.
393
handing powder out of the magazine, as fitted in the naval service, and shot-boxes for
Armstrong shot, or shot similar to them. Round the upper deck she has five boats, (I
should say,) a«ten-oared cutter, an eight-oared cutter, two gigs, and a jolly-boat, and
davits for hoisting them up—her accommodation being in no respect different from her
similar class of vessels in the royal naval service.
And on my asking the captain of the Oreto, before my own officers and three of his
own, whether she had left Liverpool fitted in all respects as she was at present, his
answer was, " Yes, in all respects;" and that "no addition or alteration had been made
"whatever."L
In transmitting this report to the governor, Captain Hickley adds:
When I boarded the Oreto she appeared to be discharging her cargo, and this cargo,
to all appearance, shells; and I was proceeding to go on with the examination when
the consignee (Mr. Harris) and a revenue officer told me that she (the Oreto.) had
cleared in ballast for the Havana, and was to sail shortly, (I understood the next day,)
and that due notice had been given at the custom-house. On this I considered interference unnecessary on my part, and came immediately with the consignee to you, to
report what had taken place, and the determined destination of the Oreto, but with
the understanding that, owing to the suspicions already cast on the vessel, I was to
again visit her before her leaving. This took place on the" 10th, and the 11th and 12th
•passed, and the Oreto did not sail, which again aroused my suspicions that the vessel
was not acting in good faith, and that she was still equipping, or making very definite
arrangements for so doing.
This morning, at 6.30 a. m., I was informed by Mr. Harris that the Oreto was to sail
immediately, at 8 a. m.; and feeling1 it a bounden duty to ascertain her character
before her leaving, to make my report to your excellency, that by so doing I might
have the law-officers' opinion as to the legality of her sailing before she quitted the
port.
I have the honor to inclose my report for your excellency's information, for the
opinion of the attorney-general and Queen's advocate, that my course may be clear
as to my dealing with the Oreto, and whether, under the circumstances detailed
therein, she is entitled to go her way on the high seas under British colors.2
As the report of the officers and the letter of Commander Hickley,
while conclusively establishing the warlike character of the vessel,
failed to carry the case any further as to attempt to equip or arm her
within the waters of the Bahamas, the attorney-general, to whom
these documents were referred, still adhered to his former view, and
advised that there was nothing contained in them which would justify
the detention of the vessel.
From the foregoing letter of Captain Hickley, it appears that, on
finding that the Oreto was discharging shells out of the vessel, and on
being told by Mr. Harris, one of the consignees, and by a revenue officer
on board, that she had cleared out in ballast for the Havana, and was
to sail, as he understood, the next day, and that due notice had been
given at the custom-house, Captain Hickley, however, desirous of preventing with inflexible rigor any breach of neutrality in a port of Her
Majesty, considered that all ground for further interference with the
vessel—provided always that this undertaking should be carried out—
was' at an end.
Two more days, however, having elapsed since his last letter, and
the vessel still remaining at her anchorage, the suspicions of Captain Hickley became aroused anew. He does not appear to have
been at first aware that the cause of the delay was the continued
refusal of the crew to remain in the ship, in consequence of which
it had become necessary to collect another crew. On the 15th, the
boatswain, Jones, and some of the crew of the Oreto, acting under
the influence and at the instigation of Mr. Whiting, as appears from
the letter of the latter to Mr. Seward of the 18th of June, came on
board the Greyhound, and made, as Captain Hickley reports, publicly
before him, a variety of statements to the prejudice of the vessel as a
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 23.
'   2Ibid., p. 22.
J*94
o
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
legal trader, both on her first leaving and subsequently to her leaving
Liverpool, stating that they had now left the Oreto, as they could notr
ascertain her destination, although she had cleared out for the Havana
some days since.1
Beferring to the statements made to him by the boatswain and crew,
Captain Hickley writes to the governor:
These circumstances, her long detention in this port, her character, her fittings, convinced as I am also that during her stay in the port arrangements'have been made for
arming her outside, with the previous correspondence on her account, and the snspi-S
cions already cast on her, her evident equipment for war purposes, although not a{||
presehfearuied, or to my knowledge having any arms on board, and my conviction, as.
also that of my officers and men that have been on board her, that she is built intentionally for a war-vessel and not for a merchant ship, make it incumbent on me to seize
the Oreto, as a vessel that can be no more considered as a free-trader, but that she is,
on the contrary, calculated to be turned into a formidable vessel of war in twenty-four
hours ; and that this, I am convinced, will be the case if she is pertnitted to leave
Nassau.
Captain Hickley accordingly proceeded to seize the vessel, and reported to the governor that*he had done so. In his letter he proposes
to || send the vessel to the commodore or commander-in-chief on .his own
professional responsibility.'-1
On the other hand, Governor Bayley, in reply, states his general concurrence with the opinion of the attorney-general:
I do not cousider, he says, that suspicion alone would justify the seizure of the Oreto,
and the case as stated by yourself hardly seems to go beyond suspicion.
And the suspicion itself attaches not to auy acts done by the Oreto, but only to the
intention of her equipment.   Indeed, the testomouy of the crew I understand to amount.0
to no more than an expressiou of suspicion.   Now, I do not consider that I have any I
legal authority to seize a vessel merely on the suspicion of her intentions.   It seemsv
to me that such an act on my part would violate the hospitalities of the harbor, and be
a precedent for grave injustice on future occasions.
The Oreto, as you are aware, has, in deference to your remonstrances and my orders,
discharged her cargo of shell, shot, and ammunition, and is ready to clear in ballast.
She has thus divested herself of the character of an armed vessel leaving this port for
belligerent purposes. I do not think it consistent with law or public.policy that shfiJ
should now be seized on the hypothesis that she is clearing out for the purpose of
arming herself as a vessel of war beyond the limits of the harbor. We have done our,:
duty in seeing that she does not leave the harbor equipped and prepared to act offensively against one of two belligerent nations, with each of whom Great Britain is at'
peace.
And if she has still any such intention—an intention which cannot be fulfilled within
the harbor—I think this could be effectually thwarted by giving instructions that the
vessels which are supposed to be freighted with her arms, and to be prepared to go oat
with her, should not leave the harbor within forty-eight hours after the Oreto has!
left it.
If, however, you still retain the firm conviction not only that she is about to arm as
a vessel of war, but also that she is already partially equipped as one, and, moreover,
that she is engaged to act against a belligerent State which is at peace-with Great
Britain, and that she has enlisted a crew for that object, your proper course undoubtedly is, on seizing the Oreto, to submit the question of her condemnation to the.
vice-admiralty court of this colony.
To remove her to Bermuda, Half fax, or any other colony, for the purpose of having
her condemned there, would be a course not only at variance with prescriptive usage,
but, as I cannot help thinking, open to censure, as implying an unmerited imputation
on the fairness and competency of the court of this colony. It is a course which I cannot myself recommend or sanction, and which, if adopted by you, must be adopted on
your own responsibility.2
The opinion of the attorney-general remained unshaken :
I The report of Captain Hickley," he writes, "does not appear to me to carry the case
against the Oreto further than that shown in the previous reports of himself and Com-
1 British Appendix, vol. i, pp. 23, 24.
2 Ibid., pp. 24, 25.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
395
mander McKillop, and I contend that no case has as yet been made out for the seizure
of that vessel uuder the foreign-enlistment act.
"With respect to the suggestion in the concluding part of Commander Hickley's letter, I have to remark that, if the vessel is liable to seizure at all, it must be under the
provisions of the foreign-enlistment act, and if so seized, the question of her liability
may as readily aud efficiently be decided in tbe court of vice-admiralty in this colony
as before any tribunal in Her Majesty's colonial possessions, and consequently that no
necessity exists, nor do I think that any excuse can be made for sending her, as suggested by Commander Hickley, to the commodore or commander-in-chief, who, I presume, are either at Bermuda or Halifax ; while, on the other hand, if I am correct in
the view I have taken of her non-liability to seizure, the reasons against sending her
hence will, of course, be far more powerful; and therefore, on either view of the case
I advise his excellency to withhold his sanction from the course of action suggested."1
On the receipt of these'communications, Captain Hickley replies,
£ repeating his professional opinion, and that of his brother officers,
and again expressing his conviction that the Oreto was a vessel of war
that could be equipped in twenty-four hours for battle, and that she was
then going out of the harbor as nearly equipped as a vessel of war could
be without guns, arms, or ammunition;" but " declining to take on himself the responsibility of the further detention of the Oreto for the purpose of placing her in the admiralty court, it being contrary to the law
officers' opinion, or of adopting the course of sending her to the commander-in-chief contrary to the governor's wishes." He announced his intention, therefore, of removing the officers and men from the Oreto, and
I as a final decision had been come to, of offering no further obstacle to
her sailing."2
On the 17th, Governor Bayley replies that he § had felt it to be bis
duty, in his letter of the day before, to express unreservedly his opinion
on the case of the Oreto, and the doubt he entertained respecting tbe
legality and policy of preventing her from leaving the harbor—doubts
which had been much increased by the strong opinion expressed by the
law officer of the Crown, who discharged the conjoint duties of Queen's
advocate and attorney-general in this colony."   He continues :
• In deference to the views entertained by that officer and myself, you have, I now understand, removed the officers and crew who were in charge of the Oreto, and thereby
gwen her the option of leaving the harbor.
But, in the letter which announces this proceeding, you repeat the expression of your
own and your officers' conviction that " the Oreto is a vessel of war, which can be
equipped in twenty-four hours for battle." And in your brief conversation with me
this morning, you stated that though the Oreto had discharged some of her suspected
cargo here, still she was not leaving the port empty. A professional opinion, coming
from an officer of your character and rank, cannot fail to have its due weight with me.
On the one hand, I am unwilling to place any restraint on a vessel which has not as
yet been formally proved to have violated the law, or impugned the neutrality of the
harbor by any overt act. I am equally unwilling to place any limit on the rights of
hospitality usually accorded to vessels of all nations in English harbors. I am most •
uuwilling to strain the law to the prejudice of any vessel seeking that hospitality.
But, at the same time, I cannot fail to recognize the great importance of the testimony
which may be brought forward by yourself and your crew; nor can I fail to see the
grave consequences which might result if a vessel, equipped and fitted as you represent for the purposes of war, were quietly allowed to take a crew here and quit the
harbor with the intention of fighting on the side of one or two belligerent states, with
each of whom Great Britain is at peace.
To the doubts which this dilemma creates, I can see only one solution. The equipment of the Oreto, the object of her voyage hither, the intent of her voyage hence,
the nature of her crew, and the purpose of their enlistment are all the fair subjects of judicial investigation. We cannot detain or condemn her on mere suspicion ; nor, when
suspicion has been s6 generally aroused, can we permit her to depart unexamined and
unabsolved.
. Under every aspect therefore of the case, I think the best course which can be taken
in the interests of yourself, the colony, and the Government, will be to seize the Oreto,
and at once submit the question of her condemnation to the local court of vice-admi-
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 25.
2Ibid., p. 26.396
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
ralty; and I am glad to see that yon abandon the idea of carrying her before the court
of any other colony. If, on the evidence which you adduce, the court condemn her,
you will have the satisfaction of having prevented, certainly an illegal, and nrobably
a disastrous voyage. If the court do not condemn her, you will have the satisfaction
of having discharged your duty under circumstances of anxious doubt and difficulty^
the solution of which will hereafter smooth the course of others placed in situations
equally trying and embarrassing.
My opinion is that an appeal to the decision of the local vice-admiralty court is the
best expedient which could be embraced by all the parties interested in the matter.
I will give the necessary instructions to the Queen's advocate.1
The course suggested was accordingly adopted. The Oreto was seized
and proceedings taken in £he admiralty court of the Bahamas for her
condemnation, the result of which I shall advert to further on.
From the correspondence which, in view of the accusations made, I
have thought it my duty toward absent men, deprived of all means-of
defense, to set out in some detail before the tribunal, even at the risk
of appearing tedious, it is apparent that two different and opposite views
were taken as to the propriety of seizing the Oreto. The naval officers,
finding her equipped as a ship of war, and from her presence at Nassau,
and the other suspicious circumstances connected with her, entertaining no moral doubt that she was intended for the service of the confederates against the United States, were for seizing her with a high
hand. The civil authorities, sensible that to seize the vessel, unless
they could afterward hold her upon legal proof of her destination
as a belligerent vessel, such as would bereceivedf|n a court of law, would
be'worse than useless, and seeing no such proof forthcoming, were unwilling to take upon themselves the responsibility of a proceeding which,
if it ended in defeat, would be attended with serious consequences. In
addition to this the attorney-general appears to have entertained an
opinion thatt in order to wferant a seizure at Nassau, some equipment
of the vessel must have taken place within the precincts of the colony—an opinion which, as we shall see presently, was shared by the
judge of the vice-admiralty court. That opinion was, in my judgment,
erroneous; but, after a careful perusal of the correspondence and consideration of the facts, I am bound, in common justice to these parties,
whose conduct has been so cruelly impugned, to say that I cannot find
any ground to justify the suggestion that the views put forward by the
governor and attorney-general, in the course of these proceedings, were
not honestly and sincerely entertained.
But while I feel bound to give credit to the governor and attorney-
general for perfect honesty of intention, I am not prepared to go the
length of saying that, in my judgment, a degree of activity such as the
circumstances demanded was exhibited in ascertaining the true character of the Oreto. Down to the time, indeed, when revelations as to
the antecedents of the vessel were made by the crew, and while all that
had happened at Liverpool remained unknown in the colony, I am entirely of opinion with the law-officer of the colony that the seizure of
the vessel would not have been warranted. However strong the suspicion, there was till then no actual proof of her destination. But when
the men on the 4th of June communicated all the facts to Mr. Whiting,
and afterward, at his suggestion, to Commander Hickley, and it thus
became known to the authorities that there were antecedents of a suspicious character connected with the vessel, it became, in my judgment,
the business of the law-officers to inquire into the facts. It is true Mr.
Whiting neglected the obvious duty of communicating to the authorities the affidavit made by the boatswain Jones.   But the attorney-;
'British Appendix, vol. i, pp. 26, 27.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
397
general must have been aware that there were important matters connected with this vessel which the men who had come out in her were
prepared to disclose; and I cannot but think that, in such a state of
things, he should have taken steps to inquire into and ascertain the
facts. In all probability the opinion—as I think, a mistaken one—that
nothing but what took place in the waters of the colony could be made
available against the vessel, may have had the effect of inducing him
to remain passive.
But the question whether the omission to resort to this source of
information did not amount to a want of due diligence, loses its importance by reason of the circumstance that, in spite of the opinion of the
attorney-general, the Oreto was in fact seized and brought into court
with a view to her condemnation. Upon that fact supervening, any
previous omission in this respect becomes, practically speaking, wholly
immaterial. AYhetber the vessel was seized^ few days sooner or a few
days later can, obviously, under the circumstances, not have been of
the slightest consequence.
In like manner, when M. Staempfli suggests that the government at
home were wanting in due diligence, because, on finding that the Oreto
had not been built for the Italian government, they did not send out
to Nassau and other British colonies to direct the seizure of the vessel
should she come into a British port, the obvious answer which I
should have hoped would have occurred to his own mind is that, even
assuming that the government were bound to send instructions to that
effect all over the globe, the only purpose which such exemplary activity could have served would have been to secure the seizure of the
vessel and the bringing her into court. But this end having been
otherwise effected by the action of Captain Hickley and the governor,
any want of diligence in any other quarter becomes wholly immaterial.
When once the end to be obtained is by some means or other effected,
what matters it whether some other means whereby the same result
might possibly have been brought about may have been omitted to be
resorted to ?
It cannot surely be necessary to point out that the omission to use
due diligence, if it produces no injury to a party entitled to claim the
exercise of such diligence, affords no ground for complaint or compensa
tion.   If, for example, a vesse
were, bv tne nej
"ligence of the authorities,
permitted to be equipped and armed and to go forth to wage war on a
belligerent, but before doing any actual mischief, were fallen in with
by a more powerful enemy and taken, no amount of negligence in suffering her to go forth could constitute a ground for asking for pecuniary
compensation.
We may, therefore, pass over all the facts preliminary to the seizure
of the vessel, and come to the trial before the judge of the court of admiralty of the"colony.
Now, I at once feel bound to say that with the result of this trial I am
anything but satisfied. In my opinion, the Oreto ought to have been
condemned, and there was a miscarriage of justice in her acquittal. Not,
that, on the point which the judge of the vice-admiralty court thought
the only issue in the case, namely, whether there had been any equipment of the vessel within the waters of the colony, I am .prepared to
quarrel with the judgment. The mistake of the judge, which led to the
acquittal of the Oreto, consisted in holding that the equipment of a
vessel in any part of the British dominions, for a purpose prohibited by
the foreign-enlistment act, would not, so long as the property in it remained in a British subject and had not been transferred to a foreign398
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
belligerent, of. which there was here no sufficient proof, form a sufficient
ground of condemnation in any court of competent authority, within
whose jurisdiction the vessel might be found, though no part of such
eQuipmeut might have taken place within srigjjh jurisdiction. Fitted out,
equipped, or armed within British dominions, in coin rave!it inn of the
statute, a vessel becomes at once forfeited by the effect of the statute;
and becomes liable to be seized aud condemned as forfeited. The character of forfeiture once attaching to her remains permanently affixed to
her, and the proceeding h&iijgin rem, any competent court within whose
jurisdiction she may be may adjudge her to be the property of the
Crown, and give effect to the seizure of her as such.
It is admitted by Her Majesty's government, upon the advice of its'
law-officers, that such is the law.
It is clear that, if the judge on the trial had acted on this principleyl
there was abundant evidence on which to condemn this vessel, and that
she ought to have been condemned.
That she was equipped, though not armed for war, not only when.
at the Bahamas, but also when she left Liverpool, is undoubted.   The
obstacle to her seizure at Liverpool was the absence of sufficient proof!
of her being intended for a belligerent.   But when it turned out that
her asserted destination for a firm at Palermo, or for the Italian government, was a mere pretense, and that, having cleared out and shipped
her crew for Palermo and Jamaica,she never went near either, but pro|
ceeded afj-once to Nassau, a port conveniently situated with reference;
to the coast of the Southern States; and when to these facts was added
the evidence of the statements of those who had had charge of her that
she was intended for the confederate service, evidence which acquired!
additional force from.the antecedent circumstances, no rational doubt
could remain of the service for which the vessel was designed.   Had
the adjudication proceeded on right legal principles, the vessel mast
clearly have been condemned.
But, when I am asked to sanction the imputation that the prosecution was conducted by the attorney-general in the scandalously corrupt!
manner imputed to him—that he directed it with the predetermined!
purpose of getting the Oreto released; that he hurried on the trial'
before evidence could be obtained from Liverpool; that he conducted!
his cross-examinations so as to suppress evidence unfavorable to the!
Oreto when it could be done; that he neglected to summon witnesses,!
who must have been within his control, who could have shown conclusively that the Oreto*1 was built for the insurgents, and was to be
converted into a vessel of war—witnesses, I may add, by the way, who,*
if called, would have been privileged from answering, or certainly wouldf
have been hostile, aud whom, therefore, a counsel, in the exercise of his
discretion, would scarcely think of calling—witnesses, too, who could
have added nothing as to that which the attorney-gHieral'and the judge
believed to be the essential matter to be pro veil—namely, an equipment
of the vessel in the port—and when I am asked to ascribe to a judge
the disgraceful partiality imputed to Mr. Lees, I must refuse my assent1
to imputations which go to fix a si igma on the character of high legal
functionaries, who are not here to defend themselves, ou grounds which'
appear to me of the most shadowy and unsubstantial character.   These
imputations of scandalous dereliction of duly in a public prosecutor,
and of gross partiality in a judge, are of a very grave and serious char-
arc! er.   I ai nst express my opinion that they ought never to have been
made, more especially in the tone of careless and offensive levity in
\\ h ich t hey are presented to as in the pages of the American case.  FewOPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
399
things of the kind, I can say with truth, ever gave me more pain than
the perusal of the observations in that document relating to this part
of the case.
I say this the more, because it appears to me that these accusations
were unnecessary to the case of the United States. There was a miscarriage of justice on the trial of the Florida. If that miscarriage can
be imputed to the British .government as negligence, so as to render it
responsible, the Government of the United States is entitled to the
benefit of it, no matter whether the miscarriage arose from corrupt
design or mistake of law. It would surely have been sufficient to show
the judgment to be wrong without assailing men's characters by the
imputation of base and evil motives and corrupt disregard of duty.
1 have yet to consider whether any default on the part of Her Majesty's
government can have contributed to the failure of the proceedings
against the Florida. It is certain that, as soon as the fact of the seizure
of the vessel and the institution of the suit was communicated to the
government at home, they approved of and ratified what had been done,
and directed that Commander Hickley, as the prosecutor, should be indemnified against all the expenses of the suit. Instructions were given
that any witnesses from Liverpool, who could give evidence material to
the case, should be sent to Nassau. But when the evidence came to be
looked into bv Sir B. Phillimore, who had then succeeded to the office
of Queen's advocate, it turned out that the Liverpool witnesses could
really add nothing to the evidence already forthcoming at Nassau.1
Their evidence went to prove that the vessel, when she left Liverpool,
was equipped so as to be capable of being armed ; but to prove this, no
evidence was needed. The fact could not be disputed ; if it had been,
there was the vessel at Nassau to speak for herself.
The Liverpool evidence would, indeed, have established that the Oreto
had cleared out on what after-events showed to have been a pretended
and fictitious voyage—no doubt a most material fact; but of this again
abundant evidence was forthcoming, from the evidence of the crew, who
had signed articles for the voyage to Palermo and Jamaica. The evidence was, therefore, unnecessary ; what is more, had it been forthcoming, it would have proved unavailing, by reason of the judge holding
the absence of equipment at Nassau to be fatal to the exercise of his
jurisdiction to condemn the vessel.
It is complained that the attorney-general hurried on the trial to avoid
the evidence of the Liverpool witnesses. Now, as I have just remarked, no
witnesses were sent, or were thought by Si__ll|. Phillimore of sufficient importance to be sent for the purpose of the tr~pl; which is a sufficient answer
to this head of complaint. It is complained that Maffit and other persons
connected with the Oreto were not called on the trial; and this head of
charge is also dwelt upon by M. Staempfli, as one of the grounds of his
judgment. But this was a matter on which it was for the public prosecutor to exercise his discretion.
In the first place, the witnesses would of course have been hostile,
and it is not usual with English advocates to call witnesses known to be
adverse; they leave them to be called on the other side, that they may
have the advantage of cross-examining them, which they are not permitted to do if they produce them themselves. Had the attorney-general
called these witnesses himself, the complaint would probably have taken
the opposite form. It would then have been said that he had called
witnesses from the enemy's camp for the purpose of damaging his own
case.
1 British Appendix, vol. i, pp. 30-36.
__
ill400
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
In the second place, as these witnesses, if mixed up in a transaction
involving a breach of the foreign-enlistment act, such as was involved
in this suit, would have been liable to be prosecuted and punished, they
would, by English law, have be#n privileged from giving evidence at
all.
Thirdly, all that these persons, if called, could have proved, was that
the vessel was intended for the confederate service. But this, in the view
unfortunately taken by the judge, that equipment within the local limits
of his jurisdiction was indispensable as the foundation of his authority
to condemn, would obviously have availed nothing, and therefore no
detriment can have arisen on the result from its not being produced.
There is an observation of the* honorable arbitrator, M. Staempfli,
namely, that the witnesses on the trial were not examined on oath, which
it is necessary to correct, lest it should go forth to the public that the
attorney-general and the judge were so unmindful or ignorant of their
d uty as to allow the wftoesses to be examined without the sanction of an
oath.    This statement must have been founded on an oversight: everv
CD J */
witness called is shown by the report of the trial to have been sworn
before he was examined. I am sure the honorable gentleman will regret
his mistake.
The Oreto ought to have been condemned. She escaped condemnation by reason of a mistake ou a matter of law of the judge before
whom she was brought for condemnation. Can such a failure be
ascribed to the government? The question is one of serious importance. I have already stated my views on it in an earlier stage of these
remarks.
But a further charge of negligence is brought against the government of the Bahamas by reason of the Oreto having received her armament in the waters of the colony.   The facts are as follows:
Having been released by the court of admiralty, the Oreto cleared
out as a merchant-vessel for Saint John's, New Brunswick, in ballast,1
the porlj for which vessels intending to run the blockade usually cleared.
On the 7th of August the vessel went out, into the neighborhood of Hog
Island, to try her steam.2 She was at that time very short-handed. It
appears, from the letter of the United States consul to Mr. Seward of
the 6th of September, that her crew at that time was ff a very small one,
and that the officers expressed great doubts of being able to man her
sufficiently for their nefarious purposes."3 It is stated in the United
States case that the Oreto lay outside, with a hawser attached to one of
Her Majesty's ships of war.
In a letter of the United States consul of the 9th- of August, that
gentleman writes to Mr. Seward as follows:
United States Consulate,
Nassau, New Providence, August 9, 1862.
Sir : I have the honor to inform you of the arrival off this port, yesterday morning,
of the United States steamship R. R. Cnyler, "Winslow commander, eight days from
Boston.   The steamer Oreto had left this harbor the day previous and anchored off
Hog Island; but early on the morning of the Cuyler's arrival she got under way, and
kept " backing and filling " around that vessel while she lay off the port.    Seeing these
suspicious movements of so suspicious a vessel, Captain Winslow concluded not to
leave his ship, but sent a boat for me, and I promptly joined him on board, giving hijri|
all the information in my power.   He concluded to stand over for the Northwest'
Passage, as I advised that course as the most likely method of trapping the Oreto,
which vessel is reported to be bound for Charleston.
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 58.
s United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 30c
3 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 30'
British Appendix, vol. v, p. 50.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
401
Shortly after the Cuyler had disappeared the Oreto came to anchor off the mouth of the
harbor, and Her Majesty's steamer Peterel, Watson commander, went out and anchored
near her as " a protection against the Yankees cutting out the privateer."
Last night guns and shells were transported to the Oreto by the schooner Prince
Alfred, which has been purchased by the Confederate States agent, Lafitte, for a tender
on the British confederate ships.
A person landing at Nassau, ignorant of facts, would certainly think that this was
England's war, from the activity of the people here to forward supplies to the rebels.
I have, &c,
SAMUEL WHITING.1
Hon. William H. Seward, .
Secretary of State.
Full explanation of the circumstances referred to, so far as the
Peterel is concerned, is given in two letters of Captain Watson, who
was in command of the ship in question, Her Majesty's ship Peterel, in
answer to an inquiry from the admiralty in consequeuce of this statement:
Her Majesty's Snip Pembroke,
Sheerness, March 22,1872.
Sir : I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated 19th instant,
with its inclosure from Admiral Sir Alexander Milne, dated 18th March, 1872.
In reply, I beg leave to report that I perfectly remember the circumstance connected with the British steam-vessel, called the Oreto, that had been placed in the
vice-admiralty court at Nassau, New Providence, by Commander Hickley, of Her
Majesty's ship Greyhound, and that after a trial of some length she was released.
I remember receiving a communication from his excellency the governor of theBaha-
mas, to the effect that there were two American ships of war under steam inside the
bar, and that he would be glad if I could put myself in personal communication with
their captains, and offer them the customary hospitalities. On receipt of his excellency's communication, or as soon after as the tide permitted, I proceeded iu He-
••Majesty's ship under my command, under steam, across the bar, and went on board thr
United States steamship of war R. R. Cuyler, where I had a long and friendly convere
. sation with her captain.   Winslow, I think, was his name.
At the time I was on board the R. R. Cuyler, the Oreto, with two other British ships,
were steaming up and down the coast abreast Hog Island, trying their machinery. The
Oreto certainly was, as I know she came out for that purpose, it being the first day she
had had her steam up since being placed in the vice-admiralty court.
The two United States steamers of war, having declined the hospitalities of the port,
proceeded toward Abaco, as far as I can remember, and I anchored the Peterel outside
the bar of Hog Island, the'tide or lateness of the date preventing my recrossing it.
Having anctiored as above stated, a boat came to me from the Oreto, asking for the
assistance of some men, under the following circumstances:
A man, who stated he was the master in command of the Oreto, said he was very
short-handed, and wanted to anchor for about two hours to adjust his machinery, bat
if he anchored outside he had not sufficient crew to weigh his anchor, and begged I
would assist him by lending him men.
I declined lending him any men, but told him he might hold on astern of the Peterel,
and I would give him a line for that purpose.
About 6.30 or 7 p. m., having seen the Oreto fast, holding on by one of our hawsers, I
went down to dinner, and when I came on deck again she was gone.
I had told the master that she must go out of our waters before the tide slacked.
This small act of courtesy I considered a duty that I should have extended to any
ship, British or foreign, and until the receipt of your communication never gave it a
second thought; in fact, I must have considered it too trivial to mention in my letters
of proceedings, which at that time were full of matter of far greater interest.
In conclusion, I may remark that the only reason I had for refusing to send men on
hoard was in consequence of the prevalence of yellow fever in the merchant shipping
at Nassau, and I had prohibited all communication, as far as practicable, with them.
I have, &c,
G. W. WATSON,
Captain.1
Vernon Ltjshtngton, Esq., Admiralty.
26 B
1 United States Appendix, vol. vi, p. 304.
2 British Appendix, vol. v, p. 50.402
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Her Majesty's Ship Pembroke,
Sheerness, March 31,1872.
Sir : WTith reference to my letter of the 22d instant, I wish to make- the following
alteration in paragraph 6:
1. Having anchored as above stated, no communication of any sort took place between
Her Majesty's ship Peterel and the British merchant-ship Oreto, until the following-
evening, (Saturday,) when a boat came alongside from the Oreto, asking for the assistance. * | * * * The remainder of the paragraph and letter remains the
same.
2. When I sent my letter of the^22d, I had not my private journal or letter with me.
3. I wish to add also to my former letter that I never had any other communication,
direct or indirect, with the Oreto, or any one connected with her, except as set forth in
my official correspondence.
I have, &c,
J. J. WATSON,
Captain.19
V. Lushington, Esq.,
Secretary of the Admiralty.
We now see how unfounded was Mr. Whiting's suspicion as to the
intentions of the Peterel.
The Oreto being in this position, on the 9th of August a small steamer
called the Prince Alfred, having been loaded with the armament intended
. for the Creto, which had been brought out partly in the steamer Bahama,
partly in other vessels, having also cleared out for Saint John's, left
Nassau, as if with the intention of running the blockade.2 The Prince
Alfred having passed the Oreto, the latter soon afterward let go the
hawser, and put to sea; and having overtaken the Prince Alfred, took
her in tow, when both vessels proceeded to Green Cay, a small desert
island, lying sixty miles south of Nassau, on the edge of the Great Bahama Bank, wholly uninhabited, and only frequented at times by fishermen. There, out of sight of every one, the armament of the Oreto
was transferred to her from the Prince Alfred, the confederate flag was!
hoisted, and the Oreto thenceforth received the name of the Florida.3
It had been surmised in the colony that the Prince Alfred was taking
out the armament of the Oreto, but the matter went no further thanj
surmise.   The harbor was full of shipping, and vessels were leaving
every day loaded with contraband of war for the purpose of running
the blockade.
Mr. Whiting, as we have seen, had stated it as a fact in his letter of
the 9th. In a later letter to Mr. Seward of the 12th he speaks with
less certainty.   He says:
On the 9th, the schooner Prince Alfred, which had been purchased by Lafitte, the
confederate agent here, left this port, and'it was currently reported and generally be-.f
lieved that she had on board the armament for the Oreto, and as that vessel left the
same night, (both clearing for Saint John's,) I think it probable.
I have given full details of these movements to the commanders of the Adirondack
and Cuyler, and also sent such information to the different consulates.4
On the 16th, a report of the two vessels having gone to Green Cay
appears to have reached Nassau.
Mr. Whiting writes on that day:
The Oreto is reported to have gone to Green Cay, about fifty miles southwest from
Providence Island, and it is also reported that the schooner Prince Alfred has-gone
there to deliver to the Oreto her piratical armament.
I have sent dispatches to the United States cruisers by the best" channels open to
me.s
1 British Appendix, vol. v, p. 51.
2 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 324.
3 Ibid., pp. 307, 319-231.
4 Ibid., p. 305.
s Ibid.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
403
The fact did not, however, become actually known at Nassau till the
6th of September, when certain men, who had been engaged at Nassau
to go out in the Oreto for the purpose of assisting in transferring the
guus and arms from the Prince Alfred, having returned to Nassau, gave
to the American consul an account of what had happened at Green
Cay.1
That, till a week after the vessels had left, no one in the colony had
any idea of an intention to transfer the armament in any place in the
Bahamas, is plain. So far from expecting anything of the kind, Mr.
Whiting expressly states, in his letter of the 9th, that he " advised Captain Winslow to stand ont for the northwest Providence Channel, as the
most likely method of trapping the Oreto, as she was reported to be
bound for Charleston." Upon the faith of this belief, Mr. Whiting, as
he tells us, "gave full details of these movements to the commanders
of the two American ships of war, the Adirondack and Cuyler.';2
What, then, is the negligence complained of in respect of the arming
of the Oreto within the waters of the colony ? In the American case
the argument is put thus:
The arrangements for arming were made in the harbor of Nassau, and the two vessels left that port almost simultaneously, and proceeded to Green Cay together. The
purpose for which they went was notorious in Nassau. This was so palpable an evasion that the act should be assumed as having taken place in the harbor of Nassau.3
This is a very adroit way of putting the case, but is it a j list one? In_
the first place, it is a great deal too much to assume that it was | notorious" that the Prince Alfred had on board the armament of the other-
vessel. The-consul puts it no higher than that it was so reported, and
the government could not act on mere report. The fact was never said
to have been notorious till 1865, three years later, when Mr. Kirkpatrick,.
the then consul, who knew nothing of the facts when they happened,
thought proper so to state.4
But the argument further puts it as though the purpose of going ti>
Green Cay was notorious ; whereas we now know that neither the con-
sal nor any one else had the remotest idea that the transfer of the armament was intended to be effected within the limits of the colony. The
consul believed that both vessels were going to Charleston. Can it be
said that the governor ought to have sent a British ship of war to accompany the two ships some sixty miles or more, till clear of the waters-
of the Bahamas, to prevent the possibility of a violation of neutrality in
. this respect"?
But then it is said, " The act was committed within British jurisdiction, and was therefore a violation of the first clause of the first rule of
the treaty."
But, with submission, the act is not necessarily within the first rule of
the treaty because it was committed in British jurisdiction. To bring
it within the first rule of the treaty it must be shown that there was a
want of due diligence in not preventing the act so done, and of this I find,
no proof in the American documents.
To be sure, our honorable colleague, Mr. Staempfli, in the grounds-
of his judgment, says :
Que Green Cay e"tait eloigne" et peu frequente"; cette objection est d'autant moins-
importante que tout ce qui se fit a Green Cay partit de Nassau, et pouvait fort bien
s'apercevoir depuis ce dernier endroit.
1 United States Documents, vol. vi, p.
2 Ibid., pp. 304, 305.
3 United States Case, p. 439.
4 United States Documents, vol. vi, p.
306.404
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
I confess I do not quite understand what is meant by this. I do not
suppose M. Staempfli can mean that what was done at Green Cay could
be seen at Nassau, sixty miles off. I must, therefore, take it that what he
means is, that the loading of the Prince Alfred and the nearly simultaneous departure of the two ships from Nassau could have been seen at
Nassau—which, as it strikes me, is a self-evident proposition, But if he
means that, because the cargo of the Prince Alfred consisted of guns and
arms that might be transferred to the Oreto, therefore the authorities
ought to have stopped the'Prince Alfred, the answer is that, until such
transfer had actually taken place, or was about to take place, in British
waters, the authorities had no power to seize or detain the vessels.
The Prince Alfred had a perfect right, subject to the chance of capture, to take arms to a belligerent port. There was nothing to show that
she was not about to do so. The American consul believed she was.
What authority had the government to assume the contrary?
Lastly, M. Staempfli makes it a matter of reproach to the local government that no prosecution was instituted against the master of the
Prince Alfred.
I must observe that this tribunal has nothing whatever to do with the
question of whether Her Majesty's government should or should not
have directed a prosecution in this or that particular instance. Though
this is a point which has more than once been dwelt upon, it is wholly
irrelevant to our inquiry.
However, let us see how the facts stand in this respect. On the 8th
of September Mr. Whiting, having seen the men who had returned from
the Oreto, and having obtained a deposition from them, writes to the
governor:
I have the honor to inform your excellency that I have good authority for stating
that the schooner Prince Alfred, of Nassau, took the Oreto's armament from this port
and discharged the same on board that steamer at Green Cay, one of the Bahamas..
That the Oreto afterward left Green Cay with the secession flag flying at her peak.
That the Prince Alfred has returned to this port, and now lies at Cochrane's Anchorage,
and I am credibly informed that her captain is again shipping men to be sent to the
Oreto, in direct contravention of the foreign-enlistment act.
I earnestly urge upon your excellency the propriety of instituting some inquiry into
these matters, and of preventing acts so prejudicial to the interests of the friendly Government which I have the honor to represent.1
To which the colonial secretary answers:
Colonial Office, Nassau, September 9, 1862.
Sir: In-reply to your letter of the 8th instant, directed to the governor, I am instructed by his excellency to inform you that, if you feel assured that you have sufficient credible evidence to substantiate your allegation, and will put your evidence
in the hands of the attorney-general, his excellency will direct a prosecution against
the captain of the Prince Alfred, or others who may have been guilty of violating the
foreign-enlistment act.
But his excellency has no authority to take any steps against the Oreto, which is put
of his excellency's jurisdiction.
I have, &c,
C. R. NESBITT,
Colonial Secretary.1
Instead of putting his evidence into the hands of the attorney-general,,
who, of course, was not himself in the possession of any, Mr. Whiting
allowed the matter to drop.   He probably thought, and thought rightly,
that it would profit the United States Government very little to punish
this man.
Another charge in respect of this vessel is that Maffitt, her commander,
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 87.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
405
when at Nassau, induced about forty men to enlist on board  ATIegedr_cru!tme„t
the Oreto.   The United States case, without more, sets thisofcrew-
down as a violation of the second rule of the treaty, but is wholly silent
as to any negligence of the local government in this behalf.
M. Staempfli, nevertheless, but without any reference to facts showing
negligence, states, as a ground of his judgment, that the manning of the
Oreto at Nassau is to be imputed to the negligence of the British authorities. In the first place, it does not appear that the authorities knew
anything whatsoever about the matter. In the second place, the Oreto,
at the time these men were engaged, had not adopted the character of
a ship of war; it was not known that she would do so; it was not known
to the local government, or even to Mr. Whiting, that she had been made
over to the confederate government; it was not known that Maffitt had
taken possession of her as their officer; Duguid, who had brought her
out, still remained apparently the master of her; her former crew had
all left her; the crew she had engaged were wholly insufficient as a
fighting crew, and there was not, and could not be, any present purpose
of using her as a fighting ship; it was believed she was going to run
the blockade. If that fact had turned out to be true, the allowing her
to hire a crew would have been perfectly legitimate, and could not have
been prevented.
Was the vessel to be kept at Nassau permanently for want of a crew?
It is quite true that, by the second rule of the treaty, a neutral government is not to permit its ports or waters to be used by a belligerent
for the recruitment of men. But at this time, as I have already remarked, though it was kno.wn that the vessel was intended for the confederate government, it was not known that she had been transferred to
them, still less that she was about to be used for belligerent purposes,
which, indeed, she could not be till a different crew could be obtained.
Till then she might be liable to capture as contraband of war, but she
would not be liable to seizure as for a breach of the municipal law.
I confess I do not see the negligence which M. Staempfli's keener
sight is enabled to discover.
When the Florida had taken in her armament at Green Cay, the crew
shipped at Nassau being altogether inadequate for the ves- F1<
sel as a ship of war, she proceeded to the port of Cardenas,
in Cuba, where she remained till the 31st of August. She there attempted to ship a crew, but the matter having come to the knowledge
of the authorities, the officer in command repudiated the transactiou,
and left the port without any increase of his uumbers.1 Unable to keep
the sea for purposes of war with so insufficient a crew, the Florida ran
past the hostile cruisers, though challenged and fired at, and succeeded
in getting into the confederate port of Mobile, where she arrived on the
4th of September.2
. She remained in the port of Mobile upwards of four months, at the end
of which time, having shipped a crew, she was sent out, on the 15th of
January, 1863, under the command of Maffitt, as a confederate ship of
war.3
A grave question here presents itself, whether Great Britain, even if
open to the imputation of want of due diligence in respect
.•    j_i i . r« _ _        _—_       . n   i •_        Question as to ef-
ot the original equipment of the Oreto, or ot her arming at re* or going into and
_^l r, ii... -i i      __•        _.i jT       _• remaining at Mobile.
Green Cay, can properly be held responsible for the acts of
this ship subsequently to her entry into Mobile.
It is all-important to bear in mind that the original equipment of this
United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 331.
2 Ibid., p. 332.
3British Appendix, vol. i, pp. 117, 120,122.
rida after leav-
Green Cay.406
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
vessel, though an offense against the municipal law of Great Britain,
was not, there being, up to the time she arrived at the Bahamas, no
present intention of war, au offense against international law. All the
power which the government could exercise against her, in respect of
any offense against the municipal law, was such as was derived from
that law; that is to say, from the foreign-enlistment act. Now, all that
the latter empowered the government to do was to seize the vessel and
to bring her before a competent court for condemnation. If, when such
a proceeding has been adopted, it results in the acquittal and release of
the vessel, the matter becoriSes res judicata, the original vice becomes
purged, and no further proceeding in rem can be had. A ship cannot
be seized and brought into court again and again when once it has been
decided by a competent court that she was not liable to seizure and
condemnation at all. After the Oreto had been thus acquitted, all
power of further seizure, as for an infraction of the foreign-enlistment
act in her original equipment, was at an end. I grant that the right of
a belligerent to redress for a breach of neutrality against international
law would not be affected by a judicial proceeding under the municipal
law; but, there having been here, according to my view, no more than
a breach of the municipal law, all that the belligerent could possibly exact was that the municipal law should be put in force by a proceeding
against the vessel. When under such a proceeding the vessel had been
acquitted, the matter was at an end.
It will be said that a second offense was committed in British jurisdiction by the arming of this vessel at Green Cay; and this nray be so;
but here again we have, in like manner, no breach of neutrality according to international law, if, owing to the deficiency of the crew, there
was no present intention of applying the ship to the purpose of war.
There is a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States which
c__eor the united is in point to the present question, in the case of the United'
states™. DeQuincy. gtates vs. De Quincy, reported in the 6th volume of Peters's
Beports, page 445.1
In that case the defendant was indicted, under the third section of the
American act of 1818, for having been concerned in fitting out a vessel
called the Bolivar, afterward Las Damas Argentinas, with intent that
such vessel should be employed in the service of the United Provinces
of Bio de la Plata against the subjects of the Emperor of Brazil, with
whom the United States were then at peace. The vessel in question,
originally a pilot-boat, had been fitted out at Baltimore for the defendant and one Armstrong, and adapted for carrying a gun. She sailed
from Baltimore to the island of St. Thomas, Armstrong being on board
as part owner and agent for the other owners. On the way to St.
Thomas, Armstrong told a witness that it was his intention and wish
to employ the vessel as a privateer, but that he had no funds. He spoke
of the difficulty of getting any, and said he could not tell, until he got
to the West Indies, whether he should be able to procure any. After
negotiating for two or three days at St. Thomas, Armstrong succeeded in obtaining funds; the Bolivar was fitted out as a privateer; and,
Armstrong having provided himself with a commission from the Buenos
Ayres government, the vessel, under the name of Las Damas Argentinas, cruised under the flag of that government, and took several prizes. \
Two questions presented themselves for the decision of the court as to
the direction which should be given to the jury. The first was whether,
to constitute an offense within the act, it was necessary that the vessel
should have been armed when she left Baltimore, the decision on which
1 See also British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 92.SBSZS
OPINIONS  OF   SIR   ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
407
is immaterial to the present purpose. The secoud question is the one
which touches the present case. On the part of the defendant, it was
submitted that the jury should be directed—
That if thejury believe that, when the Bolivar was fitted out and equipped at Baltimore, the owner and equipper intended to go to the West Indies in search of funds,
with which to arm and equip the said vessel, and had no present intention of using or
employing the said vessel as a privateer, but intended, when he equipped her, to go to
the West Indies to endeavor to raise funds to prepare her for a cruise, then the defendant is not guilty.
Or, if the jury believe that when the Bolivar was equipped at Baltimore, and when
she left the United States, the equipper had no fixed intention to employ her as a
privateer, but had a wish so to employ her, the fulfillment of which wish depended on
his ability to obtain funds in the West Indies for the purpose of arming and preparing
her for war, then the defendant is not guilty.
The court said:
We think these instructions ought to be given. The offense consists principally in
the intention with which the preparations were made. These preparations, according
to the very terms of the act, must be made within the limits of the United States; and
• it is equally necessary that the intention with respect to the employment of the vessel
should be formed before she leaves the United States; and this must be a fixed intention, not conditional or contingent, depending on some future arrangements. This intention is a question belonging exclusively to the jury to decide. It is the material
point on which the legality or criminality of the act must turn, and it decides whether
the adventure is of a commercial or warlike character.1
At the same time the court, at the instance of the prosecution, held
that if there was an intention of employing the vessel as a privateer
when she left Baltimore, the offense would be complete, though subsequent events might have prevented that intention from being carried
into effect.
The distinction is a sound one. A present intention does not the less
exist, because unexpected events may afterward change it; but an intention which is to depend on uncertain contingencies canuot be said to
be a present one. It is the present intention of the immediate employment of the vessel for hostile purposes which makes the sending out an
armed ship an offense against the law of nations, as a violation of neutrality, as distinguished from merely making it contraband of war. Assuredly there must be a distinction between the two things, and I am at
a loss to see where the line can otherwise be drawn.
A similar, purpose, in like manner, makes the equipping of a vessel an
offense against the municipal law, when without it—as if, for instance,
the vessel had been already built and equipped—the transaction would
be simply one of trade. Now, in the case before us, it may, perhaps, be
questioned whether there was any present intention of using the Florida
as a ship of war, or whether such employment was not contingent on
her obtaining a war crew. If no crew could be got, the cruise was, as
the sequel shows, to be given up, and an attempt made to run her into
one of her own ports. Be this as it may, the belligerent purpose, if any
such existed, was frustrated by the ship not obtaining a crew, and the
voyage was lost. This being so, why, as Sir Boundell Palmer puts it to
us, should not a vessel equipped in a neutral port, contrary to the municipal law of the neutral, be considered, like any other contraband of
war—such being, in point of international law, the true character of such
a vessel till she actually enters on her employment as a ship of war—as
no longer in delicto when she has once reached the port of the belligerent ?
Having shown, as I think, abundant grounds for saying that as to
what passed at Green Cay, no possible imputation of want of due diligence can attach, it seems to me that it would be carrying the doctrine
1 British Appendix, vol. iii, p. 93.
W408
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
of neutral responsibility to an unheard-of and most unreasonable length
to say that, after a lapse of five months, during which no vessel of
the United States was captured by the Florida, and after this vessel
had been four months in a confederate port, and had there shipped a
new crew, Great Britain is to be held liable for damage afterward done
by her.
I agree with Sir Boundell Palmer in thinking that, with her arrival at
Mobile, if not with her departure from the Bahamas, the illegal voyage
upon which any liability attached came to an end, and with it all responsibility which can reasonably be fastened on the government of
Great Britain.
But it is said that the Florida, having again come into a British port,
and being known to be engaged in hostile operations against
the uFi.ridawsho_i_ the United States, ought to have been detained, it being
have been seized on      , ,.        , ,       ',-,   . ~.   , ■    ■ , ,
again coming into a obligatory on the British government to stop such a vessel,
by reason of the admission in the second branch of the
first rule, viz, that "a neutral nation is bound to use due diligence to
prevent the departure from its jurisdiction of any vessel intended to
cruise or carry on war" under the circumstances referred to in the first
branch; | such vessel having been specially adapted in whole or in
part, within its jurisdiction, to warlike use."
The question is one of considerable importance, as it may affect not
only the Florida, but also the Georgia and the Shenandoah, vessels as
to the equipping of which it will be impossible to fix the British government with want of due diligence.
I cannot understand how such a contention can have been raised. It
appears to me to rest on a thorough perversion of the obvious meaning
of the rule. It is impossible to read the first rule without seeing that
it is intended to apply to two branches of one entire transaction, which
consists, first, in allowing the vessel to be equipped, next in allowing
her to depart; the second branch of the rule being intended to meet a
case in which a vessel may have been equipped in such a manner as to
elude the diligence of the authorities, but where there may be an opportunity, on her character being discovered, to arrest her before she has
quitted neutral waters.
The second branch of the rule is obviously intended to apply to the
first departure of a vessel—that is to say, its departure from a neutral
port before passing into the hands of a belligerent government, and to
that alone.
It is absurd to suppose that, if it had been intended that Great Britain should be held liable for not having seized these vessels on their1
re-entering her ports, this would not have been expressly stated, especially when it is remembered that this might have been virtually to admit
liability in respect of all these vessels, if shown to have been specially
adapted for war within British territory, for every one of them returned
to a British port at an early period of its career. It is plain that it
never could have entered into the mind of the British ministry (that the
rule would be treated as applicable to anything beyond the first departure of the vessel.
The moral bearing of the question has been admirably pointed out in
Sir B. Palmer's argument :
It would have become the plain duty of any neutral state which had entered into
such an engagement to give notice of it beforehand to all belligerent powers, before it
could be put in force to their prejudice. It is impossible that an act, which would he
a breach of public faith and of international law toward one belligerent, could be held
to constitute any part of the "diligence due" by a neutral to the other belligerent. The
rule says nothing of any obligation to exclude this class of vessels, when once commis-OPINIONS   OP  SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
409
sioned as public ships of war, from entrance into neutral ports upon the ordinary footing. If they were so excluded by proper notice, they would noteuter; and the rule
(in that case) could never operate to prevent thoir departure. If they were not so
excluded, instead of being " due diligence," it would be a flagrant act of treachery and
wrong to take advantage of their entrance, in order to effect their detention or capture.
Can Her Majesty be supposed to have consented to be retrospectively judged as wanting
in due diligence, because, not having excluded these confederate ships of war from her
ports by any prohibition or notice, she did not break faith with them, and commit an outrage on every principle of j ustice and neutrality by their seizure ? The rules themselves
had no existence at the time of the war; the confederates knew, and could know, nothing of them; their retrospective application cannot make an act ex post facto " due,"
upon the footing of " diligence," to the one party in the war, which, if it had been actually done, would have been a wholly unjustifiable outrage against the other.
And this being so, it may safely be asserted that the United States
Government must have framed the rules with a like mind ; for it would
be to give them credit for sharp practice indeed, if, while the British
government agreed to the rule, on the supposition that its application
was to be limited to the first departure of an offending vessel, the
United States should be at liberty to insist on its application, toties
quoties, to every subsequent departure. I will say no more than that the
construction thus sought to be put on the second branch of the first rule
is quite preposterous.
But it is said, in the second place, that the equipment and sending
ont of an armed vessel from the port of a neutral being a violation ot
its territory and neutral rights, and therefore a hostile act, Great Britain
had the right to seize these vessels on their again coming within her
jurisdiction, and was bound to do so, to prevent them from continuing
to make war on vessels of the United States.
The answer of the British government is threefold:
1st. That it had not the right, according to international law, to seize
these vessels, seeing that .when they came again into British ports, they
were admitted as the commissioned ships of war of a belligerent state.
2d. That, independently of the foregoing ground, the British government could not, as a neutral government, seize a ship of war of a belligerent state for that which was not a violation of neutrality, but only of
its own municipal law.
3d. That even if it had the right, it was under no obligation to exercise it.
The first of these grounds depends on the effect of the commissions;
which these vessels had in the mean time received from the Effect 0f commis.
government of the Confederate States as ships of war. ^£?^J&£:
Now, it must be taken as an unquestionable fact that these ships were
built, or equipped, for the de facto government of the Confederate States,
and were employed by it as regular ships of war, under the command
of officers regularly commissioned. Hereupon two questions present
themselves: Were these commissions valid % If so, what was their
effect as to affording immunity to a vessel, thus commissioned, from
seizure by the government of Great Britain *?
It is a familiar principle of international law that the ships of war of
a state are entitled to the privilege of exterritoriality.   This   ships of war ex.
is a point on which leading publicists are agreed.  Wheaton, temttmal-
in his "F_l_.n_.ents de droit international,"1 writes:
Une armee ou une flotte appartenant a une puissance 6trangere, et traversant ou
stationnant dans les limites du territoire d'un autre 6tat, en auntie" avec cette puissance, sonb Egalement exemptes de la juridiction civile et criminelle du pays.
II s'ensuit qne les personnes et les choses qui, dans ces trois cas, se trouvent dans les
limites du territoire d'un e"tat stranger, restent soumises a la juridiction de l'e'tat
auquel elles appartiennent, comme si elles etaient encore sur son territoire.
1 Vol. i, p. 119.410
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
- S'il n'y a pas de prohibition expresse, les ports d'nn etat sons regardes comme etnnt
ouverts jii i \ navires de guerre d'nne autre nation aveo laquelle cet 6tat est en paix et
auntie. Ces navires, entires dans les ports (Strangers, soit en vertn de l'absence d'une
prohibition, soit en vertn d'une autorisation expresse, stipule" par traite*, sont exempts
de la juridiction des tribnnaux et des autorites du lieu.
Heffter declares ships of war to be exempt from the territorial jurisdiction of the country within whose waters they are.1
Sir R. Phillimore writes as follows :a
Long usage and universal custom entitle every such ship to be considered as a part
„• <» t>_... of the state to which she belongs, and to be exempt from anv other i u-
Sur B. Phillimore. •_■•_.• _.   ..        j.i_- •    •.   6 '•l      j- i    I'—"—**" .. ™ .   / 7T •<■
risiticturn ; whether this privilege be founded upon strict international
right, or upon an original concession of comity with respect to the state in its aggregate capacity, which, by inveterate practice, has assumed the position of a right, is a
consideration of not much practical importance. But ir isof some importance, for if the
better opinion be, as it would seem to be, that the privilege in question was originally
a concession of comity, it may, on due notice being given, be revoked by a state, so
ill advised as to adopt such a course, which could not happen if it were a matter of
natural right. But, unquestionably, in the case of the foreign ship of war, or of the
foreigu sovereign and embassador, every stato which has not formerly notified its
departure from this usage of the civilized world, is under a tacit convention to accord
this privilege to the foreign ship of war lying in itsharbors.
No writer has, however, discussed the subject with so much clearness
and force as M. Ortolan in his "Diplomatic de la mer:"
Ortolan. r
Les batiments de guerre au contraire, amies par l'etat lui-meme et pour sa defense*
n sont les represen .ants a l'e'tranger; leurs commandants et leurs officiers sont comme
es di-lSgues du pouvoir executif, et snr quelques points du poavoir jndiciaire de leur
.ays.   Ces bitt iments doivent done participer pleinement a l'ind_ipendance et a la son*
verainete* de la puissance qui les arme; ils ont droit aux respects et aux honneurs qni
sont das a cette souverainete; c'est ce que reconnaissent et ce que commandent les lois.
internatinales.3 ..........
Par cela seul qne les batiments de goerre sont amirs par le gouvernement d'un etat
inde'pendant, auquel ils appartienuent, que leurs commandants et leurs officiers sont
des fonctionnaires publics de cet etat et en exercent la puissance executive, en certains,
points meme la puissance jndiciaire, enfin que tout iDdividu faisant partie de leur
e
(1
v
j;i.iiii>   in. iiir  i__   j p 11 i>>.i; u .    j i n i. u i<i 11 i -. i ■ 11 i 111   uuc   (..in    iimn nni   n.ionu.   pai i i<    u. i.u
Equipage, sans distinction de grade, est un agent de la force publique; ces b&timeuts
personnifi.es, sont une portion de ce gouvernement et doivent fitre independents e
respectes a son <'ga 1.
Ainsi, quel que soit le lieu oh ils se tronvent, qui qne ce soit au monde, e"tranger an
gonvernement auquel ils appartiennent, n'a le droit de s'immiscer en rien dans ce qni
se passe a leur bord, et encore moins d'y p6n<Strer par la force.
On exprime generalement cette regie par une metaphore pass6e en coutume, et telle*
ment accreditee, tellement traditionnelle, qne dans la plupart des esprits elle est
devenne comme une raison justificative de la proposition aout elle n'est veritablement
qu'une expression figure~e. On dit qne tout h&timent de gnerre est une partie dn territoire de la nation a laquelle il appartient: d oh la consequence que, meme lorsqn'il est
dans un .port et ranger, les officiers, 1'equipage, et toute personne quelconqne qni bo
tronve a son bord, est eensde etre, et que tout fait passe a bord est cense passe, snr 06
territoire. C'est par une continuation, par une expression resnnur de la m6me ligure,
qu'on appelle ce privilege le privilege ou le droit d'exterriior%alit6.*
The matter is so well handled by this able writer that I am induced
to cite one or two more passages :5
Ce qui est vrai, c'est qne le navire est une habitation flottante, aveo une population
soumise aux lois et au gouvernement de l'etat dont le navire a la nationality, et placee
sous la protection de cet etat. Ce qui est vrai, c'est qne si le navire est b&tiinent de
guerre, il est, en outre, une forteresse mobile portant en son sein nne portion mfime de
la puissance publique de cet etat, des officiera et nn equipage qni forment tons dans
lenr ensemble nn corps organise de fonctionnaires et d'agents militaires on administrar
tifs de la nation.
1 •• Volkerrecht der Gegenwart," $ II-
* International Law, vol. i, p. 399.
sVoLi, p.le-1.
* Ibid., p. 186.
■'■ ll.iii.. pp. 188-191.OPINIONS  OP   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
411
S'il s'agit de navires de guerre, la coutume internationale est constante; ces navires
restent regis uniquement par la souverainete de leur pays ; les lois, les autorites, et les
juridictions de l'etat dans les eaux duquel ils sont mouilies leur restent etrangeres; ils
n'ont avec cet etat que des relations internationales par la voie des fonctionnaires de
la localite competents pour depareilles relations. .....
Le navire de guerre portant en son sein une partie de la puissance publique de l'etat
auquel il appartient, uu corps organise de fonctionnaires et d'agents de cet to puissance dans l'ordre administratif et dans l'ordre militaire, soumettre ce navire et le
corps organise qu'il porte aux lois et aux autorites du pays dans les eaux duquel il
entre, ce serait vraiment soumettre l'une de ces puissances a l'autre; ce serait vouloir
reudre impossibles les relations maritimes d'une nation k l'autre par batiments de l'etat.
II faut ou renoncer k ces relations, ou les admettre avec les conditions indispensables
pour maintenir a chaque etat souverain son independance.
L'etat proprietaire du port ou de la rade peut sans doute, k l'egard des batiments de
guerre, pour lesquels il aurait des motifs de sortir des regies ordinaires et pacitiques du
droit des gens, leur interdire 1'entree de ces eaux; les y surveiller s'il croit leur presence ■
dangereuse, ou leur enjoindre d'en sortir, de ra.me qu'il est libre, quand ils sont daus
la mer territoriale, d'employer k leur egard les moyens de sdrete que leur voisiuage
peut rendre necessaires ; sauf k repondre, envers l'etat auquel ces vaisseaux appartien-
nent, de toutes ces mesures qui pourront etre, suivant les evenements qui les auront
motivees, ou la maniere dont elles auront ete executees, des ■ actes de defense ou de
. precaution legitime, ou des actes de mefiance, ou des offenses graves, ou meme des
causes de guerre; mais tant qu'il les recoit, il doit respecter en eux la souverainete
etrangere dont ils sont une emanation ; il ne pent avoir, par consequent, la pretension
de regir les personnes qui se trouvent et les faits qui se passent k leur bord, ni de faire
sur ce bord acte de puissance et de souverainete.
In the case of the Exchange, reported in Cranch's Reports, (vol. vii,
pages 135-147,) the principle that a vessel bearing the flag Cll..e of the Ex.
and commission of a belligerent power was not within the ch!UU!e-
local jurisdiction of the neutral law, though claimed by citizens of the
neutral country as having been forcibly taken from them as prize, contrary to international law, was fully upheld on appeal by the Supreme
Court of the United States.
" By the unanimous consent of nations," says Chief Justice Marshall, " a foreigner is
amenable to the laws of the place, but certainly, in practice, nations have not yet asserted their jurisdiction over the public armed ships of a foreign sovereign entering a
port open for their reception. * * * It seems, then, to the court to be a principle
of public law that national ships of war entering the port of a friendly power open for
their reception are to be considered as exempted by the consent of that power from its
jurisdiction."
It has been ingeniously attempted by the counsel of the United States
to place the decision in this case and the judgment of Chief Justice
Marshall on the footing that a neutral court has no jurisdiction over a
belligerent vessel as a matter simply of judicial authority.   But this is
not so: the eminent judge who delivered the
inn
fiuent in that case
places the matter not on the footing of jurisdiction in a judicial point of
view, but as one of international right. In proof of which the following
passages are deserving of the fullest attention :
A nation would justly be considered as violating its faith, although that faith may
-not be expressly plighted, which slwuld suddenly, and without previous notice, exercise its
territorial powers in a manner not consonant to the usages and received obligations of the
civilized world.       *       *       *
If, for reasons of state, the ports of a nation generally, or any particular ports be
closed against vessels of war generally, or the vesse. s of war of any particular nation,
notice is usually given of such determination. If there be no prohibition, the ports of
a friendly nation are considered as open to the public ships of all powers with whom
it is at peace, and they are supposed to enter.such ports, and to remain in them, while
allowed to remain, uuder the protection of the government of the place. *       *
But in all respects different is the situation of a public armed ship. She constitutes
a part of the military force of her nation ; acts under the immediate and direct command of the sovereign; is employed by him in national objects. He has many and
powerful motives for preventing those objects from being defeated by the interference
of a foreign state. Such interference cannot take place without affecting his power and
his dignity. The implied license, therefore, under which s>uch vessel enters a IVieudly
port, may reasonably be construed, and it seems to the court ought to be construed,412
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
as containing an exemption from the jurisdiction of the sovereign within whose territory she
claims the rights of hospitality.
No doubt the effect to be given to the commission of a belligerent
con.mission of government must depend on its power to act as a govern-
mere belligerent. ment. And I repeat what I have before endeavored to make
good: namely, that where an integral portion of a nation separates
itself from the parent state, and establishes a de facto government of
its own, excluding the former government from all power and control,
and thereupon a civil war ensues, a neutral nation is fully justified in
recognizing the government de facto as a belligerent, though it has not
as yet acknowledged it as a nation; and that from the time of the acknowledgment of its belligerent status, the government de facto acquires,
in relation to the neutral, all the rights which attach to the status of a
belligerent of an established nationality. The practice of nations has
been uniform on this point j all the maritime nations concurred in according to the confederate government the status and rights of a belligerent. The commissions of the Confederate States must therefore be
taken to have been valid, and to have had the same force and efficacy
as the commissions of any recognized government would have had.
It has, indeed, been contended that, in the particular instance of the
vessels belonging to the Confederate States, the commissions of the government de facto ought not to have been respected. After having listened, with the utmost attention, to the argument of Mr. Evarts, I protest I am at a loss to know why. Setting aside all the idle language
that has been written and spoken about "piracy"—as though the ships
of eleven great provinces, having an organized government, and carrying on one of the greatest civil wars recorded in history, could be called
pirates—the argument comes to this: that a country, the independent
nationality of which has not been acknowledged, and which has not
been admitted into the fraternity of nations, has no rights of sovereignty, and consequently cannot by its commission exclude the right of
the local sovereign to seize one of its vessels of war if any infraction of
the municipal law has been committed in respect of it. But what is
this, practically, but to deprive the recognition of belligerency of all
the effects it was intended to have ? It is admitted among nations that
such a recognition may be made by a neutral state. Its purpose is to
invest the de facto government with the character of a belligeren t power,"
for the common benefit of both belligerent and neutral, without any
recognition of independence or sovereignty. The recognition would
plainly be idle if it did not carry with it one of the most important
rights incidental to a belligerent government, that of commissioning and
employing vessels of war, and of having those vessels, when sailing
under its flag, and armed with its commissions, invested with the privileges conceded to ships of war, and therefore exempted from the jurisdiction of any neutral country in whose waters they may be..
But it is alleged that, even assuming the commissions to have been
Effect of aiie vahd, these vessels ought nevertheless to have been seized.
violation °f neutfai The argument, as I understand it, is iu substance this : the
equipping and sending forth of a vessel from neutral territory, for the purpose of being employed in the service of a belligerent,
is a violation of the territorial rights of the neutral; every violation of
the territory of a neutral is a hostile act; every hostile act calls upon
the neutral to vindicate its rights by force; therefore Great Britain
ought to have seized these vessels.
In support of this argument the' following passage is cited
from Hautefeuille:
Hautefeuille.OPINIONS   OP  SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
413
Le fait de construire un b&timent de guerre pour le compte d'un belligerant, ou de
l'armer. dans les etats neutres, est une violation du territoire. Toutes les prises faites
par un batiment de cette nature sont iliegitimes, en quelque lieu qu'elles aient ete faites.
Le souverain offense a le droit de s'en emparer, memo de force, si elles sont amenees dans
ses ports, et d'en reclaimer la restitution lorsqn'elles sont, comme cela arrive en general, conduites dans les ports hors de sa juridiction. II peut egalement redamer le
desarmement du batiment iliegalement arme sur son territoire, et meme le detenir s'il
entre dans quelque lieu soumis k sa souverainete, jusqu'_i ce qu'il ait ete desarme.1
After which the learned author goes on to use the following strong
language, which, however, appears to express a view peculiar to himself,
and, so far as I am aware, shared by no other writer on international
law:
Le peuple neutre ne peut negliger l'accomplissement de ce devoir, sans s'exposer a la
juste vengeance de la nation k laquelle cet abandon de ses droits porterait un grave
prejudice, sans lui fournir un juste sujet de guerre. On pourrait en effet 1'accuser, avec
raison, d'abdiquer les droits desa souverainete, de son independance, en faveur'de l'une
des patties en guerre, au prejudice de l'autre, et par consequent de manquer d'imparti-
alite, de meconnaitre le second devoir de la neutralite.2
If, indeed, by constructing or arming a ship, M. Hautefeuille means
constructing or arming for the immediate purpose of war, so as to constitute a hostile expedition from the shore of the neutral, I entirely agree
that this will amount to a violation of neutral territory. Short of that,
it will only be a violation of the local law, and therefore will not amount
to a violation of territory. This distinction is all-important, but appears
to have been wholly lost sight of.
*J CJ
But even should it amount to a violation of territory, it seems monstrous to assert that the neutral is bound to have recourse to force, possibly to become involved in war, for the benefit of the other belligerent.
It is to be observed that M. Hautefeuille, before he came to the subject of ships, had been speaking of the violation of neutral territory by
acts of hostility, such as the taking of a ship in neutral waters.
He could hardly, I imagine, mean to go the length of saying that the
clandestine equipment of a ship for belligerent use, not amounting to a
hostile expedition, would be such a violation of the rights of the neutral
as would justify, much less necessitate, a declaration of war.
M. Ortolan discusses the subject with the calm judgment
which distinguishes him.
It is true that his reasoning is addressed to the obligation of the neutral state to insure the restoration of prizes illegally captured within its
waters; but it is obvious that the principle he lays down applies to every
violation of neutral territory by a belligerent:
L'ilMgalite des actes d'hostilrte exerces dans les eaux territoriales d'une puissance
neutre entraine, comme consequence directe, l'iliegalite des prises faites en dedans des
limites de ces eaux. Ces prises ne sont pas valables, soit qu'elles aient ete faites par des
navires de guerre, soit qu'elles l'aient ete par des corsaires. C'est le devoir de l'etat
auquel appartient le capteur de les restituer aux premiers proprietaires ; et meme c'est
,le droit et le devoir de l'etat neutre dont le territoire a ete vioie de prononcer lui-meme
cette restitution si la prise se trouve amenee chez lui.
Toutefois la nullite des prises ainsi faites n'est pas tellement absolue qu'elle puisse
etre invoquee, et que l'etat du capteur doive la prononcer meme en l'absence de toute
reclamation de la part de l'etat neutre dont on pretend que les droits ont ete inecon-
nus. " C'est une regie technique des cours de prises," dit k ce sujet M. Wheaton, " de
ne restituer leur propriete aux reclamantsparticuliers, en cas pareil, que sur la deinande
du gouvernement neutre dont le territoire a ete ainsi vioie. Cette regie est fondee sur
le principe que 1' etat neutre seul a ete blesse dans ses droits par une telle capture et
que le reclainant ennemi n'a pas le droit de paraltre pour entrainer la non-validite de
la capture."
Nous adherens compietement a cette doctrine et a cette jurisprudence pratique. Elle
Concorde par faitemeut avec ce que nous avons dit ci-dessus des cas oh, a raison des circonstances et de l'etat des c6tes, les actes d'hostilite peuvent etre excuses, bien qu'ayant eu
1 Droits et devoirs des nations neutres, vol. i, p. 295.
2 Ibid., p. 296.
Ortolan.414
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
lieu dans une mer littorale neutre. Elle est mfeme indispensable dans le systeme detous
ceux qui admettent, comme nous, cette possibilite d'excuse. Puisque la nullite des
prises ainsi faites n'a rien d'absolu, qu'elle est subordonnee aux reclamations de l'etat
neutre, le fait est remis k 1'appreciation de cet etat. C'est a lui a juger s'il y a en, ou s'il
n'y a pas eu, verit
et aux obligations
i.uii. „ i itp^JLcci»iiuii u. ..I. .._(.. v_e.ba_uiajug.r_u j _ mi, oubii
ablement atteinteportee_isasouverainete; s'il doit asa propre dijjnite
i d'impartialite que lui impose sa qualitede neutre, de rlclamer contre
 . .. . _„__._■  _U      _. __    _■    ,       _     __     ______„_.__..       j^...        _,    _._      ._      ___       .V _.._        .«     __       _«.-.
et le gouvernement du capteur n\pas k tenir compte de pareilles objections.3
But it is said that—independently of any violation of territory in the
sense of international relations—because the vessel was
breach7of mun°dp°ai equipped and armed in defiance, or in fraud, of the municipal law of Great Britain, it was incumbent on the British
authorities to seize her when she next entered a British port. In this contention there appears to be—I say it with all possible respect—considerable confusion of ideas, and a losing sight of elementary principles. I
agree with M. Staempfli that, these vessels having been ordered by
agents of the confederate government, it is the same thing as though they
had been ordered by that government itself; and that there was, consequently, in respect of them, a violation of the municipal law of Great
Britain by the confederate government itself. But it is a great mistake
to suppose that a breach of the municipal law of a neutral country,
though relating to neutrality, becomes a violation of the territorial rights*
of the neutral, because committed by a belligerent power. The character of the offender does not change or affect the character or quality of
the offense. Nothing short of a breach of neutrality, according to international law, can justify a resort to forcible measures on the part of the
neutral as for a violation of his neutral rights.
Now, the. equipment of the Florida in England for the service of the
confederates constituted no violation of neutrality by international law,
the vessel not having been armed, or sent ont for the present purpose
of war. On her way to Nassau she would have been subject to seizure
as contraband of war; but that is all. In like manner, though the
arming of the vessel at the desert island of Green Cay may have been,
strictly speaking, a violation of British law, yet, there being no present
purpose of war, it was no violation of neutral territory within the rules
of international law. It was, at the utmost, a breach of the law of
Great Britain. And here the distinction should be kept in view to which
I have already referred, and which seems to me to have altogether been
lost sight of, namely, that a breach of the municipal law, though it may
be of a law relating to neutrality, does not constitute a breach of neutrality as between nations. That which, if done by a subject, would
simply amount to a breach of his own law, does not become a violation
of neutrality because done by a foreigner. Norisit the more so because
done by a belligerent government, or the agent of such government.
Let such a government send agents to purchase ships equipped and
ready for war, not with any immediate purpose of using them as ships
of war on leaving, port, but that they may be conveyed to its own
country, to be eventually used for war, if such an act is an offense
by local law, it will still be an offense against the local law alone. How,
then, can it be said that for a violation of municipal law alone a neutral can seize a vessel, in respect of which that law alone has been violated, when it has become the property of the government of another
state % No principal of the law of nations is more firmly settled or universally acknowledged than that an independent sovereign or govern-
11 Regies internationales et diplomatie de la mer," vol. ii, p. 298.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
415
ment—and, for this purpose, the government of a state, as yet acknowledged only as a belligerent, must be taken to be an independent government—is not amenable to the municipal law of another country.
All rights, all obligations, all duties, all liabilities, as between sovereign
and sovereign, state and state, government and government, depend
wholly and solely either on express convention or on the principles and
rules of the common law of nations. How, then, in the matter of an
infraction of the municipal law only$ could a neutral state have recourse,
as against a belligerent government, to the powers which that law gave
it against its own subjects alone?
But assuming even that a neutral state would be entitled to seize a vessel, though armed with a commission from a belligerent power, by reason
of some offense committed against its neutrality, as a reparation for a
wrong done against itself, how can it possibly be asserted thatitis under
any obligation to do so ? It may be said that a nation is bound to maintain
its own sovereignty, to vindicateits honor, to maintain the inviolability of
its territory; and, morally speaking, this may be true; but, I ask, what
law is there which makes it obligatory on it to do this ? A state, like
an individual, may omit to insist on its right*, among others on its right
of reparation for wrong done to i I —unusquisquepotest renuntiara juri pro
se constituto. I cannot admit the argument that it is less free to do so,
because it is to the interest of a belligerent that it should resent a
wrong by force, and so inflict damage on his adversary. To ask for
apology or reparation is one thing; but to seize the ship of another
• state, is neither more nor less than a step towards war. It is an act
which no powerful state would submit to; which would lead to reprisals,
in all probability to war. It is, therefore, one which no powerful state
should have recourse to as against a weak one. Again, the neutral
state may be a weak one—the wrong-doing belligerent a powerful one.
The neutral may have the strongest motives for remaining at peace. Is
it to be said that, in spite of all such considerations, the neutral, who
would not have recourse to forcible measures so far as his own interests
are concerned, is nevertheless bound to do so, no matter what may be the
consequences, because the other belligerent has a right to insist on it?
Yet this is what I understand our honorable president to maintain. I
cannot, for my part, concur in such a view. What would be said if a
state, the neutrality of which is secured by international arrangements,
such for instance as Belgium, were to find itself in such, a position ?
Would it be bound to have recourse to force because a belligerent had
had a vessel of war constructed in one of its ports without its
knowledge. I cannot think so. I adopt the conclusion of M. Ortolau.
The question whether a breach of its neutral rights shall be resented
or not is matter for the neutral state to determine. " C'est k- lui & juger
s'il y a eu, ou s'il n'y a pas eu, v6ritablement atteinte portee &sasouve-
raiuete; s'il doit & sa propre dignit6 et aux obligations d'impartialit6 que
lui impose sa quality de neutre, de r£clamer contre cette atteinte et de demander que les consequences en soient annul^es ou repar^es; ou bien
s'il veut garder le silence et n'61ever aucune reclamation."
, No doubt a neutral state may, and in some instances ought—as, for
instance, in such a flagrant case as the capture of the Florida by the
Wachusett in the port of Bahia—to insist on redress. If the Florida
had not sunk in the meantime, Brazil would have had a right to insist
on her being set at liberty. But what if the Florida had not fortunately sunk, and the United States had refused to release her on the demand of Brazil? Though the latter might, if so minded, have made
reprisals, or gone to war in vindication of her own rights, will any one416
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
say that Brazil must necessarily, and as matter of obligation to the
confederate government, have gone to war with the United States ?
Surely it is for a nation whose neutrality has been infringed to judge
for itself whether it will or will not resent it. In some cases, as where
the disparity of force is very great, it might not think it politic to do
so. In others, where the degree of offense is comparatively slight, it
might not be thought worth while to follow the matter up. In the
present instance, Great Britain having no diplomatic relations with the
confederate government, h_id no opportunity of remonstrating. This is
an inconvenience which necessarily accompanies the recognition of belligerency without that of sovereignty, though the inconvenience is
counterbalanced by other weighty considerations. Being thus unable
to remonstrate, will it be said that Great Britain ought to have thrown
the weight of her arms into the contest going on between the Confederate
States and their more powerful opponent, because these vessels had managed to get away from her shores ? especially when there was very great
doubt whether, in respect of vessels armed out of British jurisdiction,
any offense had been committed against international law. Would the
world's opinion have sanctioned such a proceeding? At all events,
would not public opinion have reprobated the seizure of these vessels
as an act of unpardonable perfidy, if they had been allowed to enter
British ports without notice, a deliberate intention of seizing them hav-~
ing been first formed ?
In truth, this contention on the part of the United States is entirely
an afterthought. During the whole course of the war, amid the numerous demands and reclamations made by the United States Government and its representatives, it never occurred to them, so far as I am
aware, to suggest to Her Majesty's government to detain these vessels
on their entering British ports. The conclusion, then, at which I arrive is that, even if Great Britain had a right by international law to
seize these vessels, she was not bound to do so, and in common honor
could not have done so without giving notice ; that the United States;
had no right to insist on the seizure of them, and, at all events, never
having attempted to do so, can have no right now to claim damages by
reason of its not having been done.
But it has been said that, whether or not Great Britain had the right.
Duty of __ciudin8 to seize, or whether or not, having the right, she was
from neutral pom. Under any obligation to exercise it, or whether or not she
was bound to give notice of the intention to do so, the government
should have resented the violation of its law by refusing to the delinquent vessels entrance into British ports.
The answer is, that the questions, whether the law of Great Britain
had been broken, and whether the vessels were, iu this sense, delinquent
or not, were in each case disputable questions of mixed law and fact,
which could not in any way be investigated between Great Britain and
the Confederate States, and on which the opinions of high legal authorities in Great Britain were known to differ. It was the right and duty
of the British government, under such circumstances, to take the course
which it deemed most consistent with the maintenance of a strictly impartial neutrality; aud if, under the influence of this motive, it decided
(as it did)*agaiust attempting to discriminate between the different vessels bearing the public commission of the Confederate States, it acted in
the exercise of its own proper right, and violated no obligation due to
the other belligerent. The rules of the treaty of Washington are wholly
silent as to any such obligation, and the law of nations imposes none.
The question as to the effect of a belligerent commission in the case of___SS_R9_&t__S___S-_________S__|
OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
417
a vessel illegally armed in a neutral port came under the consideration
of a circuit court of the United States in the case of the United States
vs. Peters1—a case relating to a ship called Les Jumeaux, otherwise
the Cassius. The result was remarkable, and is deserving of serious
attention.
The vessel in question was originally a British cutter engaged iu the
Guinea trade. She was pierced for twenty guns, but only car- Caseoft_e cas-
ried four guns in broadside and two swivels. Havtog passed 8ius-
into the ownership of one Lemaitre, a Frenchman, she came into Philadelphia with cargo as a merchant-vessel. Lemaitre having admitted
others of his countrymen to joint ownership, it was resolve'd to augment
the force of the vessel with a view to her sale to the French government,
then at war with England, as a ship of war. The attempt having been
prevented by the United States Government, the vessel left Philadelphia in ballast; but some sixty miles down the river took in more guns
aud a considerable number of men. There was no doubt that what was
done amounted to a breach of the neutrality act of 1794. One Guinet,
who had taken part in arming the ve$pil,was indicted under that act,
found guilty, and was sentenced to a year's imprisonment and a fine of
$400.
Ipe vessel was sold to the French government and duly commissioned
as a vessel of war. Coming into Philadelphia the year attr, with a prize,
no less than three suits arose ; one in rem for restitution of the prize;
one in personam against Davis, the officer in commwid of the Cassias,
for damages for taking the prize vessel, neither of which are in point to
the present purpose; in the third, a Mr. Ketland insfputed a suit to
have the vessel declared_forfeited.. The act of 1794 gij^ng hsm the value
of forfeited vessels to the informer, Ketland filed his information for the
forfeiture, as it is technically termed qitijijttam, for the benefit as well of the
treasury as himself, on the ground of the illegal equipment of the vessel
the year before. On M. Adet, the FreuolMJiinister, writing to compla^;
of this procedure, Mr. Pickering, then Seoretar5j|fef State, replied that
the executive could not take this case, any: more than it couldipJhe preceding one relative to the same vessel, from the ji|^^L-ry; autl that
the court had decided that it could not, in this penal proceeding, accept security for the Cassius in lieu of the vessel herself. He stated
the unquestioned fact that the Cassius was, the year be^p*e, fully equipped and armed in the United States, and tha£|the acts done had been
already decided (in the trial of The United States vs. Guiuet) to be 1
violation of their laws of neutrality; and he added that the French
minister ought not to be surprised that this matter should become a
subject of judicial inquiry, and the effect of the Saibsequent alleged
transfer to the French government a matter of judicial decision.
The United States Attorney was ins|iucted by the Government to
intervene in these suits, and to suggest for the consideration of the
court, as matter of defense, the transfer of the vessel to the French
government, and her having beeu commissioned by the latter, which he
did iu the form of a suggestion. In the suit in rem against the vessel,
at the term of the court in April, 1796, the Secretary of State, Mr. Pickering, requested M. Adet to furnish the evidence of the bonafide transfer to the French government, for the use of the United States attorney.
M. Adet replied, declining to furnish proofs to the judiciafy of a sale
and payment, saying that his relations were solely with the Executive.
1 Reported in 3 Dallas, 121, and in a note to Dana's edition of \wpaton, reprinted in
tbe United States Documents, vol. vii, p. 18.
27 B418
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
He, however, gave a certificate that the vessel was a French public ship,
duly commissioned, to which he afterward, on request of the attorney,
added the date of her acquiring that character. Mr. Bowie, the United
States attorney, expressed his fear that this certificate would not be
accepted as legal proof; but M. Adet declined to furnish any other, as
beneath the dignity of his nation, and informed the Secretary of State
that the French government had ordered him to ascertain, in conference
with the Secretary, the reparation for the injuries and damages from the
proceedings in the matter of this vessel; and that he furnished the
certificate as a courtesy to the United States Government and not for a
cause in which the French government had any further interest. In
October term, 1796, the motion of the United States attorney for a dismissal of the proceedings came on for argument. At the hearing,
another question presented itself under, the statute, namely, whether
the circuit court could take cognizance of informations for forfeiture
under the act of 1794; and the court dismissed the proceedings on the
ground that such a suit must be instituted in the dif|rict court, and,
consequently, that the circuit court had no jurisdiction in the cause.
Thus, no decision was actually given by a court of law on the important question, how far the commission of a belligerent power would
be a bar to the seizure of a vessel illegally equipped or armed in the
port of a neutral.   But, on the other hand, the intervention of the Government, through its chief legal officer, with a suggestion to the court
in which the suit was pending, that such a commission afforded a suffi-.~
cient defense, shows, beyond all possibility of doubt, that the United
States Government considered the question as one w|lch it ought to.
raise in favor of the belligerent who had acquired property in the vessel, and had commissioned it, notwithstanding that there had been a
flagrant violation of its own neutrality and of its own law; and, what
is of still greater importance, that the United States Government would
not itself seize, or be party to the seizure and condemnation of a vessep
under such circumstances, but, on the contrary, did its best to oppose
it.    With what pretense of reason or justice, then, can it be said thata
Great"13ritain was bound to do, for the benefit of the United States, in
the case of the Florida, what the American Government not only refused
to do, but opposed being done, under precisely the sameci^jumstances?
I proceed to the consideration of another subject which arises, in the
stay or belligerent first instance, with respect to the Florida, but which applies-,
ports.3 _Wp"Strof equally to the whole series of vessels with which we'have
coaithere. ^0 ^qq]^ namely, that of the entry and stay of belligerent
ships of war in the ports and waters of a neutral, and of the supplies
which may be there afforded to them.
There are certain points on which all writers are unanimous, and, as
1 had till now imagined, all nations agreed.
A sovereign has absolute dominion in and over his own ports and
waters. He can permit the entrance into them to the ships
of other nations, or refuse it; he can grant it to some, can
deny it to others; he can subject it to such restrictions, conditions, or
regulations as he pleases. But, by the universal comity of nations, in
the absence of such restrictions or prohibition, the ports and waters of
every nation are open to all comers. Ships can freely enter, and freely
Stay; can have necessary repairs done; can obtain supplies of every
kind, and in unlimited quantity; and though their crews, when on
shore, are subject to the local jurisdiction, ships of war are considered
as forming part of the territory of the country to which they belong,
and, consequently, as exempt from local jurisdiction; and, save as re-
Power of neutral
sovereign.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
419
gards sanitary or other port regulations, as protected by the flag under
which they sail from all interference on the part of the local authority.
Such is the state df things while the world is at peace. But if a war
arises between any two countries, a considerable modification, no doubt,
of the rights both of sovereigns who remain neutral and of those engaged in the war, immediately arises.
While the neutral sovereign has the undoubted right of imposing any
restrictions or conditions he pleases, in respect of any of the foregoing
particulars, on the ships of war of either belligerent, yet, if he exercises
that right, the equality which is essential to neutrality requires that he
shall impose them equally on both, and enforce them equally against
both. On the other hand, by the universal accord of nations, the belligerent is bound to respect the inviolability of neutral waters, and
therefore cannot attack his enemy within them, or make them the base
of hostile operations. He is subject also to restraint in three other important particulars: he cannot recruit his crew from the neutral port;
he cannot take advantage of the opportunity afforded him of having
repairs done to augment in any respect the warlike force of his vessel;
he cannot purchase on the neutral territory arms or munitions of war
for the use of it. These restrictions are imposed by the law of nations,
independently of any regulations of the local sovereign. Besides this,
the belligerent is bound to conform to the regulations made by the latter with reference to the exercise of the liberty accorded to him ; but
subject to these conditions, a belligerent vessel has the right of asylum,
that is, of refuge from storm and hostile pursuit; has liberty of entry
and of stay; that of having the repairs doue which are necessary to enable it to keep the sea in safety; and that of obtaining whatever is
necessary for the purpose of navigation, as well as supplies for the subsistence of the crew.
And, be it remembered—I fear it has not always been borne in mind—
the liberty thus afforded is not by the general law subjected to any limitations as regards length of stay, quantity of supply, or condition as to
the future proceedings of the vessel.
The case of the United States seeks, indeed, to put further limits on
the liberty thus conceded to belligerent ships. It would Lawa*asserted by
prohibit "successive supplies to the same vessel;" would theUnitedstate?-
limit repairs to becfone to a belligerent vessel to such as are "absolutely
necessary to gain the nearest of its own ports ;" would make the permission afforded to a vessel to take what it calls "an excessive supply
of coal" a failure in the performance of the duty of the neutral.
Such restrictions, though they maj7 be created by the will of the local
sovereign, have, however, no existence by intei-national law. They are
unknown to it. No authority is adduced in support of them, nor can
any be found. ~No writer on international law, in speaking of the gene-,
ral liberty of belligerent vessels to have repairs doue or to obtain supplies, speaks of any such restriction as existing independently of local
regulations.   The authorities are conclusive to the contrary.
Two leading* authors' are express on the point.    M. Ortolan writes
thus:
Les regies relatives a l'acces et an sejour xnomentane" des b__tinients dans les ports
et dans les rades Strangers restent les memes en temps de paix qu'en temps de guerre.
M. Hautefeuille says:
L'asile maritime consiste a recevoir dans les rades ferme'es, meme dans les ports, les
batiments des belligerents, que leur entr6e soit volontaire ou necessite" par le tempete,
1 Diplomatie de la mer, vol. ii, p. 2d6.420
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
par le manque de vivres ou par toute autre cause, meme par la poursuite de l'ennemi'.
Les vaisseaux adm&^pfitivent acbeter les vivres qui leur sont ne"eessaires, re"parer les
avaries faites, soit par les accidents de mer, soit par le combat, soigner leurs malades
ou leurs Hesse's, puis sortir Movement pour alter .^_|f»• de nouveaux combats.1
While restraints may be, and often have been, imposed by neutral
sovereigns in respect of the entry of belligerent vessels into their ports
and waters, of the length of their stay, and of the supplies to be
afforded them, no one has till now ever gone the length of saying that
it forms any part of the obligations of the neutral to make such regulations.
The greater number of the maritime states made none such on the
occasion of the civil war, except as regards the reception of privateers;
it being the apparent desire of all nations to put down forever this
worst and most noxious form of maritime warfare. Some imposed a
restraint on ships of war brinMng prizes into their ports, though mostly
this was confined to privateers. Spain, France, Brazil, and Great Britain
adopted the rule contained in Her Majesty's instructions of the 31st
January, 1862, of limiting the stay of belligerent vessels to twenty-four
hours, except in cases of necessity; Brazil and Great Britain, but these
alone, that of limiting the supply of coal to the quantity sufficient to
take the ship to the nearest port of her oWn country.
The government of the Netherlands issued instructions to the Governors of its West India colonies, limiting the stay of belligerent vessels
of war to twice twenty-four hours, but afterward did away with such
restrictions on the occasion of a complaint made by the United States.;
By article 4 of the present maritime regulations of the Netherlands
it is provided that—
The ships of war of the belligerent parties, provided they submit to the international]
Regulations for their admission into neutral ports, may remain for an unlimited time
in Dutch harbors and estuaries; they may also provide themselves with an unlimited
quantity of coal. The government, however, reserves to itself the right, whenever i i is
thought necessajry for the prevention of neutrality, to limit the duration of "such stay,
to twenty-four hours.
Italy had at the time in question no regulations on the subject. By
• the present Italian Naval Code, (chap. 7,) while it is provided that
"nothing shall be furnished to vessels of war or to belligerent privateers beyond articles of food and commodity, and the actual means of
repair.necessary to the sustenance of their crews and the safety of their
navigation," it is further provided that "vessels of war or belligerent
privateers wishing to fill up their stores of coal, cannot be furnished
with the same before twenty-four hours after their arrival;" this regulation being to prevent hostile vessels from leaving together..
Nothing is said as to the "navigation" being to the nearest port, and
I stores" of coal are spoken of without limitation. It is evident that
this code contemplates no such restriction.
As, then, the general law neither imposes any limit on the stay of
a belligerent vessel in a neutral port, nor any restriction as to quantity
in respect of the articles of which it sanctions the supply, no question
can arise as to the stay of any confederate vessel in a British port, or
as to the quantity of coal supplied to it. prior to the Queen's Kegula-
tions of January 31, 1862.
After that date, the stay of belligerent vessels in Her Majesty's ports
having been limited, save under exceptional circumstances, to twenty-
four hours, and the supply of coal to so much as should be necessary to
take them to their nearest port, and a second supply within a period of
three months having been prohibited, it became the duty of Her Ma-OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
421
jesty's officers not to allow either of these limits to be exceeded ; and it
became the duty of belligerents, knowing that they were admitted into
British ports on the condition of complying with these regulations,
honestly and in good faith to conform to them. What if there should
have been at any time an instance of deviation from the strict tenor of
these regulations ? The officer offending would, of course, be responsible to his superior. Would the government be responsible to the other
belligerent for any damage done by the vessel ?
In the first place, it being the undoubted right of the local sovereign
1 CD CD O
to impose such conditions as he'pleases on the entry of belligerent vessels into his ports, but the regulations being directed to the sovereign's
own officers to be carried out by them, and thus forming part of the
municipal law of the neutral, what right does a belligerent acquire to
insist that the regulations shall be enforced against his enemy ? Simply
that which arises from the- duty, always incumbent on the neutral, as
being of the very essence of neutrality, of enforcing against the one
belligerent any rule which he enforces against the other. If both are
treated alike there can.be no cause of complaint.
Again, to constitute an offense against the law of neutrality, there
must be, as to constitute an offense against any law, a malus animus, a
mens rea—an intention to contravene the law—here, that of showing
undue favor to the one belligerent to the disadvantage of the other.
When, therefore, any departure from the letter of a regulation has
arisen from mistake, as where a governor believed that, because a vessel had suffered from vis major, as from storm and tempest, the case
formed an exception to the rule; or where he considered that, because
he had furnished an extra supply to one belligerent, he might, under
similar circumstances, do the same for another; or, where a mistake
might be made as to t he precise quantity of coal necessary to take the
vessel to the nearest port, there would, as it seems to me, be no violation of neutrality for w hich, on rational grounds, a nation could be held
responsible.
In all such cases of alleged infraction of neutrality, the true question
should be, not whether a vessel has been permitted to stay in a port a
few hours more or less than the precise time prescribed, nor whether
a few tons, more or less, of coal have been allowed to be taken, but
whether there has been an honest intention to carry out the regulations
fairly and impartially. And, in judging of this, credit should be given
to persons in authority for honesty of purpose and a desire to discharge
their dutv faithfully.   This tribunal should take a larger and
" Florida.
more generous view of official conduct than it may have assumed in the eyes of jealous belligerents, disappointed that exclusive
favor was not shown to themselves, and irritated because, notwithstanding their loud demands that their opponents should be treated as
pirates and outcasts, civilized nations, with Great Britain at their head,
took a more liberal and enlightened view of the relative position of the
parties.
Undoubtedly, if, after regulations had been made by a neutral sovereign as to the accommodation and hospitality to be accorded to belligerent ships in the neutral ports, the regulations were enforced against
the one, while they were not enforced or were relaxed with regard to
the other, there would be a breach of neutrality, of which the less
favored belligerent, if injury was thereby occasioned to him, would
have a right to complain. Aud, in truth, it is to this point, and this
point alone, and not to minute questions of hours of stay or tons of coal
supplied, that the inquiry with reference to what has been called the
hospitality afforded to belligerent vessels should be directed.   Whether
liii
Iii422
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Her Majesty's regulations were carried out by the local governors in
the different ports fairly and conscientiously, with an honest desire to
discharge their duty in obedience to those regulations, we shall see as
we advailee; but so far as I am aware, there is no ground for saying;
that the ships of the United States were not admitted into British ports'
as freely, or were not supplied with coal and other necessaries as liberally, as the ships of the confederates.   One or two complaints made by
querulous officials during the war will be noticed by and by.- In sub-|
stance they really come to nothing.
But a novel and, to my mind, most extraordinary proposition is now
put forwar<|foamely,:p|at if.i^belligerent ship is allowed to
mnke/aport"_"____ take coal, and then to go on its business as a ship of war,:
of naval operations.      ,,  .      .      , i       _.i j. j? _. •    _.   _.!  1   ■    _.
this is to make the port from which the coal is procured " a*
base of naval operations," so as to come within the prohibition of the
second rule of the treaty of Washington.
We have here another instance of an attempt to force the words of the;
treaty to a meaning which they were never—at least so far as one of the]
contracting parties is concerned—intended to bear.   It would be absurd!
to suppose that the British government, in assenting to the rule as laid
down, intended to admit that whenever a ship of war had taken in coal
at a British port and then gone to sea again as a war-vessel, a liability
for all the mischief done by her should ensue.   Nor can I believe the
United States Government had any. such arridre pensee in framing the
rule; as, if such had been the case, it is impossible to suppose that they
would not have distinctly informed the British government of the extended application they proposed to give to the rup|||
The rule of international law, that a be^^^^^^hall not make neutral]
|||pritory the base of hostile operations, Mfounded on the principle that
the neutral territory is inviolable by the belligerent, and that it is the
duty of the neutral not to allow his territory to be used by one belligerent as a starting-point for operations against  the other.    This is
nowhere better explained, as regards ships of war, than by M. Ortolau,;i
in the following passage:
Le principe general de l'inviolabilite du territoire neutre exige aussi que l'emploi de .
ce territoire reste franc de toute mesure ou moyen de guerre, de l'un des belligerantsM
coi it re l'autre.    C'est une obligation pour chaii$n des belligerants de s'en a listen i r; c'esfej
aussi un devoir pour l'etat neutre d'exiger cette'abstention; et c'est aussi pour lei do
devoir d'y veiller et d'en maiuteuir l'observation k l'encontre de qni qne ce soit.    Ainsi.1
il appnrt lent   a  l'autorite  qui  coniniaiide dans  les  lieux neutres, oil des  navires   he] -
liberal) ts. soit de guerre, soit de commerce, ont ete recus, de prendre des mesures necessaires pour que l'asile accorde ne tourne pas en  inaehinat ion hostile contre l'un des <
belligerants; pour empftoher speeinlenient i|u'il ne devienne un lieu d'oii les b&timentsi
de guerre ou les cursaires surveillent les navires ennemis pour les poursuivre et "les"?
nombattre, et les capturer lorsqu'ils seront parvenus au-dela de la mer territoriale.   Udo
de ces mesures consist e a empecher la sortie simultaiu'e des navires appartenant k des
puissances ennemies l'uue de la u t re.'
It must be, I think, plain that the words " base of operations" must
be accepted in their ordinary and accustomed sense, as they have
hitherto been understood, both in common parlance and among authors
who have written on international law. Now, the term " base of warlike, operations " is a nii 1 itary term, and has a well-known sense. It
signifies a local position which serves as a point of departure and return in military operations, and with which a constant connection and
communication can be kept up, and which may be fallen back upon
whenever necessary. In naval warfare it would mean something
analogous—a port or water from which a fleet or a ship of war might
Diplomatic de la mer, vol. i, p. 291.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
423
watch an enemy and sally forth to attack him, with the possibility o f
falling back upon the port or water in question, for fresh supplies, or
shelter, or a renewal of operations.
The meaning to be ascribed to the term in question as applicable to
a neutral port is to be gathered, as was so well* pointed out by Sir Boundell Palmer, from the iu stances given by the various writers on international lf?w. Thus we find, the distinguished author before referred to
saying, in addition to the passage cited above:
Si des forces navales belligerantes sont stationnees dans une baie, dans un fleuve ou
a l'embouchure d'un fleuve, d'un etat neutre, k dessein de profiter de cette station
pour exercer les droits de la guerre, les captures faites par ces forces navales sont aussi
iliegales. Ainsi, si un navire belligerant mouilie ou croisant dans les eaux neutres
capture, au moyen de ses embarcations, un batiment qui se trouve en dehors des
limites de ses eaux, ce b&timent n'est pas de bonne prise, bien que l'emploi de la force
n'ait pas eu lieu dans ce cas, sur le territoire neutre; neanmoins il est le resultat de
l'usage de ce territoire; et un tel usage pour des desseins hostiles n'est pas permis.1
" It is a violation of a neutral territory," says Chancellor Kent, | for a belligerent
ship to take her station within it in order to carry on hostile expeditions from thence,
or to send her boats to capture vessels beyond it.s
So Heffter:
Le neutre ne doit pas permettre que ses rades ou ses mers territoriales servent de
stations aux b-t.tim.ents des puissances belligerantes.
Le respect d_L aux mers territoriales neutres ne se borne pas a l'abstentipu absolue
de tout acte d'hostilite ; il s'etend egalement aux faits qui prepareut immediatement
ces actes. Ainsi une flotte, un vaisseau de guerre, un armatenr ne saurait, sans coin-
mettre une violation de territoire, s'etablir sur un point quelconque de cette mer, pour
€pier le passage des b_.timents, soit de guerre, soit marchands, de l'ennemi, ou les navires
neutres, encore qu'il sorte de sa retraite pour aller les attaquer hors des limites de la
juridiction neutre. II est de m_.me defendu de croiser dans les eaux reservees pour
arriver au meme but.3
So Pistoye and Duverdy :
Les belligerants ne doivent, ni par eux-memes ni par leurs corsaires, s'etablir dans
les mers neutres, pour surveiller l'ennemi et lui courir sus. Ils ne doivent non plus
rester en croisiere dans les mers neutres, pour saisir l'ennemi a sa sortie des ports
neutres.4
None of the instances thus given have the remotest reference to the
case.of a vessel which, while cruising against an enemy's ships, puts
into a port, and, after obtaining necessary supplies, again pursues her
course.
If a military or naval officer were asked whether a ship merely putting into a port to coal, and then going to sea agafti, possibly ou a particular warlike expedition, but without any idea of returning to or
communicating with such port, for the next three months, can be held
to be using it as " a base of operations," he would certainly laugh at the
simplicity of the question.
That the United States are putting this construction on the term for
the first time is plain from their own conduct throughout the civil war;
unless, indeed, they are prepared to acknowledge a perpetual violation ■■
of British neutrality on their own part.
It appears from the return sent from the various British ports of the
amount of coal supplied to ships of war of the United States,5 that these
vessels received over 5,000 tons during the civil War. It appears from
the claims made by the United States in respect of the employment of
their vessels of war in the pursuit and capture of confederate ships,6
1 Diplomatic de la mer, vol. i, p. 302.
2 Kent's Commentaries on International Law, by Professor Abdy, p. 326.
'Droit international, p. 275.
4 Prises maritimes, vol. i, p. 108.
5 British-Appendix, vol. v, pp. 223-234.
6 United States Appendix, vol. vii, p. 120.
■■424
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Kiglit ofa_yl_
that of the foregoing amount no less than 4,000 tons was had expressly*
for the purpose Of watching or pursuing particular ships.
The case of the Vanderbilt, when in pursuit of the Alabama, is a striking instance. After having coaled at Bio, she proceeded to St. Helena,
there took in 400 tons, (all she could get,) then proceeded to Simon's
Bay, and there took in 1,000 tons; she then went to the Mauritius, and
there coaled again. If the construction put by the United States Government on the term "base of operations" is correct, in every one of these
instances there was a violation of neutraMj§i, and an infraction of the
second and third rules. Is there to be one law for the United States
and another for Great Briikin ?
But, in truth, such a construction is altogether unwarranted.
It may, perhaps, be as well to notice, as one instance occurs in this
inquiry of a vessel remaining in a British port to avoid capture by an enemy, that the right of naval asylum is not subject, as is that afforded to military forces on land, to any condition of
disarming or dismantling the vessel. Azuni alone proposed to subject
a vessel seeking refuge from an enemy to a similar condition to that of
a military force on land, but he admitted that no precedent could be
found for such a thing, and all subsequent writers have repudiated such
a notion.
M. Hautefeuille, for instance, says :
Le droit d'asile maritime differe essentiellement de celui que les neutres peuvent ex-":
ercer en faveur des belligerants sur le territoire cont|fental.   Dans les guerres terres-
tres, lorsqu'une armee, fuyaut devant son ennemi, vienlbse refugier snr un territoire1^
neutre, elle y est regne, il est vrai; elle y trouve tous les secours d'humanite.   Mais
l'arm^e est dissoute, les hommes qui la composent sont degarmes et eioignesdu the_-tre.'s
de la guerre ; en un mot, on remplit les devoirs d'humanite a l'egard des individns,
mais on n'accordepas l'asile k l'arinee pris comme corps.   Le neutre qui, an lieu d'agirI
ainsi que je viens de le dire, accueillerait les troupes ennemies, leur fournirait des vivres,
leur donnerait le temps de se remettre de leurs fatigues, de soigner leixrs malades et
leurs blesses, et leur permettrait ensuite de retourner sur le theatre des operations militaires, ne serait pas consider comme neutre; il manquerait a tous les devoirs de son
etat.   L'asile maritime, au contraire, consist© k recevoir dans les rades fermees, n_6me2
dans les ports, les batiments des bellig6:dp_.ts, que leur entree soit volontaire ou neces-
site"e par la tempete, par le manque de vivres ou par toute autre cause, mfime par la
poursuite de l'ennemi.   Les vaisseaux admis peuvent acheter les vivres qui lerir sont
necessaires, re"parer les avaries faites, soit par les accidents de mer, soit par le combat,;
soigner leurs malades ou leurs blesses, puis sortir librement pour alter iivrer de nouveaux
combats.   Ils ne sont pas,, par consequent, sournis au desarmement comme les troupes de
terre.1
M. Oalvo, in his recently published work on International Law,
says:
Tons les auteurs sont d'accord sur la difference radicale a etablir entre l'asile accorde
aux forces navales et celni qui l'est aux troupes de terre. En effet, lorsqu'une armee en
fnite ou en deroute franchi'^es frontieres d'une nation neutre, celle-ci doit aussitGt la
desarmer, l'interner et .'eloigner le plus possible du theatre des hostilites. Les mfimes I
mesures ne sont evidemment pas praticables k l'egard des navires qui'en.rent dans les %
ports, et qu'un usage universellement etabli autorise, au contraire, a s'approvisionner,
a se reparer et a faire soigner leurs blesses,-sauf a remettre en mer des qu'ils ont pourvu
k leurs besoins.2
M. Hautefeuille gives what seems to me to be the true ground of the
distinction. Galiani and Azuni had ascribed it to the perils to which
ships and men are exposed on the seas.
M. Hautefeuille says:
'II y.a done a cette difference immense une autre cause qu'il est utile de rechercher.
Je crois qu'elle est tout entiere dans la qualitereconnue du b&timent. II est une partie
dn territoire de son pays; pourljjiiut ce qui concerne son gouvernement kiterienr, il est
exclusivement place sous la jnridiet ion de son souverain.   Or, il est eviuent qu'ordon-
1 Hautefeuille, Droits et devoirs de nations neutres, vol. i, p. 307.
2 Le droit international, vol. ii, p. 420.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
425
Supply of coal.
ner le desarmement, c'est s'immiscer dans le gouvernement interieur du vaisseau, c'est
faire un acte de juridiction sur le vaisseau ; le prince neutre n'a pas le droit de le faire.
II peut refuser l'asile; il peut l'accorder seulement sous certaines conditions, avec des
restrictious. S'il veut remplir les devoirs d'humanite, arracher le batiinent aux perils
qui peuvent le inenacer, il le recoit dans ses ports, il lui accqrde les secours necessaires
pour le mettre en etat de reprendre la mer. Tel est, a mon avis, le seul motif de la
difference dont je viens de parler.1
It is plain, therefore, that M. Staempfli was in error when,in speaking
of the Sumter at Gibraltar, he assumed that her being allowed to remain in.port, to avoid hostile capture, was a violation of neutrality.
It would be to carry the perversion of language too far to contend
that, to supply coals, to a belligerent from a neutral port
was a use of the port for a "renewal or augmentation of
military supplies" within the meaning of the rule of the treaty. The
term can quIv have reference to munitions of war—things necessary for
i* CD */
actual "battle, as powder, shot, shell, and the like. J^o question has ever
been raised—no one has ever entertained a doubt—as to the perfect legality of supplying to a belligerent vessel whatever was necessary to it
for the purpose of navigation. Machinery and coal having taken, in a
great measure, the place of masts and saiis, the same principle must of
course apply to them. It was upon this principle that the great maritime nations—Prance, Holland, Spain, Brazil—acted in allowing coal
to be supplied to confederate vessels ; it was on this principle that so
abundant a supply was afforded in British ports to vessels of the United
States.
In the result, then, it seems to me beyond all doubt that no question
can arise as to the stay of belligerent ships in British ports prior to the
issuing of the regulations of 31st of January, 1862, or as to the quantity
of coal supplied to them before that time, so long as equal accommodation was afforded to both; aud that, subsequently to that period, the
only question is, whether these regulations were honestly and fairly
acted upon toward both parties ? To that question I shall now proceed
to address myself, with reference, in the first instance, to the Florida.
Having left Mobile on the 16th of January, 1863, the Florida arrived
at Nassau on the 26th.    It is complained in the Case of the
United States Hhat | her entry into the harbor, though
made Without permission, was condoned;" that the visit lasted thirty-
six hours instead of twenty-four ; " that the supplies exceeded largely
what was immediately necessary for the subsistence of the crew;" that
" by the permission of the authorities she took in coal and provisions to
last three months."    " She entered the port," it is said, u without any
restrictions, and the officers lauded in the garrison-boat, escorted by the
fort adjutant, Lieutenant  Williams, of the second West India regiment."   I The governor made a feint of finding fault with the way in
which she had entered, but ended by giving her all the hospitality which
her commander desired."  «
In an intemperate letter from Consul Whiting to Mr. Seward, of the
20th, he says:
Sir : I have the honor to inform you of the arrival at this port this morning of the
confederate steamer Florida, late the noted Oreto, in command of one Maffitt, once a
lieu euant in the United States Navy. This pirate ship entered this port without any
restrictions, with the secession ensign at the peak and the secession war-pennant at
the main, and anchored abreast of Her Majesty's ship Barracouta, Maffitt and his officers landing in the garrison-boat, escorted by the fort adjutant, Lieutenant Williams,
of Che second West India regiment.
The pirate officers proceeded at once to the Royal Victoria Hotel, to breakfast with
the confederate agents here, and they were received with much enthusiasm by the se-
1 Droits et devoirs des nations neutres, vol. i, p. 309.
2 Page 350.426
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
cession sympathizers, and a display of secession bnnting. The pirate ship, soon after
anchoring, commenced coaling, by permission of the governor; an evidence of the perfect neutrality which exists here, where the United States steamer Dacotah but a few
months since was only permitted to take on board twenty tons of coal from an American bark off Hog Island, .and then only on Captain McKinstry and myself pledging
ourselves, in writing, " that within ten days after leaving this port she would not be
cruising within five miles of any island of the Bahama government."
Pretty neutrality, this, I must say.
January 27, 1863.—The piSSstite ship is still at anchor, having exceeded her time of
lying in a neutral port.   Gangs worked all night taking in her coal, and she is ordered
to sea this forenoon.   By this time, however, my dispatches have most likely reached
some of our war-vessels, and I trust they may be able to capture this formidable .
pirate.
At noon the pirate got under way and stood out of the harbor, but continued all
day coasting up and down the Hog Island shore, within two miles of the land. Twenty
of her men left here and others were shipped in their place. From one of the deserters
I gleaned the following information, viz :
" The Oreto left Mobili January 15, under command of Maffitt; touched at Havana,
where she lay twenty-four hours; thence sailed for Nassau, where she lay thirty-six
hours, and took on board coal. She has six 32-pounders, two 9-inch pivot-guns, two
brass 12-pounders, ample stores, ammunition, and one hundred and thirty men."1
I do not see why it should be stated in the case that the Florida remained in the port of Nassau thirty-six hours, when Mr. Whitting's letter ■
states that she arrived on the morning of the 26th and left at noon on
the 27th. In point of fact she remained twenty-six hours. It behooves
those who make accusations to use " due diligence" to secure accuracy
in their facts.
It is to be regretted that it should be asserted that this steamer was
allowed to take in coal for three months, when the other facts stated in
the case show this to have been impossible. It is difficult to suppose [
that the consul should uot have been aware of the circumstances under
which Captain Maffitt, the commander of the Florida, had been brought
on shore in the garrison-boat. It.is to be regretted that- his statement
on this subject should have been repeated iu the case of the United States,
accompanied by the offensive remark that "the governor made a feint
of finding fault with the mode in which the vessel had entered, but ended
by gi vin g her all the hospitality which her com m ander required," especially
after the full explanation afforded by Governor Bayley at the time, both
to Lord Lyons and to the secretary of state for the colonies, which, was
in due course communicated to the Government at Washington. It is the
more to be regretted that these imputations should have been made, because it must have been known to those who make them that a ship of
war of the United States had shortly before entered the port of Nassau
without permission; that her commander had, in like manner, been
brought on shore in the garrison-boat; and that the entry had been, in
like manner, u condoned," and the ship allowed to remain in the harbor
for repairs. The conduct of a British governor being thus called in
question, I think it right to call attention to the correspondence, which
will speak for itself.
Mr. Whiting's letter having been brought to the notice of Lord Lyons,
and his lordship having applied to Governor Bayley for au explanation,
the latter, in a letter of the 11th of March, 1863, replies as follows:
GOV~ERjSnvrENT HOUSE,
Nassau, Bahamas, March 11, 1863.
My Lord : I have the honor to acknowledge your lordship's dispatch inclosing a
complaint from the United States consul at this port to Mr. Seward, the Secretary of
State, respecting undue advantages alleged to have been given  to. the confederate
steamer Florida in this harbor.OPINIONS   OF   SIR'ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
427
In reply, I beg leave to state that no undue advantages were accorded to the Florida.
•She arrived in our harbor, having steamed over the bar without a pilot, early in the
morning of the 20th of January. I was not aware of it till 8 or 9 o'clock a. m. About
that hour Captain Maffitt called (I think in company with the fort adjutant) to explain
that he was ignorant of my proclamation requiring that permission Should be formally
asked before any man-of-war belonging to either of the two belligerents could enter
the harbor. I did not see him ; but in a very short time I received a letter from him,
of which I transmit your lordship a copy, along with the copy of the memorandum
iudorsed on it by myself before I sent it to the colonial secretary. The Florida remained in harbor about twenty-six hours, during which time I neither spoke to nor
saw Captain Maffitt.
So far from any advantage having been accorded to the Florida which was not accorded to United States vessels, she did not receive privileges equal to those wHich 'I
granted to the United States gun-boat Stars and Stripes. That vessel entered the harbor without permission (which she asked for after she had come in.) Her commander
then asked for an extension of the permission, which I also accorded; and she remained in harbor, if I remember rightly, three or four days for the alleged purpose of
undergoing repairs.
I regret that the Secretary of State should have given credence to the misrepresentations of a person of such infirm judgment and excitable temperament as Mr. Whiting
I has proved himself to be.1
I have, &c,
C. J. BAYLEY.
Captain Maffitt, the commander of the Florida, having written to the
governor, saying that the vessel was in distress for want of coal, and
asking leave to enter the harbor in order to obtain a supply, the following memorandum was made by the governor:
I grant this request under the circumstances; thereby according to a confederate
steamer the same privileges which I have formerly granted to Federal steamers. But
the irregularity in delaying to make this request should be pointed out, and the pilot
called on to explain how he admitted the Florida without my permission.2
Repeating these statements in a letter to the secretary of state for the
colonies, of May 2, Governor Bayley adds:
I have no distinct recollection of the special reasons which induced me to impose
the restrictions mentioned by the consul in the Dacotah's coaling; I can only suppose
that I did this in consequence of the pertinacity with which Federal vessels about
that time resorted to the harbor on pretense of coaling, but really with the object of
watching the arrival and departure of English merchant-vessels, supposed to be
freighted with cargoes for the southern ports. Had not such prohibition been issued,
the harbor would have become a mere convenience for Federal men-of-war running in
and out to intercept British shipping. And that such conditions as I thought it my
duty to impose were tempered by a proper feeling of courtesy and humanity will, I
think, be made evident by the accompanying letters from the American consul on the
subject of the Federal man-of-war the R. Cuyler, and the memoranda of my replies
indorsed upon them by myself.
On the whole I am satisfied that I have acted with perfect impartiality in all my
dealings with Federal and confederate men-of-war. But I am not surprised that my
conduct should have been misrepresented by so hot-headed a partisan as the late American consul, Mr. Whiting, whose ingenuity in misconstruction is well illustrated by
his reply to my letter of the 29th of September, of both of which papers I inclose
copies, with the indorsation of the draught of my replies to his last communication.
I think that these inclosures will be sufficient to prove that, in my demeanor to the
Federal men-of-war, I have generally preserved an attitude of fairness and impartiality ; and that if at any time I have appeared to assume an unfriendly or inhospitable mien, the charge can be fully explained and defended by my desire to maintain the
security of a British possession, and the rights of British subjects.3
It is not worth while to set out the inclosures, with the exception of
the letter of Lieutenant Williams, the fort adjutant, which The Florida at
is of importance, and is in these terms: Nassau-
Nassau, New Providence, April 30,1863.
Sir : In answer to your letter of yesterday, requesting me to state, for. the information of his excellency the governor, whether Captain Maffitt, of the Confederate States
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p.77.
2 Ibid., p. 78.
3 Ibid., p. 79.428
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
steamer Florida, came aShore in the garrison-boat, I beg to observe that, in the middle
of last year, I received instructions from his excellency, through the colonial secre-.
tary, that when I boarded any ship of war belonging to either belligerent, I was to
hand to the'csnbain of such vessel a copy of the proclamation regarding neutrality,
and to point out the clause forbidding belligerent vessels to anchor in the port or roadstead of Nassau without having previously obtained the governor's permission, adding
at the same time that, circumstances permitting, his excellency would always be most
happy to extend the hospitality of the port to such as might require it.
The first vessel which I had occasion to visit after the receipt of the above instructions, was the Federal gun-boat Scars aud Stripes. I pointed out to the captain the
requirements of the procla_tf|lion, lrallhe said thiffl/' owing to certain injuries received
jf^MDds machinery, and the roughness of the weather, he must anchor at once, or his
ship would go on shore." I therefore suggested to him the propriety of coming: ashore ,
with me, and proceeding to Government House to explain personally to his excellency
the necessities of his position. He lauded iu the gsraison-boat, and went with me to
the governor.
A short time after this the Confederate States steamer Florida ran into the port at ~
daybreak, and cast anchor before I was able to board her.   I gave a copy of the proclamation to Captain Maffitt, who stated his entire ignorance of any such restrictions, and
expressed his regret for having unwittingly violated the regulations of the port, and.
also asked me what course he had better follow.   I told him that he had better come
ashore in my boat, and go with me to the governor, explain matters, and obtain the
necessary permission to remain.   He therefore, like the captain of the Stars andj
Stripes, landed in the government boat, and proceeded with me to his excellency the ■
governor.
Trusting that his excellency will consider the above explanation sufficient for the
purpose for which he may require it, I have, &c,
(Signed) S. W. WILLIAMS,
Lieutenant 2d West Indian Regiment, Fort Adjutant.1
The tribunal must judge for itself how far, after these explanations,
which were communicated to the United States Government, and the
fact that precisely the same circumstances had previously occurred with
a Federal vessel—unless, indeed, the word of a British governor or of a
British officer is to be discredited or set aside by an offensive sneer—
the color attempted to be given to this transaction in the case of the
United States is just or right. I pass on to what is of greater relevancy
to the present inquiry, namely, the quantity of coal taken by the Florida
on this occasion.
It is stated in the American Case2 that the Florida at the time in
question "received a three months' supply." A moment's reflection
would have sufficed to satisfy those who make this rash assertion that,
upon their own data, it must necessarily be incorrect. The only evidence adduced in support of it is a loose statement from the Liverpool
Journal of Commerce of the 27th February, 1863, in which, after saying that the Florida had arrived at Nassau on the 30th January, (instead
of the 26th,) it is said, by some one writing on this side of the Atlantic,
that she left on the evening of the 31st (instead of the 27th) "fully supplied," it is not said with what, "for a three months' cruise."3 To which
must be added a passage from an anonymous journal afterwards found
on board the Florida, in which it is said, under the date of January
26, "We took on board coal and provisions to last us several months."4
But when we come to the only evidence worthy of a moment's consideration, namely, the deposition furnished to Mr. Whiting by John Demeritt, who assisted to put the coal on board, the quantity is reduced to
180 tons. "I suppose," he says, "she had on board over 180 tons that
we put there; she did not have less than that quantity."5 Tet even
this must have been an exaggeration.   According to the report of the
1 British Appendix, vol. i, pp.. 79, 80.
2 Pages 351, 352.
3 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 334.
4 Ibid., p. 335
5 Ibid., p. 336.!H5»S__
OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
429
British officers, who afterwards surveyed the Florida at Bermuda in
June, 1864, and which will be set out hereafter, her capacity for carrying coal was limited to 130 tons. Demeritt, it is true, says, " we placed
some on deck; and in every place that would hold it; " but a vessel of
war would not be likely to incumber her decks with very much coal;
nor iu such a vessel would there be many places in which coal could be
stowed, except those expressly appropriated to the purpose. Kear-
Admiral Wilkes, writing to Governor Walker at Barbados on the 6th
of March following, says that the Florida had "obtained a full supply
(160 tons) at Nassau;"1 but gives no other authority than the public
prints. But even if Demeritt's statement as to the quantity having
been 180 tons could be taken as true, it would fail to bear out the assertion of a three months' supply. For it is stated iu the United States
case2 that the Florida "generally sailed under canvas, and that, when
using steam in the pursuit and capture of vessels, her consumption of
coal, as shown by her log-book, did not average 4 tons a day." Now, at
the rate of 4 tons a day, a supply for three months, or ninety days, would
have amounted to 360.tons, i. e., just double, the amount which, according to Demeritt's statement, she actually took in.
But the best proof of the incorrectness of the assertion is to be found
in what follows in the American Case :3
The Florida left the port of Nassau on the afternoon of the 27th of January, 1863.
By the middle of the following month her coal \\-as getting low. On the 26th day of
February, Admiral Wilkes, in command of the United States squadron in the West
Indies, wrote to his Government thus: "The fact of the Florida having but a few
days' coal makes me anxious to have our Aressels off Martinique, which is the only
island at which they can hope to get any coal or supplies, the English islands being
cut off, under the rules of Her Majesty's government, for some sixty days yet, which
precludes the possibility, unless by chicanery or fraud, of the hope of any coal or comfort there." Admiral Wilkes's hopes were destined to disappointment. Op the 24th of
February, two days before the date of his dispatch, the Florida had been in the harbor
of Barbados, and had taken on board about 100 tons of coal in violation of the instructions of January 31, 1862.
How, if the Florida took with her from Nassau a provision of coal
sufficient for three months, or even 180 tons, as stated by Demeritt, her
coal could have been getting low in a fortnight's time, even though she
had been obliged to consume a greater quantity than usual, owing to
bad weather—or how far, having taken in such a quantity, she could
by the 24th of February have been able to take in 100 tons more—her
capacity being limited to 130 tons—it is for those who make these apparently inconsistent statements to explain. For my part, I must decline to give credit to them.
We may then, I think, safely assume that the Florida took away with
her from Nassau little more coal, if any, than what her capacity enabled
her ordinarily to carry. At the same time, it must be admitted that,
reference being had to the regulations of the 31st of January, this
quantity was in excess of what would have sufficed to take her to the
nearest port of the Southern States. But up to this time, there being,
owing to the blockade of the southern ports, no port of their own
country to which the confederate cruisers could resort, and these vessels being consequently compelled to remain at sea, the colonial governors appear to have relaxed somewhat of the rigor of the rule; aline
of conduct, however, which was soon after changed by reason of what
occurred on the occasion of the visit of this same vessel to Barbados in
the ensuing month, to the facts of which I am about to refer. >
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 93.
2 Page 352.
3Pa»e354.10
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
The Florida arrived at Barbados on the 24th of February. Her
commander stated'to the governor that, unless he was allowed to have some lumber to repair damages which he had
suffered in a recent gale of wind to the northward, and some coal, as
every bit he had had before had been exhausted in the same bad weather,
he could not go to sea, and should be obliged to land the men and strip
the ship. He received permission to ship 90 tons of coal. No complaint is made as to the quantity thus allowed; but it is alleged that a
supply of coal having beeh«granted within a month previous, the further allowance thus accorded was in contravention of the regulations
of January 31, 1862. And this, no doubt, strictly speaking, is true;
and it is admitted by Governor Walker that, though he had not received official information that the Florida had received, the supply at
Nassau, yet the fact had transpired and was not unknown to him. But
it appears that the view he took was that the rule laid down was not
applicable to a case of distress, and the case was dealt with by him as
the earlier case of the Federal ship San Jacinto had been; both vessels
having been, to use Governor Walker's own expression, "dealt with
specially as being in distress," and therefore, " without reference to the
circumstance of having been in British ports within the previous three
months."1
I trust we are not called upon to doubt the word of Governor Walker
that, in granting liberty to the Florida to take in a fresh supply of coal,
he believed himself to be following a precedent set by himself in the
case of the San Jacinto. It has, however, since been discovered, though
only as lately as last year, by reference to the papers of the Navy Department of the United States, that it was a mistake to suppose that
the San Jacinto when, on the 13th of November, 1862, (the occasion to
which Sir James Walker had referred,) she took in a supply of 75 tons
of coal at Barbados, had had a supply from a British port within three
months before.2 That the governor believed she had done so must be
taken as undoubted! He referred to the fact at the time, in his conversation with Admiral Wilkes, as the precedent which he had followed
with reference to the Florida. How the mistake arose admits of easy
The Florida at solution. It appears from a letter of Mr. Bobeson to Mr.
Bar_ad.es. ' Secretary Fish, that on the 1st of November, 1862, the San
Jacinto " came to anchor in Grassy Bay, off Bermuda, and there remained till the morning of the 4th, having been in port sixty-three hours
twenty-seven minutes." It appears from return of the United States
men-of-war that visited Bermuda during the civil war (set out at page
226 of volume V of the Appendix to the British Case,) that the San
Jacinto and another United States ship of war, the Mohican, entered
Grassy Bay together on the 1st November, and that the latter was
allowed to repair damages, and, as not being on a belligerent errand, to
take in 100 tons of coal.3 The fact of the two vessels having put into
Bermuda together, and of the one having coaled during their stay, a
fact which must have come, to the governor's knowledge, would easily
account for any confusion which might have arisen as to which of them
it was that had coaled on that occasion.
The coaling of the Florida at Barbados gave rise to a more rigorous
application of the rules contained in the regulations of January, 1862.
The American admiral, Wilkes, who, as we kuow from his letter of
the 26th of February, had been lying in wait for the Florida off Marti-
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 92.
2 United StateaJDocuments, vol. vi, p. 345.
3 British Appendix, vol. v, p. 266.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
431
nique, no sooner heard of her having put into and coaled at Barbados,
than he sought a personal explanation from Governor Walker. The
governor explained the principle on which he had acted, and referred to
the coaling of the San Jacinto as a precedent directly in point. He
failed, however to appease the anger of the admiral, who, having returned to his ship, addressed to the governor an offensive letter of remonstrance, or rather of reproach, with a demand of explanation, a proceeding wholly unprecedented and irregular, it being altogether beyond
the authority of an officer of the United States Navy to address a letter
of remonstrance to the Queen's representative iu the person of the
governor of one of her colonies, in respect of acts done in the execution
of his duty, such representative being responsible to Her Majesty alone,
and any alleged misconduct on his part being matteifpor discussion'between the two governments.
Governor Walker, of course, declined to furnish any explanation in
auswer to such a demand, aud transmitted Admiral Wilkes's letter to the
Duke of Newcastle, then secretary of state for the colonies, with a simple statement of the facts.
Both these letters were submitted to the law-officers of the Crown, to
report whether there had been any "breach of Her Majesty's regulations.
The law-officers reported as follows:
We are of opinion that his excellency the governor of the Windward Islands does
not appear to have been guilty of showing any undue partiality to the Oreto, or to
have committed any literal breach of Her Majesty's regulations. We would take the
liberty of observing further, that his excellency owes no account to Admiral Wilkes of
his conduce in the matter of his discharge of his duties toward Her Majesty; and that
the very offensive tone and language of that officer's letter ought to apprise his excellency of the inexpediency of long personal interviews and explanations with him. It
is manifest that upon this, as upon other occasions, these interviews and explanations
are made the pretext for writing subsequent letters of this description, intended to be
used hereafter very disingenuously, as proof of charges made at the time of the favor
shown by Her Majesty's officers to the Confederate States.
We feel ourselves called upon, while giving to Governor Walker full credit for honest
and impartial conduct, to add that, in our opinion, the letter and spirit of Her Majesty's
regulations (quoted in Rear-Admiral Wilkes's dispatch of the 6th March, 1863) have
not been adhered to with sufficient strictness in either of the cases mentioned, that of
the San Jacinto or that of the Oreto. The limits of the supply of coal, in particular,
prescribed by that regulation, ought to be observed, both as to the quantity of coal to
be supplied in the first instance, and as to the interval of time which, in the absence
of "special permission," (a permission not contemplated except under "special" circumstances of a kind different, in our opinion, from those which occurred in the two
cases in question,) ought to elapse between two successive supplies of coal from British
ports. *
(Signed) WM. ATHERTON.
ROUNDELL PALMER.
ROBERT PHILLIMORE.1
It will be observed that this opinion bears the signature of Sir Bobert
Phillimore, who, as we know, is held up to us, and deservedly so, in the-
argument of the United States for our guidance, as a great authority..
From this time forward to the end of the war Sir Bobert Phillimore filled
the high office of Queen's advocate, and must share the responsibility
of many things which are made matter of complaint on the part of the
United States.
In the mean time Mr, Secretary Seward having transmitted to Lord
Lyons Admiral Wilkes's letter to Governor Walker, Lord Lyons, in
forwarding it to Earl Bussell, accompanied it with the following very
pertinent and sound advice :
I have always been myself of opinion, that the course best calculated to avoid unpleasant discussions with this Government, is to adhere as closely as possible to the
1 British Appendix, Ibid., vol. i, p. 96.432
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
regulations. A departure from them, even in favor of the United States cruisers, is
likely (as. indeed happened at Bermuda) to lead to misunderstandings respecting the
nature' and extent of the concession intended, and to demands for similar concessions
on other occasions ; while the displeasure occasioned here by any favor granted to a
confederate ship is in no degree diminished by proof that a similar favor had been previously granted to a United States ship.1
The colonial secretary appears to have deemed the report of the law-
officers too general arid too deficient in ,|gi|jj||H.ou to afford a sufficient
guide to the governors of colonies in the great difficulty of, their position between the belligerent parties—a difficulty which will be the
better appreciated from his grace's observations and the questions put
to the law-officers to enable him to give instructions to the governors
for their future guidance.    His under-secretary, Mr. Elliot, writes:
With regard j;o the law-officers' opinion that the governor did not adhere to Her
Majesty's regulations with sufficient strictness, either in the case of the Oreto or in that"
of the San Jacinto, his grace observes that the law-officers have not afforded any such
specification of the governor's errors as might be a guide to him in future. They say
that the limits of the supply of coal prescribed by the regulation should be adhered to.
But they do not say on what grounds they come to the conclusion that it has been exceeded. The supply is to be limited to such as will enable the ship to reach the nearest
of its own ports, or any nearer destination. The supply to the Oreto was 90 tons.
The papers do not show ^though possibly the law-officers may be aware from other
sources) what was the supply to the San Jacinto. The question, therefore, arising
upon these papers is, whether 90 tons is mor.e than would be required by such a vessel
as the Oreto to reach the nearest confederate port, or any nearer destination.
It would be very desirable to explain to Governor Walker for what destination
(supposing all confederate ports to be under blockade) the Oreto or any other confederate ship under similar circumstances should be allowed to take in coal.
On the next point of alleged insufficientstrictness, his grace is disposed, to a certaiu
extent, to agree with the law-officers. Tbe regulation requires that "no coal shall be
again supplied to any such ship of war, or privateer, in the same or any other port,
roadstead, or waters, subject to the territorial jurisdiction of Her Majesty, without
special permission, until after the expiration of three months from the time when such
coal may have been last supplied to her within British waters, as aforesaid."
The Oreto appears to have coaled at Nassau within three months, and,indeed, within
^Birty days of her arrival at Barbados; and though the American consul's vehement
remonstrance of the 24th February against, her being allowed to coal did not touch the
point, and the governor had no official information of the fact, he does not deny that
the fact had transpired and was known to him ; but states*plat the supply of coal was
allowed on the ground of the ship having suffered at sea in a gale of wind, had been
obliged to exhaust her coal, the whole of which was gone; so that, if supplies were
refused, the captain said he would be obliged to laud his men, and strip the ship. The
statement of the captain of the San Jacinto was of a like tenor. The first question
seems to be, whether the governor ought to have instituted an inquiry into the trnrli
of the statements made to him by the captains of the Oreto aud San Jacinto. It
appears to his grace that he ought. It is, no doubt, very desirable to avoid resting
decisions, of which the impartiality is sure to be questioned, upon the results of
inquiries in which more or less doubtful and conflicting testimony has to be weighed.
But, in the case of an allegation that a vessel is destitute of coal, all that seems necessary is to send an officer on board to see whether-there is coal there or not. Perhaps, if
the governor were to refuse to take the word of an American admiral for such a fact, and
Avere to send an officer on board to verify it, the admiral would regard the proceeding
as offensive; but, nevertheless, his grace thinks .that he should be required to submit
to it before he should be allowed to coal out of time, unless he be prepared to consent
to the word of a confederate officer being taken in like manner without inquiry.
But, supposing the governor to have erred in these cases, it is not explained in the
report of the law-officers whether it is of this, or of what other errors, he has been
guilty, so as to help him to avoid a repetition of error. For example, supposing it had
been the fact duly ascertained, thawthe Oreto or San Jacinto had suffered severely iu
a gale of wind, had exhausted all her coal, and was disabled from proceeding to sea
unless supplied, was the governor to have forbidden her to coal on the ground that
she had coaled at some British port within thirty days ?
On the other hand, did his only error consist in his having allowed her to coal without verifying the fact of her distress ?
Again, assuming the fact to be that there is, or may be hereafter, no confederate port
unblo.ckaded, and that the real destination of a confederate vessel asking for supplies
1 British Appendix, vol.
97.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
42 9
is a cruising destination, so that she is not bound for any particular port, is this to
deprive her of the supplies which would be granted to a Federal cruiser in all respects
similarly circumstanced, except that in her case a port can be designated which is in
the possession of her government, by the distance of which from the British colony a
standard is afforded for measuring the quantity of coal to be supplied ?
His grace would be glad to be enabled to send out in structions to Governor Walker,
founded upon the opinions of the law-offieers, so far as they shall appear to have fully
and correctly understood the course taken by the gover nor, together with any further
instructions which would serve for the governor's guidance on the points
adverted to, and on the nature of the cases (if not those alleged by the N.The Tl0Tiia at
Oreto and San Jacininto) which " special permission " is to be given to
take in coals.
His grace desires me to observe that Governor Walker, by adopting the course of sending immediate notice to all the other governors in the West Indies of a belligerent vessel having obtained coals and supplies at Barbados, appears to have taken a very useful precaution against the violation of the regulations', and that it would apparently
be expedient to iustruct the other governors to do likewise.1
To these questious the law-officers answered:
That with respect to the observance of Her Majesty's regulations, in answer to the
questions of the Duke of Newcastle, it is most desirable that the terms of Her Majesty's
proclamation should be strictly adhered to ; that coal ought not to be supplied to
either belligerent, except in such quantity as may be necessary to " carry such vessel
to the nearest port of her own country, or to some nearer destination ;" and that by
these latter words it is not intended to include a mere cruising destination, but some
definite port or place. That, therefore, coal granted at any of Her Majesty's ports,
and consumed in cruising, ought not to be replenished under the terms of the proclamation ; but that a vessel whose coal has, owing to real necessities arising from
stress of weather, been prematurely exhausted, before she could (if time and weather
were the only obstacles) reach her port of destination, ought not to be forbidden by
the governor to coal, althoTigh within the time specifiednn the regulations.-
It would appear to us that the suggestion of sending an officer ou board to verify
in each case the necessity of- coaling, would be likely to give great offense to belligerent men-of-war; but of course it would be competent to Her Majesty's government,
if they thought fit, to make such a verification the condition of liberty to coal in Her
Majesty's ports.
(Signed)
WM. ATHERTON.
ROUNDELL PALMER.
ROBERT PHILLIMORE.
lowing dispatch-of the 16th July, 1863, was addressed
Hereupon the toiiov
to Governor Walker
Downing Street, July 16, 1863.
Sir : I have received and had under my consideration your dispatch of the 7th
March, giving an account of certain communications which have passed between yourself and Rear-Admiral Wilkes, of the United States Navy.
You were quite right in refusing to enter into correspondence with that officer upon
the matter adverted to in his dispatch of the 5th March. On this and other occasions
it has become evident that interviews and explanations such as you accorded to Rear-
Admiral Wilkes were made the pretext for placing on record charges more or less
direct against officers of Her Majesty. And I think that, as the governor of one of Her
Majesty's colonies owes no explanation of his conduct to an officer of the United
States Navy, it will be prudent hereafter to avoid such explanations as far as-the rules of
courtesy will allow. It is the wish of Her Majesty's government that matters of coin-
' plaint should in general be discussed between the two governments concerned rather
than between any subordinate officers.
With regard to the issue of coal to the war-vessels of the belligerents, you have, I
think, allowed yourself too much liberty in giving the " special permission" to take
in fuel contemplated in Her Majesty's proclamation. Coal, in the opinion of Her
.Majesty's government, ought not to be supplied to a vessel of war of either belligerent
except in such quantity as may be necessary to carry such vessel to the nearest port
of her own country, (or, of course, any nearer port,) and this, I will add, without reference to the question whether the ports of that country are or are not under blockade.
In case of such blockade it will rest with the officer in command to seek some more
convenient destination. If, within the period prescribed by the proclamation, a vesse
thus furnished with coal in one of Her Majesty's possessions should apply for a second
IS B
1 British Appendix, vol. i,
- Ibid., p. 100.
98.434
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
supply in the same or another colony, the application may be granted, if it is made to
appear that, owing to real necessities arising from stress of weather, the coal originally
given has been prematurely exhausted before it was possible that the vessel could, under existing circumstances, have reached the destination for which she coaled.
But if it should b.e.the case that the vessel has not, since taking in coal, been bona
fide occupied in seeking her alleged destination, but has consumed her fuel in cruising,
the coal should not be replenished under the terms of the proclamation. Such a
case is not one to which the " special peflnission" referred to in that proclamation was
intended to apply.
Her. Majesty's government artfbf opinion that the regulations of the proclamation
thus interpreted should be striatly adhered to, without any arbitrary concession to
either belligerent. It is by such a course that misunderstandings and complaints of
partiality will be most certainly avoided. An unauthorizSp. concession to one belligerent, it may be safely assumed, will not be accepted by those to whom it is made as a
justification of a similMi concession in an opposite direction.
I approve of your having commuuica1~® to the officers, administering, the government of the other West Indian Islands the fact that certain Federal and confederate
vessels of war had called at Barbados.
I shall instruct the governors of the other islands to follow the same course, communicating in all cases the name of the vespiL its alleged destination, and the date of
receiving the coal, and the quantity allowoorao be placed on board.
I have, &c,
NEWCASTLE.!
The foregoing" papers are certainly deserving of attentive considera-
tion, as establishing beyond controversy that the British government
were desirous of carrying out, in their fullest extent, the Queen's regulations for the maintenance of neutrality, and, what is more, that ithey^
were prepared to do so, though an adherence to the letter of these reg-^
ulatiohs would have the effect of placing one of the belligerents in a
position of great disadvantage relatively to the other. It was obvious ■
that the rule that, unless the whole of the last supply of coal obtained
in a British port had been consumed in seeking the nearest port of the
belligerent, not even distress of weather should form a ground for
allowing a further supply within the three months, was one which exposed to very great difficulties those whose own ports were closed, and
who, having few other ports to resort to, were thus compelled to keep
the sea at the same time that their means of doing so were seriously
diminished, while it was of very little importance to the other belligerent, who, having his ports open, could always have recourse to them
for supplies if other resources failed.
Yet, when Sir James Walker, recollecting what had happened on the
former occasion, and solicitous to carry out the instructions he had
since received, iu all their stringency, on the application of Captain
Boggs, in April, I860, to remain a few days at Barbados for the purpose
of overhauling the piston and feeding-pump of the engine of his ship,
the Connecticut, replied that it would be necessary,in order that he.
should sanction a stay beyond the prescribed time of twenty-four hours,
that Captain Boggs should give a definite assurance of his inability to
proceed to sea at the expiration of that time, and as to the period
within which it would be possible to execute the necessary repairs—
matters as to which the Florida at Bermuda had to submit to a survey
by the naval authorities—Captain Boggs allowed his temper to get the
better of him; says that § an American man-of-war can always go to
sea in some manner"—which sober-minded people may perhaps think
a somewhat idle boast—and that he shall do so, "though with
risk to his vessel and machinery"—which, as it involved danger
both to his ship and crew, may be thought a questionable view of his
duty; "regrets that the national hospitality of remaining at anchor
for the purpose named in his letter is refused," which was the reverse________________
OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
435
of the fact; and, evidently with considerable temper, informs the governor that he shall depart from the port to-morrow at 10 a. in.1
It is a pity that this outbreak of temper on the part of Captain Boggs
should have been exposed by his own countrymen, as though it had
been an example of heroism, or that the requisition of Governor Walker,
induced by the stringent instructions issued by the British government
on the occasion of the complaints of the United States relatively to the
Florida, should have been distorted into anything more than a resolution to carry out those instructions efficiently and impartially toward
both belligerents.
I return to the Florida. Her next visit to a British port was at Bermuda.
From a dispatch of Governor Ord to the Duke of Newcastle it appears that the Florida was off the port of St. George's
on the evening of the 15th of July, and on the following
morning received the necessary permission to enter the port:
Having sent to Captain Maffitt a copy of the printed circular-letter I have bad
drawn up, embodying the instructions of Her Majesty respecting the treatment of
Federal aud confederate vessels of war, he called on me on the day of his arrival, and
stated that he had been at sea seventy days, with the exception of two visits to Havana and Barbados, each of which occupied less than twenty-four hours, and a visit of
shorter duration to a port in the Brazils; that he was last from the immediate neighborhood of New Yorkiirithin sixty miles of which he had been harassing the United
States commerce; that he was in want of repairs to the hull and machinery of his
ship, and a small supply of coal; that he feared he should experience difficulty in obtaining the latter, as he was informed that there was no steam-coal whatever in the
colony, except iu the stores at the dock-yard; and that he trusted, under the circumstances, he would be permitted to receive from this source as much as would serve to
carry him to a port of his own country; that he would then use every exertion to complete his refitment, and would leave the colony forthwith.
I told Captain Maffitt that his application for coal from admiralty stores must be
made to the senior naval officer, but I assured him at the same time that it would
not be complied with, and I granted him permission to remain so long as might be
necessary to fit his ship for sea, aud to procure from private sources the coal actually
required.2
All supply of coal from the dock-yard was refused. Thereupon Mr.
Walker, a merchant of the colony, applies on behalf of Cap- ^ Florida at
tain Maffitt to the governor:
.ermuna.
As the Florida must of necessity be detained at this port, as a vessel in distress, until the arrival of coals which are daily expected, Captain Maffitt begs me to inquire of
your excellency if the privilege will be accorded to him of proceeding to the dock-yard
for the purpose of having effected some repairs to machinery and hull of ship, which
are of essential importance, and which cannot be effected in the port of St.
George's.3
The answer of the governor was that the application could not be
'granted, to which he adds:
In making this communication I have to express a hope that Captain Maffitt may yet
find it in his power to obtain for his vessel such supplies of coal and such necessary
repairs as will enable her to proceed without delay to her destination, but I must at
the same time point out that Her Majesty's instructions (with a copy of which Captain
Maffitt was supplied on the 16th instant) are very stringent as to the limitation of the
stay in British waters of vessels of war of the United States or Confederate States, and
that it is necessary that whatever may be required to enable the Florida to take her
departure from these islands should be provided in the shortest possible period. If,
however, Captain Maffitt should find it impossible to procure at the present time whatever may be requisite for this pnrpose, I must request that he will at once proceed
with the Florida to Grassy Bay, there to remain until his departure from the colony
is rendered practicable.4
1 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 178.
2British Appendix, vol. i, p. 108.
3 Ibid., p. 109.
4 Ibid., p. 110.436
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Mr. Walker wrote again, suggesting that there was a large quantity
of coal lying in the commissariat department, and applying, on behalf
of Captain _f|affitt, in his great emergency, for a sufficient quantity to
carry his vessel to some coaling depot, offering to pay for them, or to
return them in kind within a week or two.   This again was refused.
On the 22d of July the governor writes to Mr. Walker, requesting him
? to ascertain, for his satisfaction, when the necessary repairs and coaling of the Florida will be completed, so as to enable her to proceed to
sea." In answer, _\Ir. Walker says he is requested by Captain Maffitt to
inform his excellency that he is using every effort to proceed to sea with
as little delay as possible.
" Captain Maffitt," he says, " is fully aware of the stringent character of Her Majesty's
instructions with regard to the stay in British waters of men-of-war of the United
States and of the Confederate States; and begs me to assure your excellency that his
detention has been occasioned not by any disposition to contravene Her Majesty's instructions on the subject, but from the great deficiency of labor at this port, and from
causes to which the attention of your excellency has already been directed.
"The necessary repairs to Captain Maffitt's ship are now nearly completed, and he
will commence taking in his coals at 12 ». m. to-day. As it is probable that it will be
impossible to finish coaling until to-morrow, (Friday,) Captain Maffitt would be happy
to receive the permission of your excellency to remain in the port of St. George's
until Saturday morning."1
The governor answers that—
Although the instructions of Her Majesty respecting the limitation of the stay fS;
British waters of vessels of war of the Confederate and United States are very stringent, yet, as I have reason to believe that circumsta'Uces beyond Captain Maffitt's control
have obstructed him in procuring the supply of coal and repairs to his vessel, necessary
to enable him to proceed to sea, I think I am justified in complying .with his request;
arid I accordingly authorize the Florida remaining in these waters unti
of Saturday, the 25th instant, but no longe"^^
A cargo of coal had, in the mean time, arrived in a vessel called the
Harriet Pinckney, out of which Captain Maffitt was enabled to obtain a
supply. It is stated in the United States Case and Argument2 that this
vessel was one of the | insurgent transports M from which it is sought
to be inferred that the cargo of coal brought out in her was intended expressly for the Florida; and upon this a charge is founded of a violation
of neutrality in a breach of the rule that neither belligerent was to be
permitted to establish depots of coal on British territory. To prove that
the Harriet Pinckney was an u insurgent transport," a letter from Mr.
Dudley to Mr. Seward, of January 2,1863,3 is referred to; but, on turning to that letter, it will be found that Mr. Dudley is not speaking of
or referring to " insurgent transports" at all, but to British vessels
employed in running the blockade with arms and contraband of war.
The word " transport," which, in the argument, is printed between inverted commas, as if taken from the letter, does not occur in it at all.
The vessel was, to all appearance, an ordinary trading-vessel—one of
those engaged in the profitable employment of running the blockade.
In this business She visited St. George's five times between January,
1863, and February, 1864.4 A letter from a Mr. Walker, is, indeed,
printed in the seventh volume of the United States Documents,5 in
which he says that he had employed the Harriet Pinckney in the beginning of July to bring a cargo of coal from Halifax; not, however, for
the Florida, but to supply some steamer with the means of running the
the morning
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 111.
2 United States Case, p. 358; United States Argument, p. 161.
3 United States Documents, vol. i, p. 732.
4 British Appendix, vol. v, pp. 5, 13.
6 Ibid., p. 56.OPINIONS   OF   SIR   ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
4.
) i
blockade; aud, as he expresses it, to save that steamer " the loss of a
moon." This shows that the intention was not to supply the Florida
with coal, and that the visit of the Florida to Bermuda was not in any
way connected with the voyage of the Harriet Pinckney; still less was
there anything to suggest the slightest suspicion of such a kind to the
colonial authorities. Besides which, the anxietyof Captain Maffitt to
obtain coal from other quarters shows plainly that he •had no expectation of a specific cargo being sent out for his vessel.
The charge of any violation of neutrality on the occasion of the last-
.mentioned visit appears wholly to fail.
Leaving Bermuda on the 25th of July, the Florida arrived at Brest
•on the 23d of August. This part of her history is touched
upon lightly and cautiously in the case of the United States;
yet the indulgence alleged to have been granted to this vessel in British
ports is but trifling as compared with that which was extended to her
in the French port; and the events which occurred there are important
as showing that the French government entertained notions more liberal
than our own on the subject of hospitality to be extended to belligerent
vessels. She had sustained considerable injury to her copper, and much.
of her machinery required renewing, aud workmen and materials had
to be brought from England, and these repairs were likely to require a
period of several months for their accomplishment. A considerable part
of her crew, the time for which they had engaged having expired, desired their discharge. From the dispatches of Mr. Dayton, the United
States minister at Paris, to Mr. Secretary Seward, if appears that Mr.
Dayton began by remonstrating against any assistance being given to
the Florida at all. But the French government answered that, having
recognized the Confederate States as belligerents, they could not refuse
them the ordinary assistance rendered to ships of war in need of repairs.
Next. Mr. Dayton insisted that, as the Florida was a good sailing vessel, no repair should be allowed to be done to her machinery. But to
this M. Drouyn de Lhuys answered, "that if she were deprived of her
machinery, she would be pro tanto disabled, crippled, and liable, like a
•duck with its wings cut, to be at once caught by the United States
steamers. He said it would be no fair answer to say the duck had legs
and could walk or swim. He said that, in addition to this, the officers of the port had reported to the government that the vessel was
leaking badly, that she made water at $o much per hour (giving the
measurement) and unless repaired she would sink."1
There being no commercial dock at Brest, Captain Maffitt applied for
the use of a government dock. Mr. Dayton remonstrated; but M.
Drouyn de Lhuys replied that, where there was no commercial dock, as
at Brest, it was customary to grant the use of any accommodation there
to all vessels in distress, upon payment of certain known and fixed
rates; that they must deal with this vessel as they would with one of the
United States ships, or the ships of any other nation; and that to all
•such these accommodations would be granted at once.2
Lastly, permission having been asked to ship new hands, in "the place
of those whose time had expired, M. Dayton strongly opposed it.    He,
thus states the result:
M. Drouyn de Lhu3rs informed me that this government, after much conference (and,
Ithink, some hesitation,) had concluded not to issue an order prohibiting an accession to
the crew of the Florida while in port, inasmuch as such accession was necessary to her
navigation. They had made inquiries, it would seem, and they had ascertained that
the seventy or seventy-five men discharged after she came into Brest were discharged
_§_.
1 British
3 Ibid.
Appendix, vol. vi, p. 132438
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
because the period for which they had shipped had expired. He said, furthermore, that
it was reported to him that the Kearsarge had likewise applied for some sailors and a
pilot in that port, as well as for coal, and leave to make repairs, all of which had beenr
and would be, if more were needed, cheerfully granted.
I told him 1 was quite confident the Kearsarge had made no attempt to ship a crew
there, and that, as respects a pilot, that stood onjlfround peculiar to itself, and had no-
reference to the general principle.
The determination which has been reached by the French authorities to allow the
shipment of a crew, or so large a-portion of one, on board of the Florida while lying
in their port is, I think, wrong, even supposing 'mat vessel a regularly commissioned
ship of war. I told M. Drouyn de Lhuys, that, looking at it as a mere lawyer, and
clear of prejudices which my official position might create, I thought this determination an error. He said, however, tbat in the conference they had reached
iri.n at that unanimously, although a majority of the ministry considering the
question were lawyers.1
From a report by the British cousul at Brest, on the subject of the
reception and stay of the Florida at that port, it appears that—
Captain Maffitt, the commander of the Florida, was informed by the admiral of the
port, (pre"fet maritime,) Vice-Admiral Count de Gueytou, that he was at liberty to-
effect the repairs. of the ship aud provide her with coal and provisions, the same as-
any merchant-ship. * * * * * *
The commercial resources of Brest proving insufficient to effect the repairs of the
Florida, application was made to the port-admiral to allow her to enter the government dock-yard, and permission for her to do so was granted, it being stipulated that
all expenses should be re-imbursed by tlie agent, M. Aumaitgit and that her powder-
magazine should be cleared before entering the dock. To effect the latter operation, a
government barge was furnished for thepurpose of removing the ammunition ; and thi_t|
barge was, later, moored in the bay.
On the 9th of September, 1863, the Florida entered the government dock, and remained there for general repairs for a period of about five weeks.
The Florida completed.her repairs in the dock-yard, and afterward took moorings in.
the merchant harbor of Brest, where she was slowly refitted. On the 27th of December she was moved to the roadstead.
It appears that some of the mechanism of the more heavy guns of the Florida had.
never been regulated, and her commander desiring to have this done, an application*
was made to the port-admiral for permission to land the guns for that purpose; but
this was at once and positively refused, on the ground that such an act might be inter-"
preted as equivalent to allowing a re-inforcement of arms.
But, it appears, her small-arms were allowed to be landed, in order to be repaired byjl
a gun-maker of Brest, named Kock; this permission was granted, on the agent, M3§
Aumaltre, giving a guarantee-to the authorities of the custom-house that they should
be reshipped on board the Florida.
No arms or ammunition were furnished to the Florida while at Brest.
Through M. Aumaltre, the agent, M. Rainals ascertained that thirty-five seamen-
claimed and obtained their discbarge from the Florida here; that they were, in part,
replaced by others, chiefly natives of Belgium, Germany, Italy, and Southern Austria,
brought to Brest by railway direct from Paris, iu numbers never exceeding four at _£|
time, and that they were quietly sent on board in similar numbers.
The Federal corvette Kearsarge re-appeared in Brest waters on the 3d of January,.
1864; and, after steaming about the bay to within a mile of the town, again proceeded to sea.
The Florida, being ready for sea, left Brest between 9 and 10 o'clock on the evening-
of the 9,th of February, 1864, in charge of a pilot; and at a distance of about thirty»
miles from that port, passed through the dangerous passage Du Raz, inside the Saints,,
landing the pilot at Audierne.3
I cannot help surmising that, if all this had happened in one of Her
Majesty's ports; if a government dock-yard had been placed at the disposal of a confederate cruiser; if such cruiser had been allowed to
remain six months ; to have her small-arms repaired on shore; and to
take in as much coal as she wanted, "like any merchant-vessel," and
largely to recruit her crew, this tribunal would not have failed to find
a very eloquent and indignant denunciation of such a violation of neu%
trality in the papers which have been presented to us.
British Appendix, vol. vi,
2 Ibid., vol. i, pp. 126, 127.
136.-*■
OPINIONS. OF
GXANDER   COCKBURN.
439
After leaving Brest on the 12th of February, 1864, the Florida visited
the French colony of Martinique, where she remained from
the 26th of April to the 7th of May repairing her machinery and taking in a full supply of coal.1   On the 12th  of May she
touched at Bermuda, but only to land a sick officer, and left again at once.2
On the 18th of June, 1864, she again put into Bermuda,
being then under the command of Lieutenant C. M. Morris.3 Lieutenant Morris immediately wrote to Colonel Munro, the acting governor, stating that his vessel was in want of coals, provisions,
and repairs, and requesting permission to have the necessary repairs to
the propeller and blow-valve done at Her Majesty's dock-yard, as they
could not otherwise be effected ;4 and Governor Munro having referred
the application to Sir James Hope, the admiral on the station, Sir
James Hope directed a survey of the vessel to be made by competent
officers, who, on the 20th, reported as follows.:
"We have the honor to report that, having, in,obedience to your directions, been on
board the Florida, and with the assistance of Messrs. Thompson aud
Leitch, assistant engineers, examined her machinery, we beg to make
the following report:
1. She can proceed to sea with such repairs as cau be made good here, which, as
far as we are able to judge, will require five days, for one man, viz, a diver for two
days and a fitter for three days, or three complete days in all.
2. She can proceed to se^a with safety in her present state under steam, bnt under
sail is unmanageable with her screw up in bad weather, and her defects aloft (cross-
trees) render main topmast unsafe.   This could be made good in two days.
3. Her horse-power is 200.
Consumption of fuel going full speed  15   cwt.
Speed  10  knots.
Consumption of fuel going half speed    7£ cwt.
Speed  8   knots.
4. We are of opinion that the Florida should be able to fetch the following places in
the time aud with the coal stated against each, viz:
Hours. Tons
Wilmington     115 46
Charleston     129 52
Savannah _     138 55
Mobile     250 100
We have, &c.,'
ARTHUR H. G. RICHARDSON,
Lieutenant.
EDWARD O. CRICHTON,
Chief Engineer.
Vice-Admiral Sir J. Hope, §c, cfc, <fc.
P. S.—The Florida can stow 130 tons of coal.7'
Upon this a stay of five working days was accorded for the completion of the necessary repairs.6 Permission was given to ship 80 tons of
coal.
Three heads of complaint are put forward by the United States Government as to what was done on this occasion. Twice over it is stated
that, a stay of jfa'e.days having been granted, that stay was extended
to nine.'1
We have here another of those inaccurate statements of fact, the
effect of which may be to mislead the tribunal. The stay of the Florida
at Bermuda on this occasion was only nine days in the whole.   But the
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 131.
-Ibid.,p. 132; United States Documents, vol,vi, p. 355.
3 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 132.
4 Ibid., vol. v, p. 9.
"British Appendix, vol. v, p. 11.
8 Ibid., pp. 6, 11, 12.
7 Case of the United States, pp. 3G0, 351;
.1440
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
earlier portion of that time was occupied in the preliminary communications and in the survey. The stay of five days was granted by the
governor on the 21st of June. The Florida left on the 27th. The total
stay of nine days has thus been confounded with the. stay after the
granting of the five days. I should be ashamed to suggest that this
misrepresentation was intentionally made; but I must repeat that those
who accuse persons in authority of misconduct should take more care to
be accurate as to their facts.
It is next stated that, instead of 20 tons, the Florida was allowed to
take 135.1 But on reference to the report of the surveying officers, it
will be seen that they estimate 46 tons as the amount necessary for the
vessel, if seeking the nearest port, namely, A^pLmington; 100 tons if
seeking the furthest, nSgfnely, Mobile; with varying amounts if making
for intermediate ports.
Lieutenant Morris assured the governor that the port he expected to
make was Mobile.2 The governor compromised the matter by giving
permission to load 80 tons. Lieutenant Morris reported officially in
writing to the governor that he had loaded 80 tons, as appears by the
letter of Governor Munro to Mr. Secretary Cardwell of the 7th of July,
1864.3 But the United States produce a voucher for 135 tons of coal
shipped on this occasion.4
If it be true that Lieutenant Morris abused the confidence of Colonel
Munro, and took in 135 tons instead of 80, all that this proves is that
Lieutenant Morris acted in a manner unworthy of an officer and a gentleman. Is it to be said that it was the duty of the governor to send
officers to watch the shipment of the coal, and see that Lieutenant
Morris did not play a dishonorable part and abuse the trust reposed in
him, and that the quantity was not exceeded1? Such a proceeding
would have implied a disbelief in the word of the officer commanding a
ship of war, and- therefore would more or less have amounted to an
affront.   I cannot think it was necessary.
The next complaint is, that whereas five days' work was reported by
the surveyors to be all that was necessary to be done to the vessel,
twenty days of carpenters' work was done to her.5 The voucher produced shows that four carpenters were employed for four days.6 Looking to the small quantity of materials charged for, it is probable that,
if an undue amount of time was occupied in carpenters' work, it arose
from the unskillfulness of the workmen. .
The number of men required for the repairs of the maintop-mast is not
stated in the report of the officers. The work of four men for four days
may have proved absolutely necessary.
But even if a small and microscopic criticism could here discover anything to find fault with, here again the fault was that of the officer commanding the Florida, not of the authorities. Or, is it to be said that
here also a watch should have been set to measure the precise amount
of work to which the carpenters should have been limited %
But complaint is made that, besides coal, the Florida was allowed to
take in large supplies of provisions, clothing, and other stores, even of
medicines 17   For what purpose this is stated I cannot conceive.   If it is
4.
1 United States Case, p. 362.
2 British Appendix, vol. v, p.
3 Ibid"., vol. i, p. 133.
4 United States Documents, vol. vi,
5 Case of the United States, p. 361.
8 United States Documents, vol. vi,
7 Case of the United States, p. 361.mtm
OPINIONS OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN
441
meant to be said that herein there was any breach of neutrality, such a
proposition implies ignorance of the first principles of international law.
All the articles enumerated are things which a belligerent has a perfect
right to procure in a neutral port, and which the governor could neither
prevent the commander of such a vessel from buying, or the Queen's subjects from selling to him.
There is one other complaint, which I confess occasions me both surprise and pain. It is that, although the surveyors had reported that
" the vessel was unmanageable with her screw up in bad weather," and
that " her defects aloft (cross-trees) rendered the maintop-mast unsafe,"
yet, as they had reported that " she could proceed to sea with safety in
her then state under steam," the governor ought not to have allowed the
repairs necessary to render her safe when under sail.1 We have here
the converse of Mr. Dayton's contention with the French government,
but in a more objectionable form. When it is borne in mind that in a
screw-steamer steam is but an auxiliary power, and that no such vessel
is ever committed to th.e ocean without everything necessary to her
safety under sail being in a seaworthy condition ; when it is remembered
that all machinery is liable to accident, especially such as is exposed to
the action of the elements, and that if anything had happened to the
machinery of this vessel in her then condition, she would have been exposed, with her living freight, crippled and helpless, to danger and disaster, I think the proposition which the tribunal is asked to adopt ought
not to find much favor in its sight. For myself I can only say, that I
trust and believe no British governor, placed in similar circumstances,
would—let our decision be what it may, let the political consequences be
what they will—be so wanting in a sense of what is due to humanity
and to the honor of his country as to act otherwise than I am glad to
think the governor of Bermuda acted on this occasion.
I have only further to observe that when much is made in the case of
the United States of the fact that the Florida, instead of proceeding to
the nearest port, was kept cruising off the islands, looking out for United
States vessels, which no doubt appears to have been the case,2 the same
observation occurs as before. Such a course of conduct may have been
dishonorable in Lieutenant Morris, as being in breach of the good faith
he ought to have kept with the governor, but it certainly cannot be ascribed as a fault to the latter.
No doubt the conduct of Lieutenant Morris is open to observation.
He came back afterwards to the island, on the pretext of delivering up
two deserters, but in fact to try and get more coal, which, however, was
peremptorily refused.3 But the answer lies in a word : Lieutenant Morris was an officer bearing a commission and wearing a sword in the
service of an American government; as such, he was entitled to the
presumption which attaches to such a position, and which presupposes
the impossibility of acts inconsistent with the highest sense of honor
and the most scrupulous good faith. To have acted on such a presumption ought not to be ascribed, by a tribunal of honorable men, to those
who did so, as a want of due diligence in the discharge of any duty they
were called on to fulfill on the part of a neutral government.
On the 5th of October, 1864, the Florida entered the port of _ Bahia,
whereupon Mr. Wilson, the United States consul, forthwith addressed a
letter to the president of the province in the accustomed terms:
1 Case of the United States, p. 362.
2 See British Appendix, vol. i, p. 133.
IIbid.442
ARBITRATION . AT   GENEVA.
Consulate of the United States of Ameiuca,
Bahia, October 5,1864—9 a. m.
Sir : This morning a steamer anchored in this port bearing the.flag adopted by those
who are involved in the rebellion against the Government of the United States of"
America, and I am informed that the said vessel is the Florida, which is engaged in
capturing vessels navigating under the flag of the United States of America, and in
destroying them by making bonfires of them and their cargoes.
The vessel in question is not commissioned by any recognized government whatever, and her officers and crew are composed of persons of various nationalities, who
are not subject to any international or civilized law, and are consequently not entitled
to the privileges and immunities conceded to vessels navigating under the flag of a
civilized nation. I therefore protest, in the name of the United States of America,,
against the admission of this vessel to free practice, by which she might be enabled to
supply herself with coal, provisions, tackle, or utensils of any kind whatever, orreceive
on board any persons whailYer; finally, against any assistance, aid, or protection
which might be conceded to her in this port, or in any other belonging to this
province.
I likewise claim that the piratical cruiser which, iu combination with the pirate
Alabama, violated the sovereignty of the imperial government of Brazil by capturing
and destroying vessels belonging to citizens of the United States of America, within the
territorial waters of Brazil, near the island of Fernando de NoroDha, in April, 1863, be
detained, with all her officers and crew, in order-to aSafiwer.for so flagrant a violation
of the sovereignty of the government of Brazil and of the rights of citizens of the
United States within the jurisdiction of the Brafpian government.
I avail, &c,
THOMAS F. WILSON,
Cotumlofthe United Slates.1
His Excellency Antonio Joaqiim da Silva Gomez,
President of the Province of Buhia.
The president replies:
In reply to the consul, I have to inform him that, as the said vessel belongs to the
Confederate States, in whom the imperial government recognized the character of
belligerents,' all the assistance required by humanity may be furnished her which does
in no wise constitute astsistanee for warlike purposes, as laid down by international
law, and does not conflict with that neutrality which this government studiously seeks
to preserve, and has always preserved, in the contest between the States of North
America. The undersigned cannot, therefore, admit the first portion of the claim of 1_fc_e
consul, in the general manner in which it was presented, and particularly in relation
to those articles considered as contraband of war in conformity with instructions
issued on that subject by the imperial government, and according to which the said
vessel will only be permitted to remain in this-port for the length of time absolutely
indispensable.
In regard to the second parfof his note^itis my duty to observe to the consul that,
even if it were fully established .hart the Florida had previously violated neutrality,
such a proceeding would scarcely authorize us to refuse her perihission to enter the
ports of the empire, and would never warrant us to commit the acts required by the
consul, which would be equivalent to a hostile ruptqre, without the intervention of
the supreme government of the State, which is one competent to authorize such a rupture.2
Before daybreak on the morning of the 7th the Florida was surprised
in the port of Bahia and taken by the United States war-steamer
Wachusett and carried off as a prize.
She sank shortly after her arrival in Chesapeake Bay,in consequence,
as was asserted, of her having sprung a IHpSbk'during her voyage, and other having been injured while at anchor by a United States transport.
Mr. Seward appears at first to have been disposed to think that the
Brazilian government, in " furnishing of shelter and a haven to pirates,"
was as much to blame as the captain of the Wachusett, as we find him,
on hearing what had occurred, writing thus to Mr. Webb:
Department of State,
Washington, November 11,1864.
Sir : In the years 1862 and 1863 remonstrances were addressed by us to the government of Brazil against the policy, different as it was from that of all other American
1 British Appendix, vo
2 Ibid., p. 147.
iM. 146.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
443
States, in regard to the furnishing of shelter and ahaven to pirates who were engaged in
depredating upon the peaceful commerce of the United States. The correspondence
came to a close without having produced any satisfactory result, and not without
leaving a painful presentiment that a continuance of measures so injurious to the
United States would, sooner or later,-affect the harmonious relations heretofore existing between the two countries.
We have just now heard of the capture of the Florida by the Wachusett, at Bahia,
and of the consequent hostilities adopted by the Brazilian forces in that port; but we
have no particular information of the circumstances which preceded the collision, and
our information concerning the transaction itself is incomplete. At the same time we
are absolutely without knowledge of any correspondence that it may have elicited between yourseK' and the Brazilian government.
In this stage of the matter the President thinks it proper that you should inform the
minister of foreign affairs that we are not indisposed to examine the subject upon its
merits carefully, and to consider whatever questions may arise out of it in a becoming
and friendly spirit, if that spirit shall be adopted by His Imperial Majesty's government.1
The government of Brazil protested immediately in strong terms
against this violation of its sovereignty and the neutrality of its waters.
The following letter was immediately written by Senhor Barbosa da
Silva, the Brazilian charge" d'affaires at Washington, to Mr. Seward:
[Translation.]
Imperial Legation of Brazil,
Washington, December 12, 1864.
The undersigned, charg^ d'affaires ad interim of His Majesty the Emperor of Brazil,
has just received orders from his government to address himself, without delay, to that of"
the United States of North America about an act of the most transcendant gravity, done
on the morning of the 7th day of October last, in the port' of the capital of the province
of Bahia, by the war-steamer Wachusett, belonging to the Navy of the Union, an act
which involves a manifest violation of the territorial jurisdiction of the empire, and
an offense to its honor and sovereignty.
On the 4th day of the month referred to there entered that port, where already had
been lying for some days the Wachusett, the confederate steamer Florida, for the purpose, declared by her commander to the president of the province, to supply herself
with alimentary provisions and coal, and to repair some tubes of her machinery.
The President, proceeding. in accordance with the policy of neutrality which the
empire resolved to adopt on the question in which unfortunately these States are
involved, and in conformity with the instructions in this respect issued by the imperial
government on the 23d of June of the year last past, assented to the application of the
commander of the Florida, and fixed the term of forty-eight hours for taking iu supplies, aud fixing, in dependence on the final examination by the engineer of the arsenal,
the determination of the residue of the time which, peradventure, should be deemed,
indispensable for the completion of the repairs.
The same authority/at once took, with the greatest impartiality, all the measures-'
necessary to avoid any conflict between the two hostile steamers.
The Florida was placed under cover of the batteries of the Brazilian corvette D.
Januaria, on the inshore side, at the request of her commander, who, reposing on the
faith with which, without doubt, the chief authority of the province could not fail to
inspire him, considered himself sheltered from any attack of his adversary, and in this
confidence not only staid a night on shore, but gave liberty to a great part of the
crew of his vessel.
It behooves me to say that, as soon as the confederate steamer entered the port of
Bahia, the American consul, Wilson, addressed to the President a dispatch claiming-
that the Florida should not be admitted to free pratique, and that on the contrary she
should be detained, alleging for this, that that vessel had, in concert with the Alabama,
violated the neutrality of the empire by making captures in 1863, near the island of
Fernando de Noronha.
Such exaggerated pretensions, founded on facts not proven, which had already been
the subject of discussion between the Imperial government and the legation of the
United States, could not be even listened to.
If the President should have refused the hospitality solicited by the commander of
the Florida he would have infringed not only the duties of neutrality of the empire,
but also those of humanity, considering that steamer, coming from Teneriffe, had been
sixty-one days at sea, was unprovided with food, and with machinery in the worst condition.
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 152.
iiil444
ARBITRATION
GENEVA.
Afterwards the President having stated to the same consul that he hoped, from his
honor and loyalty toward a friendly nation, that he would settle with the commander
■of the Wachusett, that he should respect the neutrality and sovereignty of the empire,
he was answered affirmatively, the consul pledging his word of honor. Things were
in this condition, the term of forty-eight hours being to expire at 1 o'clock, of the
■afternoon of the 7th, when about dawn of that day, the commander of the steamer
Wachusett, suddenly leaving his anchorage, passed through the Brazilian vessels of war
_tnd approached the Florida.
On passing across the bows of the Brazilian corvette D. Januaria, he was hailed from
■on board that he must anchor; but, as he did not attend to this intimation, and continued to approach the Florida, at the same time firing a gnn and some musketry, the
•commander of the naval division of the Empire stationed in those waters sent an
officer on board the Wachusett, and informed her commander that the ships of the
division and the forts would open fire upon her if she should attack the Florida. The
Brazilian officer was not allowed to make fast to the Wachusett, but the officer of the
deck hailed him, saying, in reply that he accepted the intimation given, that he would
do nothing more, and that he was going to return to his anchorage. The commander
of the Brazilian division then thought proper to ratify his intimation by firing a gun,
upon which a complete silence followed between the two ships Wachusett and
Florida.
At the time this was passing, the corvette D. Januaria, ou board which the commander of division had hoisted his flag, lay head to flood, the steamer Florida anchored
B.B., side by side of her, and quite close to the shore, and between her and the corvette
the Wachusett stopped her wheels.
The commander of division then observing—notwithstanding the darkness of the
night—that the Wachusett, from the position in which she was, kept moving onward
and was passing ahead of the corvette, in a course E.B., became convinced that, in fact,
she was steering for her anchorage, thus complying with the promise made.
But a few moments afterward, perceiving that the Florida was in motion, the commander discovered that the Wachusett was taking her off in tow by means of a long
cable.
Surprised at such au exta~JB5_~dinary attempt, the commandqjiimmediately set about
stopping this, and redressing at the same tinfe, as behooved him, the offense thus done
to the dignity and sovereignty of the empire.
But availing hinjself of the darkness of the night, and of other circumstances, the
commander of tbe Wachusett succeeded in carrying his prize over the bar, and escaping'the just punishment he deserved.
The consul, Wilson, preferred to abandon his post, withdrawing on board the Wachusett.
The government of His Majesty, as soon as it had official information of the event,
addressed to the legation of the United States at Rio Janeiro a note, in which, giving
a succinct exposition of the fact, it declared that it had no hesitation in believing that
it would hasten to give to it all proper assurances that the Government of the Union
would attend to the just reclamation of the empire as promptly and fully as the gravity
of the case demanded.
In correspondence with this expeo^lave note the worthy representative of the United
States was prompt in sending his reply, in which he declares he is convinced that his
Government will give to that of the empire the reparation which is due to it.
Such are the facts to which the undersigned has received orders to call the attention
of the Hon. William H. Seward, Secretary of State of the United States.
The principles of international law which regnlate this matter, and in respect of
which there is not the least divergence among the most distinguished publicists, are
common and known to all. The undersigned would fail to recognize the high intelligence of the Honorable Mr. Seward, if, perchance, he should enter in this respect into
fuUer developments.
He limits himself, then, only to recall a memorable example, in which these principles, invariably sustained by the United States, had entire application. In 1793, the
great Washington then being President of the United States, and the illustrious Jefferson Secretary of State, the French frigate l'Embuscade captured the English ship
Grange in Delaware Bay, thus violating the neutrality and the'territorial sovereignty
of the United States. The American Government remonstrated energetically against
this violation, and required from the government of the French Republic not only the
immediate delivery of the captured vessel, but also the-complete liberation of all the
persons found on board. This reclamation was promptly satisfied. Much more grave,
certainly, is the occurrence in the port of the province of Bahia, which makes the
subject of the present note. By the special circumstances which preceded and.
attended it, this act.has no parallel in the annals of modern maritime war. -
The commander of the Wachu|jSiit not only gravely offended the territorial immunities of the empire, passing beyond the laws of war by attacking treacherously, during
thevnight, a defenseless ship, whose crew,«_uch reduced, because more than sixty menOJ
XIOXS OF SI
ALEXANDER COCKBURN.
44i
were on shore with the commander and several officers, reposed riuwary beneath the
shadow of the protection which the neutrality of the empire guaranteed to them; and
so open was the A'iolation, so manifest the offense, that the enlightened American press
was almost unanimous in condemnation of the inexcusable proceeding of Commander
Collins.
On this occasion, reminding the United States, whose antecedents are well known
and noted in history by the energetic defense of, and respect for, neutral rights, of
those unshaken principles, the undersigned cannot consider the event which occurred
at Bahia otherwise than as the indvidual act of the commander of the Wachusett, not
authorized or approved by his Government, and that it will consequently give to the-
government of His Majesty the Emperor the explanations and reparation which, in
conformity with international laws, are due to a power which maintains friendly and
pacific relations with the United States.
The just reclamation of the Imperial government being thus presented, the undersigned awaits the reply of the Honorable Mr. Seward, and, fully confiding in his exalted
wisdom, and in the justice of the Government of the United States, he has not even
for a moment doubted but that it will be as satisfactory as the incontestable right
which aids the empire, and the vast gravity of the offense which was doue to it, may
require.1
Mr. Seward's answer is remarkable for its haughty tone, and still
more as showing the view which the United States Government persisted in taking as to the inadmissibility of the Confederate States to
the character of belligerents, notwithstanding that all the great maritime states had agreed throughout, in conformity with principle and
precedent, in according to them the status of belligerency:
Department oe State,
Washington, December 20, 1864.
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note, which sets forth the senti -
ments of the Imperial government of Brazil concerning the capture of the Florida by
the United States war-steamer Wachusett in the port of Bahia.
You will, of course, explain to your government that, owing to an understanding
between you and myself, your note, although it bears the date of the Pith December,
was not submitted to me until the 21st instant.
Jealousy of foreign intervention in every form, and absolute non-intervention in
the domestic affairs of foreign nations, are cardinal principles in the policy of the
United States. You bave, therefore, justly expected that the President would disavow
and regret the proceedings at Bahia. He will suspend Captain Collins, and direct him
to appear before a court-martial. The consul at Bahia admits that he advised and incited the captain, and was active in the proceedings. He will therefore be dismissed.
The flagof Brazil will receive from the United States Navy the honor customary in the
intercourse of friendly maritime powers.
It is, however, not to he understood that this Government admits or gives credit to-
the charges of falsehood, treachery, and deception which you have brought against
the captain and the consul. These charges are denied on the authority of the officers-
accused.
You will also be pleased to understand that the answer now given to your representation rests exclusively upon the ground that the capture of the Florida was an unauthorized, unlawful, and indefensible exercise of the naval force of the United States
within a foreign country, in defiance of its established and duly recognized Government.
This Government disallows your assumption that the insurgents of this country are
a lawful naval belligerent; and, on the contrary, it maintains that the ascription of
that character by the government of Brazil to insurgent citizens of the United States,
who have hitherto been, and who still are, destitute of naval forces, ports, and courts,
is an act of intervention, in derogation of the law of nations, a_td unfrieadly and
wrongful, as it is manifestly injurious to the United States.
So, also, this Government disallows your assumption that the Florida belonged to the
aforementioned insurgents, and maintains, on the contrary, that that vessel, like the
Alabama, was*a pirate, belonging to no nation or lawful belligerent, and therefore
that the harboring and supplying of these piratical ships and 'their crews in Brazilian
ports were wrongs aud injuries for which Brazil justly owes reparation to the United
States, as ample as the reparation which she now receives from them. They hope, and
confidently expect, this reciprocity in good time, to restore the harmony and friendship which are so essential to the welfare and safety of the two countries.
In the positions which I have thus assumed, the imperial government will recognize
British Appendix, vol. i, p. 153.446
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
an adherence to the rights which have been constantly asserted, aud ah enduring
sense of injuries which have been the subjects of earnest remonstrance by the United
States during the last three years. The government of Brazil is again informed that
these positions of this Government are no longer deemed open to argument.
It does not, however, belong to the captains of ships of war of the United States, or
to the commanders of their armies, or to their consuls residing in foreign ports, acting
without the authority of Congress, and,without even Executive direction, and choosing their own time, manner, and occasion to assert the rights and redress the wrongs
of the country. This power can be lawfully exercised only by the Government of the
United States. As a member of the family of nations, the United States practice
order, not anarchy, as they always prefer lawful proceedings to aggressive violence or
retaliation. The United States are happy in being able to believe that Brazil entertains the same sentiments. The authorities at Bahia are understood to have unsuccessfully employed force to overcome the Wachusett and rescue the Florida, and to
have continued the chase of the offender beyond the waters of Brazil out upon the
high seas. Thus, in the affair at Bahia, subordinate agents without the knowledge of
their respective governments, mutually inaugurated an unauthorized, irregular, and
unlawiip. war. In desisting from that war on her part, and in appealing to this Government for redress, Brazil rightly appreciated the character of the United States, and
set an example worthy of emulation.
The disposition of the captured crew of the Florida is determined upon the principles which I have laid down. Although the crew are enemies of the United States,
and, as they contend, enemies of the human race, yet the offenders were, nevertheless,
unlawfully brought into the custody of this Government, and therefore they could not
lawfully be subjected here to the punishment which they have deserved. Nor could
they, being enemies, be allowed to enjoy the protection of the United States. They
will, therefore, be set at liberty, to seek a refuge wheresoever they may find it, with
the hazard of recapture when beyond the jurisdiction of this Government.
The Florida was brought into American waters, and was anchored, under naval surveillance and protection, at Hampton Roads. While awaiting the representation of
the Brazilian government, on the 28th November, she sunk, owing to a leak which
could not be seasonably stopped. The leak was at first represented to have been
caused, or at least increased, by a collision with a war transport. Orders were immediately given to ascertain the manner a,nd circumstances of the occurrence. It seemed
to affect the Army and the Navy. A naval court of inquiry and also a military court
of inquiry were charged with the investigation. The naval court has submitted its
xeport, and a copy thereof is herewith communicated. The military court is yet engaged. So soon as its labors shall have ended, the result will be made known to your
government. In the mean time it is assumed that the loss of the Florida was a consequence of some unforeseen accident, which cast no responsibility upon the United
States.1
When this correspondence, together with that which passed on the
occasion of the Sumter, the Alabama and the Florida, in 1862 and 1863,
and which I have already referred to, is borne in mind, it is somewhat
surprising that Brazil should be held up for our special admiration in
contrast to the defective neutrality of Great Britain. Our worthy Brazilian colleague will, I doubt not, appreciate the compliment thus paid
to the country of which he is the distinguished representative.
The Alabama.
CASE OF THE  ALABAMA.
I proceed to consider the facts relating to the Alabama, which, I am
glad to say, can be brought into a much shorter compass
than those relating to the Florida. We are now in possession of the whole history of this vessel, partly through the published
journal of her commander; but, in deciding whether Her Majesty's
government were wanting indue diligence in not seizing her, the tribunal can look only to the facts as they existed at the time of her
escape, and the amount of available evidence then forthcoming to
justify and support her seizure.
There is no doubt that, from the beginning, the Alabama was a vessel
intended for war, and constructed and adapted accordingly, although,
as is stated in the case of the United States, I she was designed as a
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 155.OPINIONS   OF   SIR   ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
447
scourge of the enemy's commerce rather than for battle."1 We now
know that from the beginning she was intended for the confederate
service. The fact that she was ordered by Bullock expressly for the
Confederate States is, no doubt, true; but, at the time in question, this
was wholly unknown to the British authorities.
Commenced in October or November, 1861, by Messrs. Laird, the
well-known shipbuilders of Liverpool, the vessel, known then only by
her number, (290,) was launched on the 15th May, 1862.
She had already attracted the attention of Mr. Dudley, whom we find
writing about her to Mr. Secretary Seward on the day following her launch:
In a previous dispatch I mentioned the fact that Messrs. Laird & Co. were bui'ding
a gun-boat at Birkenhead, which, I believe, was intended for the confederacy. This
boat was launched yesterday; she will be, when finished, a very superior boat.
He then gives a a description of her, and winds up by saying:
There is no doubt but what she is intended for the rebels. This was admitted by
one of the leading workmen iu the yard; he said she was to be the sister to the
Oreto, and for the same purpose and service.'3
After this, Mr. Dudley remains quiet for a month ; but, on the 18th
of June, writes again:
The gun-boat building for the confederates by|_j_ssrs. Laird will soon be completed
She made a trial-trip last Thursday. None of the press were invited. No one was
admitted on board without a ticket. They were issued only to the persons actively
engaged in aiding the rebellion. All the active persons and houses engaged in fitting
out ships, &c, were represented on her. The New York papers have published articles
stating that information of ships fitting out at this, port is sent to our Government.
These pieces have been copied iu the newspapers here, and the effect has been to make
the people much more careful and guarded. It is now difficult to obtain information
•about this vessel. They will not admit anyone, except those connected with the yard,
to go in.
After giving a full description of the vesssel, he adds :
No pains or expense has been spared in her construction, and, when finished, she will,
be a very superior boat of her class. Indeed, they say there will be no better afloat.
Her trial-trip was entirely satisfactory. She will be finished and ready for her armament in about ten days or two weeks. I have not yet learned what it is to be. The
•platforms for the guns that are being made are such that the gun can be used on both
•sides of the vessel.3
On the 21st of June, Mr. Dudley, who had been to London to see Mr •
Adams, the United States minister, on the subject of this   -n,, Alabama, at
vessel, wrote, on the suggestion of the latter, a letter to be Uyervoo]-
forwarded by him to Her Majesty's government.   Writing to Mr. Seward
-on the 27th of June, Mr. Dudley says:
Being entirely satisfied in my own mind that this vessel was intended as a privateer
for the rebel government, and that it was my duty to use every effort to prevent. her
sailing, I went up to London to confer with Mr. Adams. At his instance I drew up
and addressed to him a note, a copy of which is inclosed, marked No. 1. He inclosed a •
copy of this, accompanied with an energetic note from himself to Earl Russell. Mr.
Adams thinks there is a better feeling on the part of the Government toward us, and
that they will now do what they can to conciliate us, and will stop the fitting out of
this vessel. It is to be hoped that they will do it, as she would do much mischief to
our commerce if she got out in some quarter distant from our cruisers. One of the
Lairds, an active member of this firm, is a member of Parliament. This vessel is ready
for sea, and if not prevented will sail before the end of next week. Captain Bullock
will command her. She will enter upon the business as a privateer at once, and not
attempt to run into a Southern port. It is said that her armament will consist of
■eleven guns, all of heavy caliber.4
. 1 Page 365.
3 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 373.
3 Ibid., p. 374.
4 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 377.
j
In448
ARBITRATION
GENEVA.
Mr. Dud
as follows:
ev
letter to Mr. Adams, under date of the 21st of ..June, was-
The gun-boat now being built by the Messrs. Laird .& Co., at Birkenhead, opposite
Liverpool, and which I mentioned to you in a previons dispatch, is intended for the so-
called confederate government in the Southern States. The evidence I have is entirely
conclusive -to my mind. I do not think there is the least room for doubt about it.
Beaufort and Caddy, two of the officers from the privateer- Sumter, stated that this
vessel was beini^j-bnilt for the Confederate States. The foreman in Messrs. Laird's yard
says she is the sister to the gun-boat Oreto,. and. has been built for the same parties and
for the same purpose; when pressed for a further explanation he stated that she was.
to be a privateer for the " Southern government in the United States." The captain-
and officers of the steamer Julia Usher, now at iM^erpool, and which is. loaded to run
the blockade", state that this gun-boat is for the confewferates, and is to be commanded,
by Captain Bullock.
The strictest watch is kept over this vessel; no person except those immediately engaged upon her is admitted into the yard.   On the occasion of the trial trip made last
Thursday week, no one w£B|^dmitted without a pass, an;d these passes w©*e issued to
but few persons, and those who are known here as active secessionists engaged in.
sending aid and relief to the rebels.
I understand that her armament is to consist of eleven guns, and that she is to enter;
at once, as soon as she leaves this port, upon her business as a pii va teer.
The vessel is very nearly completed; she has had her first trial trip. This trial was
successful, and entirely satisfactory to the persons who are superintending her construction.   She will be finished in nine or ten days.    *   *    *    *
When completed and armed she will be a most formidable and dangerous craft; and,
if not prevented from going to sea, will do much mischief to our commerce. The persons engaged in her construction say that no better vessel of her class was ever built.V
Transmitting this letter to Earl Russell on the 23d of June, MrJ
Adams, after adverting to the affair of the Oreto, goes on to say:
I am now under the painful necessity of apprising your lordship that a new and still^
more powerful war-steamer is nearly ready for departure from the port of Liverpool on
the same errand.   This vessel has been built and launched from the dock-yard of persons, one of-whom is now sitting as a member of the House of Commons, and is fitting
out for the especial and manifest object of carrying on hostilities by sea.   It is about ■
to be commanded by one of the insurgent agenfcs, the same who sailed in the Oreto.
The parties engaged in the enterprise are persons well known at Liverpool to be agents-
and officers of the insurgents in the United States, the nature and extent of whose
labors are well explained in the copy of an intercepted letter of one of them which I
received from my Government some days.ago, and which I had the honor to place in
your lordship's hands on Thursday last.
I now ask permission to transmit, for your consideration, a letter addressed to me by
the consul of the United States at Liverpool, in confirmation of the statements here •
submitted, and to solicit such action as may tend either to stop the projected expedi—i
tion, or to establish the fact that its purpose.is not inimie§jEto the people of the United'
States.*
The evidence, which was conclusive to Mr. Dudley's mind, and left no-
doubt on it, and on which Mr. Adams asked for the seizure of the vessel, was wholly insufficient to justi^i such a proceeding.   The statements of the two officers of the Sumter, and those of the captain and
officers of the Julia Usher, then leaving Liverpool in order to run ttee^
blockade, and "wf^ch Mr. Dudley could owly produce at second hand.
would have been unassailable in an English court of justice.   The unsupported statement of a single workman from the ship-builders' yard,
even if such workman should be willing to reproduce it in the shape of"
evidence on oath, would have fallen short of what p"eobably would have
been deemed judicially requisite.   The assertion of Mr. Adams, "that
the parties engaged in the enterprise were well known at Liverpool to
be agents and officers of the insargents," carried the ease no fasther.   It
amounted only to a%featement of generaSfeotoriety.   A fact does not the
less require to be proved by posi t i ve evidence because it may be generally reported.
1 Appendix to British Case, vol. i, p. 179.
2 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 177.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
449
The "intercepted letter" referred to by Mr. Adams was a letter from
a Captain Caleb Huse, a captain of confederate artillery, on subjects
connected with the supply of artillery and rifles.1 The only parties in
this country referred to in it are Fraser, Trenholm & Co., who are
mentioned as having placed the Bahama at his disposal for the transport of some batteries of artillery. It is stated in the United States
case that the officers who were to serve in the Alabama were in England
awaiting her completion, and were paid their salaries monthly at Eraser,
Trenholm & Co's.2 But it is not stated, as I think it should have been,
that this was not known at the time, even by Mr. Dudley, much less
by the British government. The fact first came to light in the following
April, when Yonge came forward to make disclosures.
Earl Bussell having in due course referred the letters of Mr. Adams
and Mr. Dudley to the department of the customs, the following report
was received by the commissioners from the surveyor of the port of Liverpool, under date of the 23th of June:
Liverpool, June 28,1862.
Sir: I most respectfully beg to report that the vessel to which these papers refer
has not escaped the notice of the customs officers, but, as yet, nothing has transpired
concerning her which appeared to demand a special report.
. The officers have at all times free access to the building-yards of the Messrs. Laird,
at Birkenhead, where the said vessel is now lying, and there has been no attempt on
the part of her«builders to disguise what is most apparent to all—that she is intended
for a ship of war.
Agreeably with your directions, I have person ally'inspected her, and find that she is
rightly described in the communication of the United States consul, except that her
engines are not on the oscillating principle. Her dimensions are as follows : length,
211 feet 6 inches; breadth, 31 feet 8 inches ; depth, 17 feet 8 inches, and her gross tonnage, by the present rule of admeasurement, is 682 fy-g tons.
She has several powder-canisters on board, but neither guns nor carriages as yet.
The current report of that, vessel is that she has been built for a foreign government, and that is not denied by the Messrs. Laird, with whom I have communicated
upon the subject, but they do not appear disposed to reply to any questions with reference to the destination of the vessel after she leaves this port, and we have no other
reliable source of information.
It will be in your recollection that the current report of the gun-boat Oreto was,
jjthat she had been built for a foreign government, which vessel recently left this port
under a British flag, without any guns or ammunition on board, as previously reported.
I beg to add that any further information that may be obtained concerning the vessel referred to will be immediately reported, agreeably with your directions.
Very respectfully,
E. MORGAN, Surveyor.3
The reports carrying the case no further, the solicitor of the customs
advised the Board:
At present there is not sufficient to show that the vessel in question falls within
the provisions of the seventh section of the foreign-enlistment act, or to give the
board of officers of this revenue power to interfere in this case. The officers at Liverpool have acted discreetly in keeping a watch upon her, and should continue to do so,
immediately reporting to the board any circumstances that they may consider to call
for directions, or advisable to bring under the board's notice; but the officers ought
not to move in the matter without the clearest evidence of a distinct violation of the
foreign-enlistment act, nor unless at a moment of great emergency, the terms of the
act being extremely technical and the requirements as to intent being very rigid. It
may be that the ship, having regard to her cargo as contraband of war, might be
unquestionably liable to capture and condemnation, yet not liable to detention under
the foreign-enlistment act, and the seizors might entail upon themselves very serious
consequences.
F. J. HAMEL.
June 30,1862.
29 B
1 British Appendix, vol
- Ibid., p. 366.
3 Ibid., p. 183.
4 Ibid., p. 183.
i;450
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
The Commissioners of Customs concurred in opinion with their legal
adviser.   In their report to the lords of the treasury, they add:
With reference to the statement of the United States consul, that the evidence he
has in regard to this vessel being intended for the so-called confederate government in
the Southern States is entirely conclusive to his mind, we would observe that, inasmuch as the officers of customs of Liverpool would not be justified in taking any steps
against the vessel unless sufficient evidence to warrant her detention should be laid
before them, the proper course would be for the consul to submit such evidence as he
possesses to the collector at that port, who would thereupon take such measures as the
provisions of the foreign-enlistmefnt act would require. Without the production of
full and sufficient evidence to justS" their proceedings, the seizing officers might entail
on themselves and on the government very serious consequences.[
In forwarding these reports to Mr. Adams, Earl Bussell, in a note of
the 7th July to Mr. Adams, suggests to Mr. Adams " to instruct the
United States Consul at Liverpool to submit to the collector of customs
at that port such evidence as he may possess tending to show that his
suspicions as to the destination of the vessel in question were well
founded.2
Mr. Adams accordingly wrote to Mr. Wilding, the American Yice-Con-
sul at Liverpool, inclosing a copy of Earl Bussell's note, requesting him
to " communicate as soon as may be any evidence which he could readily
command in aid of the object designated."
Beferring to the requisition thus made, Mr. Dudley, in a dispatch to
Mr. Seward of the 9th July, writes:
I do not think the British Government are traating us properly in this matter. They
are not dealing with us as one friendly nation ought to deal with another. When I, as
the agent of my Government, tell them, from evidence submitted to me, that I have no
doubt about her character, they ought to accept thffl until the parties who are building
her, and who have it in their power to show if her destination and purpose are legitimate and honest, do so. It is a very easy matter for the Messrs. Laird & Co. to
show for whom they are building her, and to give silch information as to her purpose
as to be satisfactory to all parties. The burden of proof ought not to be thrown upon
us. In a hostile community like this it is very difficult to get information at any timejj
upon these matters, and if names are to be given it would render it almost impossible.
The government ought to investigate it, and not call on us for proof.
Notwithstanding the view thus expressed that his belief as to her destination was sufficient to call for the seizure of the vessel, Mr. Dudley,
on the same day, addressed the following communication to the Collector
of Customs:
Liverpool, July 9, 1862.
Sir: In accordance with a suggestion of Earl Russell iu a communication to Mr-
Adams, the American minister in London, I beg to lay before you the information and
circumstances which have come to my knowledge relative to the gun-boat now being
fitted out. by Messrs. Laird, at Birkenhead, for the confederates of the Southern United
States of America, and intended to be used as a privateer against the United States.
On my arrival, aud taking charge of the Consulate at Liverpool in November last,
my attention was called by the Acting-Consul and by other persons to two gun-boats
being or to be fitted out for the so-called Confederate Government: the Oreto, fitted out
by Mr. Miller and Messrs. Fawcett, Preston & Co., and the one now in question. Subsequent events fully proved the suspicion with regard to the Oreto to be well founded;
she cleared from Liverpool in March last for Palermo and Jamaica, but sailed direct
for Nassau, where she now is receiving her armament as a privateer for the so-called
confederate government; and my attention was called repeatedly to the gun-boat building by Mr. Laird by various persons, who stated that she also was for a confederate
privateer, and was being built by the Messrs. Lairds for that express purpose.
In May last two officers of the southern privateer Sumter, named Caddy and Beaufort, passed through Liverpool ou their way to Havana and Nassau, and while here
stated that there was a gun-boat building by Mr.'Laird, at Birkenhead, for the Southern
C mfederacy; and not long after that a foreman employed about the vessel in Mr. Laird's
1 British Appendix, p. 182.
2 Ibid., p. 184.
3 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 382. ,OPINIONS   OF .SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
451
yard stated that she was the sister of the Oreto, and intended for the same service, and
when pressed for an explanation further stated that she was to be a- privateer for the
Southern Government in the United States.
When the vessel was first tried, Mr. Wellsman, one of the firm of Fraser, Trenholm
& Co., (who>are well known as agents for the confederate government,) Andrew and
Thomas Byrne, and other persons, well known as having been for months actively engaged in sending munitions of war for said government, were present, and have accompanied her on her various trials, as they had accompanied the Oreto on her trial trip and
on her departure.
In April last, the southern screw-steamer Annie Childs, which had run the blockade
out of Charleston, and the name of which was changed at this port to the Julia Usher,
was laden with munitions of war, consisting of a large quantity of powder, rifled
cannon,' &c, by Messrs. Fraser, Trenholm & Co. for the southern confederacy, and left
Liverpool to run the blockade under the command of a Captain Hammer, and having
on board several of the crew of the privateer Sumter, to which I have before referred.
For some reason unknown, this vessel came back and is now here. Since her return
a youth named Robinson, who had gone in her as a passenger, has stated that the gunboat building at Lairds' for the Southern Confederacy was a subject of frequent conversation among the officers while she (the Julia Usher) was out. That she was all the
time spoken of as a confederate vessel; that Captain Bullock- was to command her;
that the money for her was advanced by Fraser, Trenholm &. Co.; that she was not to
make any attempt to run the blockade, but would go at once as a privateer; that she
was to mount eleven guns; aud that if the Julia Usher was not going, the six men from
the Sumter, who were on board the Julia Usher, were to joiu the gun-boat. This youth,
being a native of New Orleans, was extremely anxious to get taken on board the gunboat, and wished the person he made the communication to, to assist him and see
Captain Bullock on his behalf. He has, I understand, been removed to a school in London. With reference to his statement, I may observe that Captain Hammer referred
to is'a South Carolinian, has been for many years in Fraser, Trenholm & Co.'s employ,
is greatly trusted by them, and is also intimate with Captain Bullock, so that he would
he likely to be well informed on the subject; and as he had no notion at that time of returning to Liverpool, he would have no hesitation in speaking of the matter to his officers, and the persons from the Sumter. I may also state that Captain Bullock referred
to is in Liverpool, that he is an officer of the Confederate Navy, that he was sent over
here for the express purpose of fitting out privateers and sending over munitions of
war; that he transacts his business at the office of Fraser, Trenholm & Co.; that he
has been all the time in communication with Fawcett, Preston & Co., who fitted out
the Oreto, and with Lairds', who are fitting out this vessel; that he goes almost daily
on board the gun-boat, and seems to be recognized as in authority.
A Mr. Blair, of Paradise street, in this town, who furnished the cabins of the Laird
gun-boat, has also stated that all the fittings and furniture were selected by Captain
Bullock, and were subject to his approval, although paid for by Mr. Laird.
The information on which I have formed an undoubting conviction that this vessel
is being fitted out for the so-called Confederate Government, and is intended to cruise
against the commerce of the United States, has come to me from a variety of sources,
and I have detailed it to you as far as practicable. I have given you the names of
persons making the statements, but as the information in most cases is given to me by
persons out of friendly feeling to the United States, and in strict confidence, I cannot
state the names of my informants; but what I have stated is*of such a character that
little inquiry will confirm its truth.
Everything about the vessel shows her to be a war-vessel; she has well-constructed
magazines; she has a number of canisters of a peculiar and expensive construction for
containing powder; she has platforms already screwed to her decks for the reception
of swivel guns. Indeed, the fact that she is a war-vessel is not denied by Messrs.
Laird, but they say she is for the Spanish Government. This they stated on the 3d of
April last, when General Burgoyne visited their yard, and was shown over it and the
various vessels being built there by Messrs. John Laird, junior, and Henry H. Laird, as
was fully reported in the papers at the time.
Seeing the statement, and having been already informed from so. many respectable
sources that she was for the so-called Confederate Government, I at once wrote to the
minister in Loudon, to ascertain from the Spanish Embassy whether the statement was
true. The reply was a positive assurance that she was not for the Spanish Government.
1 am therefore authorized in saying that what was stated ou that occasion, as well as
statements since made that she is for the Spanish government, are untrue.
I am satisfied beyond a doubt that she is for a Confederate war-vessel.
If you desire any personal explanation or information, I shall be happy to attend
yon whenever-you may request it.'
Of the statements contained in the foregoing letter the greater part452
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
could not have been made available in an English court. For the reasons I have already mentioned, the loose statements made to Mr. Dudley
by persons unnamed; the unauthorized statements of Caddy and Beaufort, on their way through Liverpool; the loose conversations and equally
unauthorized statements of the officers on board the Annie Childs, reported by the youth Bobinson, who had been removed to a school in
London, nobody knew where, would all have been inadmissible according to English procedure. The fact that particular persons, supposed to
be connected with the Confederates, had gone out in the vessel on her
trial trip was equally worthless. But there were other facts which were
of a different stamp and deserved more attention than they appear to
have received.
The Collector returned for answer that he should immediately submit
Mr. Dudley's communication to the London board, adding, however, his
own opinion that the statement made by that gentleman | was not such
as could be acted upon by the officers of the revenue, unless legally
substantiated by evidence."] Forwarding Mr. Dudley's communication
to the board of customs, Mr. Edwards incloses a report from Mr. Morgan, the surveyor, saying that he has inspected the steamer; that she
is in the same state as regards her armament as on the date of his former report, having no guns or carriages on board, nor were her platforms fitted to the deck. " If," says Mr. Edwards,""she is for the Confederate service, the builders and parties interested are not likely to
commit themselves by any act which would subject them to the penal
provisions of the foreign-enlistment act."2
The solicitor of the customs adopted the views of the Collector,"and
thus advised the Board:
There is only one proper way of looking at this question. If the Collector of Customs were to detain the yessel iu question, he would no doubt have to maintain the
seizure by legal evidence in a court of law, and to pay damages and costs in case of
failure. Upon carefully reading'the statement, I find that the greater part, if not all,
is hearsay and inadmissible, and as to a part the witnesses are not forthcoming or even
to be named. It is perfectly clear to my mind that there is nothing in it amounting to
prima-facie proof sufficient to justify a seizure, much less to support it in a court of
law, and the consul could not expect the collector to take upon himself such a risk in
opposition to rules and principles by which the Crown is governed in matters of this
nature.
F. J. HAMEL.1
July 11, 1862.
Acting on this advice, the Commissioners of the Customs acquainted
'Mr. Edwards that there did not appear to be prima-facie proof in the
statement of the Consul sufficient to justify the seizure of the vessel,
and directed him to apprise the consul accordingly.
This having been communicated to Mr. Dudley, we find him writing
to Mr. Adams on the 11th of July:
The Collector seems disposed to hold our Government to as strict a rule as if we were
in a court of justice. We are required to furnish legal evidence—I take it this is his
meaning, though it is involved in some obscurity—thatv is, that the onus is upon Us
to prove and establish by legal evidence that this vessel is intended as a private(er. If
this is to be taken as the answer of the government, it is hardly worth spending our
time in making further application to them. They show that their neutrality is a mere
pretense, and that the United States cannot expect, anything like impartiality and fairness at their hands.
When the United States Government, through its acknowledged representatives, say
to the British government that it is satisfied that a particular vessel, which is. being
built at a certain place in the kingdom by cermin parties who are their own subjects,
British Appendix, vol. i, p. 186.
■ Ibid., p. 184.
British Appendix, vol. vi, p. 187.OPINIONS*0F   SIR. ALEXANDI
is intended as a privateer for the rebel Government, it is the duty of that Government
to call upon the parties who are fitting out the vessel, to tell them what the-charge is,
and require them to state for whom and what purpose she is being built, and if the
charge is admitted or shown to be true, to stop her sailing. Our Government has a
.right, it seems to me, not only to expect but to require this much of another friendly
government. And if there was any disposition to do right and act honestly, this much..
at least would be accorded.    I inclose a description of the inside of this vessel.1
The pretension thus put forward by Mr. Dudley, in this and in his
former letter, that as soon as the agent of a foreign state declares his
conviction that a vessel is being built for another belligerent, it becomes
the duty of the neutral government to call on the parties engaged in
building her to show that her destination is lawful, and if they do not
do so, to seize her, is one which cannot be admitted. It proceeds on an
entirely mistaken notion of the powers of a Constitutional government in
a free state. As I have already pointed out, by the then existing law of
Great Britain, as by that of America, a vessel could only be seized with
a view to its being brought forthwith into aj|f3ompetent court, with a
view to its condemnation; nor could the Government call on the parties
interested in the vessel to show that the purpose for which she was being built was a lawful one, till they had made out in a Court of Justice
at least a sufficient prima-facie case to call upon these parties for an
answer.
But it is a very different thing to say that when persons capable of
giving evidence are expressly named, and sources of information are
pointed out from which the truth may be ascertained, the authorities
are to sit with their arms folded, and do nothing toward satisfying themselves whether a vessel is one the unlawful purpose of which it is their
duty to frustrate by seizure; and although the British government had
no power to insist compulsorily on explanations being given by shipbuilders as to the destination of a particular vessel, yet I can see no
reason why, in a case of suspicion, official application might not be
made to the builders to relieve the government from its embarrassment by stating for whom the vessel was being built. If an answer
were given to such an application, its truth could generally be tested.
If all explanation were refused, or if that which was given turned out
on inquiry to be untrue, the evidence against the vessel would become
strongly confirmed. It is true the builders of this vessel appear to have
been very shy of answering inquiries about her, but I do not find that
any inquiry of an official character was ever addressed to Messrs. Laird.
If it had been, the high character of these gentlemen would doubtless
have insured either a refusal to answer or a truthful answer. The former
would have helped materially to establish a case against the vessel, the
latter would have justified her immediate seizure.
But beside the omission to make any official inquiry of the builders,
no attempt appears to have been made to utilize the reference to persons specified by Mr. Dudley, a subject to which I shall return presently^
Under these circumstances Mr. Adams hit on the happy idea of employing a solicitor to get up the case in a business-like manner; and a
Mr. Squarey, an active solicitor of Liverpool, was retained for the prosecution. This gentleman, in spite of difficulties, soon succeeded in discovering evidence. 1 The difficulty we have had to contend with," writes
Mr. Dudley to Mr. Seward, j was to get direct proof. There were men
enough who knew about her, and who understood her character, but
they were not willing to testify, and in a preliminary proceeding like this
it was impossible to obtain process to compel them. Indeed, no one in
a hostile community like Liverpool, where the feeling and sentiment are454
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
against us, wouM be a willing witness, especially if he resided there,
and was in iM.j way dependent on the people of that place for a livelihood."1 All this no doubt was true, but then it should not be forgotten
that exactly the same difficulty, arising both from the unwillingness of
the witnesses to come forward and the absence of process to compel
them, stood in the way of the local authorities just as much as it did in
that of Mr. Dudley and Mr. Sqnarey.
On the 21st of July, however, Mr. Dudley with his solicitor waited
on Mr. Edwards with six depositions, one of which, that of a man named
Passmore, went directly to the^ point to show that the vessel was intended for the Confederate service. It wHs shown by the affidavit of an
Sp||cled clerk of Mr. SquareylMlilit he had examined the Birkenhead
dock-maiiifer's book, and found an entry relating to a screw steamer, No.
290, the number of the vessel in question, of the registered tonnage of
500 tons, from which entry it appeared that the name of her master was
Matthew J. Butcher.
Then Passmore deposed as follows:
I, William Passmore, of Birkenhead, in the county of Chester, mariner, make oath
and say as foUows :
1. I am a seaman, and have served as such on board Her Majesty's ship Terrible during
the Crimean war.
2. Having been informed that bands were wanted for a»fighting-vessel built by
Messrs. Laird & Co., of Birkenhead, I applied on Saturday, which was, I believe, the
21st day of June last, to Captain Butcher, who, I was informed, was engaging men for
the said vessel, for a berth on board her."
3. Captain Butcher asked me if I knew where the vessel was going, in reply to which
I told him I did not rightly understand about it. He then told me the vessel was going
out to the Government of the Confederate States of America. I asked him if there
would be any fighting, to which he replied, yes, they were going to fight.for the Southern
Government. I told him I h^d been used to fighting-vessels, and showed him my
papers. I asked him to make me signalman on board the vessel, and, in reply, he said
that no articles would be signed until the vessel got outside, but he would make me
signalman, if they required one, when they got outside.
4. The said Captain Butcher then engageqSae as an able seaman on board the same
vessel, at the wages of £4 10s. per month; and it was arranged that I should join the
ship in Messrs. Laird & Co.'s yard on the foUowing Monday. To enable me to get on
board, Captain Butcher.gave me a password, the number " 290."
5. On the following Monday, which was, I believe, the 23d of June last, I joined the
said vessel in Messrs. Laird & Co.'s yard at Birkenhead, and I remained by her till
Saturday last.
6. The said vessel is a screw-steamer of about 1,100 tons burthen, as far as I can judge,
and is built and fitted up as a fighting-ship in all respects; she has a magazine and
shot and canister racks on deck, and is pierced for guns, the sockets for the bolts of
which are laid down. The said vessel has a large quantity of stores and provisions on
board, and she is now lying at the Victoria Wharf in the great float at Birkenhead,
where she has taken in ab6ut 300 tons of coal.
7. There are now about thirty hands on board her, who have been engaged to go out
iu her. Most of them are men who have previously served on board fighting-ships :
and one of them is a man who served on board the Confederate steamer Sumter. It is
well known by the hands on board that the vessel is going out as a privateer for the
Confederate Government to act against the United States under a commission from Mr.
Jefferson Davis. Three of the crew are, I believe, engineers; and there are also some
firemen on board.
8. Captain Butcher and another gentleman have been on board the ship almost every
day. It is reported on board the ship that Captain Butcher is to be the sailing-master,
and that the other gentleman, whose name, I believe, is Bullock, is to be the fighting
captain.
9. To the best of my information and belief, the above-mentioned vessel, which I
have heard is to be called the Florida, is being equipped and fitted out, in order that
she may be employed in the service of the Confederate Government in America, to cruise
1 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 390.OPINIONS ?OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
455
and to commit hostilities against the Government and people of the United States of
WILLIAM PASSMORE.
Sworn before me at the custom-house, Liverpool, this 21st day of July, 1862.
S. PRICE EDWARDS,
Collector.1
Thus it appeared that the registered captain of the vessel, and who
was in charge of her, had actually engaged a seaman expressly for the
service of the Confederate States. The other depositions went strongly
to show that Captain Bullock was the agent of the Confederate Government ; that he had superintended the building of the vessel; selecting
the timber to^be used for her, and directing and giving orders to the
workmen; and, this being so, that he had proposed to one Brogan, an
apprentice in the ship-building yard of Messrs. Laird & Co., to enter as
carpenter's mate on board the vessel.
Ebw, if this evidence could be relied on, it established a strong case
against the vessel, and afforded sufficient reason for seizing her. I by
no means go the length of saying that a public prosecutor is bound to
accept as trustworthy evidence the statements of witnesses furnished to
him Wy a party interested, till he has had an opportunity of satisfying
himself that the evidence is deserving of credit. But here the officer
whose business it was neither acted nor inquired. He made no inquiry
in the first instance of the workman in Messrs. Laird's yard, who appears to have been willing to speak. The important statement that it
had been represented to General Burgoyne, when visiting the yard, that
the vessel was being built for the Spanish government, while the Spanish
minister in Loudon denied the fact, was not followed up. When the
evidence of Passmore and Brogan was brought before him, he took no
trouble to communicate with these witnesses with the view of satisfying
himself of the truth of their statements.
The blame of this inaction, however, attaches rather to those under
whose direction Mr. Edwards •proceeded than to himself. He cannot,
I think, be justly blamed for having sought for and acted under the
directions of his superiors in Loadon in an affair of so much importance.
The legal advisers of the Customs Department of the Government did
not see in the evidence submitted to them sufficient to justify the seizure
of the ship.   The assistant solicitor reports as follows:
In my opinion there is not sufficient evidence in this case to justify the detention of
the vessel under the 59 George III, c. 69. The only affidavit that professes to give
anything like positive evidence is that of the seaman Passmore; but, assuming all he
states to be true, what occurred between the reputed master (Butcher) and himseB?
would not warrant a detention under section 6, nor support an information for the penalty under that section. Nor do I think, however probable it may seem that the vessel is fitted out for the military operations mentioned, that sufficient evidence has been
adduced to entitle the applicants to the interference of the Collector of Customs at Liverpool. The only justifiable grounds of seizure under section 7 of the act would be the
production of such evidence of the fact as would support an indictment for the misdemeanor under that section.
J. O'DOWD.3
Customs, July 22,1862.
This report of the assistant solicitor was upheld by his principal:
I entirely Concur with Mr. O'Dowd in opinion that there is not sufficient evidence to
warrant the seizure or detention of the ship by the officers of customs.   There appears
1 Appendix to British Case, vol. i, p. 189.
s Appendix to United States Case, vol. i, p. 192.
JJ456
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
to be some evidenco of enlistment of individuals, and if that were sufficient to satisfy
a court, they would be liable to pecuniary penalties, for security of which, if recovered,
the customs might detajpjthe ship until*those.penalties were satisfied or good b ail given ;■
but there is not evidence enough of enlistment to call upon the customs to prosecute.
The'United States Consul'or any other person may do so at their own risk, if they
see fit.
F. J. HAMEL.1
' Jcxy 22, 1862.
The commissioners adopted the views of their advisers, and on the
22d of July reported to the Lords of the Treasury accordingly, but
accompanied their report with the very proper suggestion that should
their lordships entertain any doubt upon the subject, the jljinion of the
Law-Officers should be taken. The papers were forwarded by the Treasury to the foreign office without a moment's delay, in order that the
opinion of Lord Bussell might be taken, as appears from a note from
the secretary of the treasury to the under secretary of state for foreign
affairs:
Treasury, _r_|| 22,1862.
My Dear.Mr. Layard : As the communication may be considered pressing, I send
it to you unofficially to save time.   Perhaps you will ascertain from Lord Russell
whether it is his wish that we should take the opinion of the law-officers as to tiie case
of this vessel.   It is stated that she is nearly ready for sea.
Sincerely yours,
GEO. A/ HAMILTON.2
The depositions of Passmore and the others were transmitted also by
Mr. Adams, to Earl Bussell, with the accompanying note :
Legation op the Uhited States,
London$mly 22,1862.
My Lord : I have the honor to transmit copies of six depositions taken at Liverpool,,
tending to establish the character aud destination of the vessel to which I called your
lordship's attention in' my note of the 23d of June last.
The originals of these papers have already been submitted to the collector of the
customs at that port, in accordance with the suggestions made in your lordship's note
to me of the 4th of July, as the basis of an application to him to act under the powers
conferred by the enlistment act. But I feel it to Mb my duty further to communicate the
facts as there alleged to Her Majesty's government, and to request that such further
proceedings may be had as may carry into full effect the determination which I doubt
not it ever entertains to prevent, by all lawful means, the fitting out of hostile expeditions against the government of a country with which it is at peace.
I avail, &c,
CHARLES FRANCIS ADAMS.3
The papers were submitted to the law-officers on the 23d, with a request for their answer at their earliest convenience.
In the mean time Mr. Squarey had procured two 'other important
depositions: the one that of a ship's carpenter, named Boberts, who-
stated that he had been engaged as carpenter's mate on board this vessel, and had seen Captain Butcher by appointment, and that Captain*
Butcher had spoken to the boatswain about him ; and that it Was generally understood on board of the vessel that she was going to Nassau
for the southern government;4 the other au affidavit of Bobert John
Taylor, which was still more to the purpose. This man, an Englishman,
by birth, but living at Mobile, had been captured in attempting to run
the blockade, and was now desirous of taking jjlijrvice, whereby to get
back to Mobile.   The material part of his statement was as follows :
Mr. Rickarby, of Liverpool, a brother of the owner, at Mobile, of the vessel in which
I was captured when attempting to run the blockade, gave me instructions to go to»
1 Appendix to United States Case, vol. i, p. 193.
3 Ibid., p. 188.
3 Appendix to British Case, vol. i, p. 193.
4 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 159.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
457
Captain Butcher, at Laird's yard, Birkenhead. I had previously called 'on Mr. Rick-
arby, and told him that I wanted to go South, as the Northerners had robbed me of
my clothes when I was captured, and I wanted to have satisfaction.
I first saw Captain Butcher at one of Mr. Laird's offices last Thursday fortnight,
(namely, the 3d of July last.) I told him that I had been sent by Mr. Rlckarby, and
asked him if he were the captain of the vessel which was lying in the dock. I told
him that I was one of the men that had been captured in one of Mr. Rickarby's vessels',
S and that I wanted to get South in order to have retaliation of the Northerners for robbing me of my clothes. He said that if I went with him in his vessel I should very
shortly have that opportunity.
Captain Butcher asked me at the interview if I was well acquainted with the Gulf
ports, and I told him I was. I asked him what port he was going to, and he replied
that he could not tell me then, hn't that there would be au agreement made before we
left for sea. I inquired as to the rate of wages, and I was to get £4 10s. per mouth,
payable weekly.
I then inquired if I might consider myself engaged, and he replied, yes, and that I
might go'on board the next day, which I accordingly did; and I have been working
on board up to last Saturday night.-1
These depositions were' properly forwarded by Mr.. Squarey to Mr.
Gardner, the secretary to the board of customs, together with an opiu-
. ion which had been given by Mr., now Sir Bobert, Collier, on the whole
case, and which, was in these terms:
I have perused the above affidavits, and I am of opinion that the collector of customs
would be justified in detaining the vessel. Indeed, I should think it his duty to detain her; and that if, after the application which has been made to him, supported by
the evidence which has been laid before me, he allows the vessel to leave Liverpool,
he will incur a heavy responsibility—a responsibility of which the board of customs,
under whose directions he appears to be acting, must take their share.
It appears difficult to make out a stronger case of infringement of the foreign-enlistment act, which, if not enforced on this occasion, is little better than a dead letter.
It well deserves consideration whether, if the vessel be allowed to escape, the Federal Government would not have serious grounds of remonstrance.
R. P. COLLIER.2
Temple, July 23, 1862.
iSTotwithstanding this additional evidence, and the decided opinion .of
Mr. Collier, strange to say, the assistant solicitor to the customs remained unshaken in his opinion.   He reports on the 23d :
I have read the additional evidence, and I do not think that it materially strengthens
the case of the applicants. As regards the opinion of Mr. Collier, I cannot concur in
his views; but, adverting to the high character which he bears in his profession, I
submit that the board might act judiciously in recommending the lords of the treasury
to take the opinion of the law-officers of the Crown.
J. O'DOWD.3
July 23,1862.
These papers were immediately submitted to the law-officers.
On the 25th of July came a further affidavit from Mr. Squarey, that
of a man named Bedden, who deposed as follows :
I am a seaman, and have followed the sea for fifteen years. I have been boatswain
onboard both steamers and sailing-vessels, and belong to the naval reserve.
About six weeks ago I was engaged by Captain Butcher, (with whom I had previ-'
ously sailed,) as boatswain on board a vessel then in Messrs. Laird & Co.'s ship-building
yard, but now lying in the Birkenhead float, and known by the name of No. 290. The
said Captain Butcher offered me £10 per month, and said an agreement should be
signed when we got outside. He told me that we should have plenty of money when
we got home, as we were going to the Southern States on a speculation to try and get
some.
The crew now on board the said vessel consists of about forty men, but I believe that
■ she wiU take to sea about one hundred men, aU told.  It is generally understood on board
that she will clear for Nassau, but not make that port.     The said vessel has all her
stores and coals on board ready for sea.     She is fitted in all respects as a man-of-war,
to carry six broadside-guns and four pivots, but has no guns or ammunition on board
1 British Appendix, p. 196.
2 Ibirl.
3 British Appendix, vol. i, p.
197mij«. ..   *4
458
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
as yet.    The rules on board are similar to those in use on a man-of-war, and the men ■'
are not allowed to sing as they do on a merchantman.     The call is used ou board.
The said vessel is of about 1,100 tons burthen.
I know Captain BnUock. He has been superintending the building of the said vessel
in Messrs. Laird & Co.'s yard, and is, I believe, to take charge of the vessel when We
get outside.
It is generally understood on board the said vessel'that she belongs to the confederate government.
HENRY REDDEN.'
Nevertheless, Mr. O'Dowd still clings to his opinion with the pertinacity with which men sometimes persist in adhering to an opinion
once formed.   He says:
I submit a reference to my former reports, to the opinions expressed in which I feel still
bound to adhere. So far from giving additional force to the application, the affidavit
of Henry Redden appears to me to weaken it, as, after the lapse of several days, since the
date of the former affidavits, the applicantsare confessedly unable to make out a better
justification for detaining the vessel. It is, no doubt, difficult to procure satisfactory
evidence in such a case; but, in the absence of at least a clear prima-facie case, there
cannot exist those grounds for detaining the vessel which tbe foreign-enlistment act
contemplates.
J. O'DOWD.^
Customs, July 25,1862.
There was, however, abundant evidence to make out a prima-facie
case, and of that opinion were the law-officers of the Crown, who, on the.
29th of July, reported as follows:
In our opinion, the evidence of the witnesses who have made depositions, (we allude
particularly to William Passmore, Edward Roberts, Robert John Taylor, and Henry Redden,) coupled with the character and structure of the vessel, makes it reasonably clear
that such vessel is intended for warlike use against citizens of the United States and
in the interest of the (so-called) Confederate States. It is not, and cannot, be denied
that the vessel is constructed and adapted as a vessel of war, being pierced, for guns,
the sockets for the bolts of which, Passmore states, are already laid down, and having a
magazine, and shot and canister racks on the deck, and a certain number of canisters being actually on board. It is also stated in the report of the commissioners of customs
of July 1st that Messrs. Laird, the builders, do not deny that the vessel has been built
for some "foreign government," although they maintain, apparently, a strict reserve
as to her actual destination, and as to the "foreign government" in particular for
whose service she is intend .d. We do not overlook the facts that neither guns nor
ammunition have as yet heen shipped; that the cargo, (though of the nature of naval
stores in connection with war-steamers,) may yet be classed as a mercantile cargo ; and
that the crew do not appear to have been, in terms and form at least, recruited or en-
roUed as a military crew. It is to be expected that great stress will be laid upon these
circumstances by the owners and others who may oppose the condemnation of the
vessel if seized by the officers of the customs; and an argument may be raised as to
the proper construction of the words which occur in the seventh section of the foreign-
enlistment act, " equip, furnish, fit out, or arm," which words, it may be suggested,
point only to the rendering a vessel, whatever may be the character of its structure,
presently fit to engage in hostilities. We think, however, that such a narrow construction ought not to be adopted; and, if allowed, would fritter away the act, and
give impunity to open and flagrant violations of its provisions. We, therefore, recommend that without loss of time the vessel be seized by the proper authorities, after
which au opportunity will be afforded to those interested, previous to condemnation to
alter the facts, if it may be, and to show an innocent destination of the ship. In the
absence of any such countervailing case it appears to us that the vessel, cargo, and
stores may be properly condemned.3
Unfortunately, the report of the law-officers came too late. Before
the necessary orders to seize the vessel could be issued, a telegraphic
message from Liverpool announced that she had gone out of dock the
night before, (the 28th,) and had left the port that morning, (the 29th.)
She left under the pretense of making a trial trip, but stood out to sea,
and never returned.
".British Appendix, vol. i, p.
2 Ibid., p. 199.
3Ibid., p. 201.
19:\m
OPINIONS   OF   SIR   ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
459
Upon these facts it appears to me impossible to say that in respect of
this vessel there was not au absence of 1 due diligence" on the part of
the British authorities. The delay which occurred, in the furnishing of
the report of the law-officers is no doubt to be attributed to the illness
of the Queen's advocate, referred to in the case of the United States—
an illness unhappily affecting his mental faculties, and which necessitated his entire withdrawal from public life. As senior in standing of
the law-officers, the papers would be sent to him in the first instance.
From a letter from Mr. Adams to Mr. Seward, of the 1st of August,
1862, it appears that, in the interview had by the former with Lord
Bussell, on the previous day, Lord Bussell had explained to him that a
delay in determining on the course to be taken with respect to the Ala-
barnaT|ad most unexpectedly been caused by the sudden development
of a malady of the Queen's advocate, Sir John Harding, totally incapacitating him for the transaction of business, and that this had made it
necessary to call in other parties, whose opinion had been at last given
for the detention of the gun-boat.1 Upon this, it is observed in the
argument of the United States, that no opinion of the law-officers was
signed by the Queen's advocate after the 30th of June, whence, it is
said, the United States infer that that officer | was unable to attend to
his duties as early as that date," and, it is added with an ungenerous
sneer, " they infer ttmt it was not necessary to call in new parties, but
to call upon the old."2 The unworthy insinuation here meant to be
conveyed is that Lord Bussell stated that which was untrue—an insinuation which will be treated as it deserves by every one who knows him.
It is obvious that Mr. Adams must, in this particular, have misunderstood his lordship. The accompanying explanation of the circumstances
attending the delay in the deliyery of the opinion of the law-officers on
the occasion in question has been handed to the tribunal by Sir Boundell Palmer, and is beyond doubt the true explanation:
Sir John Harding was ill from the latter part of Junq, 1862, and did not, after that
time, attend to government business. It was not, however, known, till some weeks
afterward, that he was unlikely to recover; nor did the disorder undergo, till the end
of July, such a development as to make the government aware that the case was one
of permanent mental alienation.
Although, when a law-officer was ill, he would not be troubled with ordinary business, it was quite consistent with probability and experience that, in a case of more
than usual importance, if would be desired, if possible, to obtain the benefit of his
opinion. Under such circumstances, the papers would-naturaUy be sent to his private
house; and if this was done, and if he was unable to attend to them, some delay would
necessarily take place before the impossibility of his attending to them was known.
Lord Russell told Mr. Adams (31st July, 1862,) that some delay had, in fact, occurred
with respect to the Alabama, in consequence of Sir John Harding's illness. He could
not have made the statement, if the fact were not really so ; because, whatever the
fact was-, it must have been, at the time, known to him. The very circumstance, that
Sir J. Harding had not already advised upon the case in its earlier stage, might be a
reason why it should be wished to obtain his opinion.
Sir J. Harding and his wife are both (some years since) dead ; so are Sir W. Ather-
ton (the then attorney-general) and his wife; no information, therefore, as to the circumstances which may have caused delay, with respect to the delivery at their private
houses, dr the transmission and consideration of any papers on this subject, can now
be obtained from them.
The then solicitor-general was Sir R. Palmer, who is able to state positively that the
first time he saw or heard of the papers sent to the law-officers (i. e., all three law-
officers) on the 23d and 25th or 26th of July, was on the evening of Monday the 28th of
July, when he was summoned by the attorney-general, Sir W. Atherton, to consider
them in consultation, and when the advice to be given to the government was agreed
upon. Sir R. Palmer thinks it his duty to add, that no government ever had a more
diligent, conscientious, and laborious "servant than Sir W. Atherton ; and that it is in
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 201.
2 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 414.460
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
the last degree unlikely that he would have been guilty of any negligence or nnneces-
■ sary delay in the consideration of papers of such importance.
As I think that a government, in the habit, according to its constitutional practice, of consulting its legal advisers before taking action
on matters of importance, would be entitled to reasonable time for doing
so on such an occasion as this, and would not be liable for delay occasioned by an unforejfeeh accident, I should not have been prepared to
say, had the delay in the report of the law-officers thus arising been the
sole cause of the delay in ordering the seizure of this vessel, that a delay arising from such an accident could properly be attributed to a want
of | due diligence" in the government. The want of i due diligence,"
on which my judgment in respect of the Alabama rests, is to be found
further back. I entirely agree with Sir Bobert Collier that it was the
duty of the collector of customs at Liverpool, as "early as the 22d of July,
to detain this vessel. When for his better guidance and protection the
collector sought the directions of his superiors—for which I can scarcely
blame him, although the case appeared clear enough—it became, in my
opinion, the duty of the commissioners of customs at once to direct the
seizure to be made. Misled by advice which they ought to have rejected as palpably erroneous, they unfortunately refused to cause the
vessel to be seized. The matter properly belonged to their department;
it was competent to them to act independently of any other department
of the state; and the case, as it seems to me, was too clear to require
the opinion of the law-officers, although, after the decision of the commissioners, it might well be deemed proper on the part of the heads of.
the government to consult the law-officers before acting in opposition
to it.
At the same time, I must not be understood as holding that a mere
error in judgment amounts to negligence. Questions present themselves
in the business of life so difficult of decision that the wisest and the
ablest men are apt to err in respect of them. Sumanum est errare. In
such cases the question must always be one of degree. But here I cannot help thinking that the mistake was such as to carry with it legal
responsibility as its consequence. I readily admit that, iu a case
of doubt, a public department may properly act on the advice of its
constitutional advisers, and would not be liable to the imputation of
negligence if that advice should turn out to be unsound. But here I
think there was no room for doubt. My judgment is founded on the
view that the course to be taken was plain and unmistakable, but unfortunately was not pursued; and that there was consequently an absence of the due diligence which ought to have been exercised.
The vessel having thus escaped through want of due diligence in that
department of the government to which it specially appertained to
seize her, the entire British government, and through them the British
people, become, as it appears to me, by necessary consequence, involved
in_ a common liability. But how far, considering the fact that, while
the British government was desirous of doing its duty in respect of this
vessel, the escape of it was, in the event, practically speaking, the result
of an unfortunate and unforeseen accident, the tribunal should award'
to the United States damages to the full extent demanded, as though
the result had arisen from negligence alone, is a question which may
deserve serious consideration.
But it belongs rather to a different department of our labors, and I
will reserve it till we enter thereupon.
After leaving Liv-     But, I am sorry to say, the charge of want of diligence
erpooi. jn respect of this vessel does not stop with the fact of her
escape.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN
On the morning: of th(
30th of July, a
letter of the 29th, from Mr
Squarey's firm, informed the commissioners of customs that the vessel
had come out of dock the night before, and had steamed down the river
between ten and eleven that morning, as the writers had reason to believe, on her way to Queenstown.1 At that time, indeed, the commissioners of customs were under the belief that there were not sufficient
grounds for detaining the vessel. It was, therefore, not to be expected,
that ou being informed she had left the Mersey and gone to Queenstown,
they should take any steps to seize her at the latter place. But on the
preceding day, the 29th, the opinion of the law-officers had been given
that the vessel should be seized. Had that opinion been at once communicated to the customs, as the emergency of the case required, and the
•commissioners had themselves immediately telegraphed to the collector at
Liverpool, as itwouldhave been their duty to do, desiring him to ascertain
where the ship was, and if possible to follow and seize her, there would
still have been an opportunity of .stopping her; for it appears that she
first proceeded to Moelfra Bay, on the Welsh coast, a place about fifty
miles from Liverpool, and remained cruising off the coast. On the
afternoon of the 30th the tug Hercules left the Mersey, with thirty or
forty men, who were to form part of the ship's crew, and found her in
Moelfra Bay, where the two vessels lay alongside one another till midnight, and the war-steamer remained tilt 3 in the morning of the 31st.
On the morning of the 30th, prior to the Hercules leaving the river, the
•consul called in person upon the collector and informed him that the
tug was then in port, having returned from the Alabama the evening
before ; that she reported that the Alabama was cruising off Point Lynas,
and that she (the tug) was then taking on board.men aud equipments to
■"convey down to the gun-boat."2
The collector sent the surveyor to the. tug, and he reported that he
found a considerable number of persons on deck, 1 some of whom admitted that they were a portion of the crew and were going to join the gunboat." He also informed the collector that it was said she had cruised
off Point Lynas the night before.3
It is obvious that if a telegraphic communication had been sent to the
■collector at Liverpool, as, looking to the urgency of the case, it should
have been, he might, by followin
the Hercules, have found the steamer
in Moelfra Bay j and though in these waters, as being beyond his jurisdiction, he would have had no authority to seize her, he might have
called on the collector of customs at Beaumaris, a place eight miles off,
within whose jurisdiction she was, to take the necessary steps for doing
so. Knowing that she was off that part of the Welsh coast, he might also
have telegraphed from Liverpool, before leaving to follow the Hercules,
to the collector at Beaumaris to look out for the vessel, and, if possible,
to seize her.
Unfortunately, the report of the law-officers, though sent in on the
29th, was not communicated to the commissioners of customs till the
afternoon of the 31st, by which time the vessel was beyond the reach of
British jurisdiction. It followed the ordinary routine of official communication—was sent in to the foreign office, thence to the treasury, and
tbence to the department of the customs.4
It seems to me that the United States Government have also reason to
complain of the inactivity of the collector at this conjuncture in another
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 21W.
2 Ibid., p. 205.
3 Ibid., p. 201.
4 Ibid., p. 205.462
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
Arming off Terce
particular. When, in addition to the evidence which had passed through
his hands, the collector found that the vessel, having gone out ostensibly on a trial trip, did not return, but was lying off' the Welsh coast,
and that, instead of having shipped her crew at Liverpool, she was having them brought off to her by the Hercules, all doubt as to the real
character and destination of the ship should have been at an end; and
as he might fairly presume that the men had a knowledge of the service
on which they were entering, he ought not to have allowed the Hercules
to leave, (unless for the purpose of finding and seizing the war-steamer,)
seeing that, under the 6th section of the foreign-enlistment act, he had
power to seize the tug, as being about to take off to the steamer persons
who had unlawfully enlisted as part of her crew.
I must say I think the complaint of the United States of a want of
official activity at such a conjuncture by no means without foundation.
There is little more to be said on the subject of the Alabama. She
left England without her guns or munitions of war of any
kind. She received her armament, as we now know, off
Terceira, it having been conveyed to her in two vessels called the
Bahama and Agrippina, but without any knowledge whatever on the
part of the authorities that those vessels were leaving Liverpool for the
purpose. What is stated in the British counter case on this head appears to me strictly accurate:
The Alabama sailed from England wholly unarmed, and with a crew hired to work
the ship, and not enlisted for the confederate service. She received her armament at
a distance of more than 1,000 miles from England, and was armed for war, not within -
the Queen's dominions, but either in Portuguese waters or on the high seas. The guns
and ammunition, which were put on board of her oif Terceira, had been procured and
exported from England in an ordinary merchant-steamer, which loaded them as cargo
and sailed with a regular clearance for Nassau. The clearance and departure of this
steamer presented, so far as Her Majesty's government is aware, no circumstance distinguishing her from ordinary blockade-runners. No information was ever given or
representation made to the government as to this ship or her cargo before she left
British waters; nor does it appear that the errand on which she was employed was
known to or suspected by the officials of the" United States. Bnt, even had a
suspicion existed that her cargo was exported with the intention that it should be
used, either in the Confederate States or elsewhere, in arming a vessel which had been
unlawfully fitted in England for warlike employment, this would not have made it the
duty of the officers of customs to detain her, or have empowered them to do so. Such"-
a transaction is not. a breach of English law ; nor is it one which the British government was under any obligation to prevent. Whether the cargo was sent from the same
port as the ship, or from a different port, and by the same or different persons, is manifestly immaterial for this purpose. The distinction is plainly not such as to create in
the one case a duty which would not arise in the other. |
The armament was, however, prepared in England, and it was part
of the same scheme that the vessel having been "equipped," that is to
say prepared to receive her armament in England, should have her armament and crew sent out and put on board out of the Queen's dominions, for the purpose of immediate warfare. It is fairly open to contention that under such circumstances the whole should be regarded as one
armed hostile expedition issuing from a British port, or, at all events,
that the ulterior purpose of arming, though out of British jurisdiction,
gives to such an equipment of the vessel within the jurisdiction the
character of an equipment with intent to carry on war.
On the whole, I concur with the rest of the tribunal in thinking that
in respect of this vessel the liability of Great Britain, in respect of want
of due diligence, is established by the facts.
It would be unnecessary to pursue the history of the Alabama any
further, were it not that, in respect of her after-proceedings, imputa-
British Counter Case, p.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN
tions of insincere neutrality are cast upon British authorities,
these it becomes necessary to say a word.
The first port she put into after leaving Liverpool was at Martinique.
The Agrippina, with a cargo of coal specially destined for
the Alabama, was there by arrangement awaiting her arrival.  What further passed is thus stated in the argument of the United
States:2
The Agrippina left port upon the order of Captain Semmes to get under way forthwith and proceed to a new place of rendezvous, as "it would not do for him to think of
coaling in Martinique under the circumstances."   Martinique was under the jurisdiction
of the French government and not under that of Her Majesty.
The part of this passage printed in italics is taken from the journal of
Captain Semmes, set out in the sixth volume of the United States Appendix, p. 491.
The effect of this statement is to convey the impression that Captain
Semmes found it would not do for him to coal at Martinique on account of the strictness of the French authorities, as compared with the
lax neutrality of ports within Her Majesty's jurisdiction. I deeply and
sincerely regret to find myself bound to denounce this representation as
altogether disingenuous. It was the fear of the United States cruisers,
not apprehension of French authorities, which led Captaiu Semmes to
seek a safer place for coaling.   His journal shall speak for itself:
After describing his cruise and captures until October 30, he continues, (p. 492:)
'• The engineer having now reported to me that we had no more than about four days of
fuel on board, I resolved to withdraw from the American coast, run down into the West
Indies to meet my coal-ship, and renew my supply. Being uncertain, in the commencement of my career, as to the reception I should meet with in neutral ports, and fearing that I might" have difficulty in procuring coal in the market, I had arranged with
my ever-attentive co-laborer, Captain Bullock, when we parted off Terceira, to have a
supply-ship sent out to me from time to time, as J. should indicate to him in the rendezvous. The island of Martinique was to be the first rendezvous, and it was thither
accordingly that we were now bound. This resolution was taken on the 30th of October."
After describing several other captures, and his arrival at Martipjujue, he continues,
'(p. 514:)
"I found here at her anchors, as I had expected, my coal-ship the Agrippina. She
had been lying here eight days. Her master, an old Scotchman, who, like most old
sailors, was fond of his grog, had been quite indiscreet, as I soon learned, in talking
about his ship and her movements. Instead of pretending to have come in for water
or repairs, or to hunt a market, or for something of the kind, he had frequently, when
'half seas over,' in the coffee-houses on shore, boasted of his conuectiou with the Alabama, and told his brother tars that that ship might be daily looked for. Eight days
were a sufficient space of time for these conversations to be repeated in the neighboring
islands; and as I knew that the enemy had several cruisers in the West Indies, I was
only surprised that some one of them had not looked in upon the Agrippina before. It
would not do for me to think of coaling in Martinique, under the circumstances, and so I
ordered my coal-ship to get under way forthwith, and proceed to a new rendezvous—a
small island ou the Spanish main, where, in due time, we will rejoin her. I had the
satisfaction of seeing her get a good offiDg before nightfaU, and knew that she was
safe."'-
The foregoing extract speaks for itself. What makes the matter still
worse is that, at the time this passage in the United States argument
was penned, a letter from the British consul at Martinique to Earl
Bussell had been published in the British Appendix, from which it
appears that the consul actually remonstrated with the master of the
Agrippina, and called the attention of the French governor to the transaction, as an improper one, on which the governor declared his intention
of allowing the same facilities to the Alabama as he had previously afforded to the Sumter.
1 Page 202.
2 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 490,464
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
The letter is as follows:
Saixt Pierre, November 26, 1862.
My Lord : I have the honor to report to your lordship that the confederate steamer
.Alabama, Captain Semmes, has visited this island.
The following are the circumstances in connection with the arrival and departure of
this noted cruiser:
I had to proceed to Fort de France on the 12th instant on official business with an
English ship lying there, and, on my arrival, I heard that an English bark, the Agrippina, master McQueen, had entered the harbor on the previous evening with a cargo of
coals, shipped at Cardiff and cleared from the custom-house there, for Jamaica; that to
explain his presence at Fort de Fr^iice, the master had stated that he was to receive instructions from me. I was, moreover, informed that it was reported in town that the
coals on board of this vessel were destined for the Alabama.
I immediately sent for the master and acquainted him with what I ha'd heard; at
the same time expressing my surprise and displeasure at his having presumed to connect
my name with such a matter. He assured me positively that these reports were without
a.ny foundation whatever; that he had merely said that, when about to leave England,
he had received from his owners a telegram desiring him to call at Martinique, where
he would find a letter of further instructions addressed to my care.
On informing him that I had received no such letter, he replied it would, no doubt, j
arrive by the next mail.
The harbor regulations not allowing vessels to remain over three days without paying port-charges, I gave him, at his request, and on the faith of his assurances, a draught/
of a letter T;o be addressed to the authorities to obtain permission to await the arrival
of the steamer, due on the 18th of November, without expense.   This demand, I may
here observe, was not granted ultimately.
On the same afternoon, having heard from the captain of the port that the pilot, who
had been on board of the Agrippina, had reported, to him that the master had told
another British Captain, who had boarded the ship in the offing, in his presence, that
his cargo was for the Alabama, I at once sent for both the master and the pilot, but
they all agreed that the statements the master of the Agrippina had made was to the
■effect merely that he had, on a previous voyage, taken stores to the Alabama. lex-
pressed to him my opinion that he had acted most improperly on that occasion, and I
warned him of the consequences that might follow the repetition of any such illegal
proceedings. No longer feeling assured of the veracity of his protestations, and hearing that a sloop was about to sail for Saint Vincent, I addressed a letter to the senior officer of the station, in the hope that it might find him there, and procure for me the
benefit of his advice.
On my return to Saint Pierre, finding everywhere the same rumors afloat concerning
the Agrippina, I thought it proper to write to the- master to repeat the observations I
had already made to him verbally. Herewith I have the honor to inclose copies of both
these letters.
I was obliged to return to Fort de France the next day to end the inquiry, began the
previous day, with regard to another vessel, and I was about leaving again when the
master of the Agrippina came to tell me he had a confidential communication to make;.
I answered that I would not refuse to hear any statement he might wish to make, but
that I reserved to mysebf complete freedom of action as to the course I should adopt
afterward, particularly if the communication had reference to the report in circulation
concerning his vessel. He still persisted in making a statement to the effect that his
cargo was, in truth, for a steamer that he had expected to find at Fort de France, and
which he had reason to believe was a confederate cruiser.
I again pointed out the illegality of such a line of conduct, but the sequel showed
that my remonstrances proved of no avil.
I next deemed it proper to acquaint his excellency the governor of what I had just
learned. He did not seem much surprised, and observed that, if the Alabama came into
port, he would act exactly as he had done on a former occasion, in the case of the
Sumter, when the French government had altogether approved of the measures he had
taken in regard to that vessel.
Nothing new occurred until the morning of the 18th instant, when a black, rakish-
looking screw-steamer was seen approaching the land, steering for Fort de France. As
she passed close before this town, she showed fb British blue ensign and pennant, but
no one was deceived by the character she had thus assumed. She was at once put
down as the Alabama, and such in effect she proved to be.
On his arrival at Fort de France, Capjpin Semmes sent a message to the governor
to request permission to land fifty-three prisoners whom he had on board. On the return of the officer they were landed and sent to the United States consul at this port. On
the same afternoon the Agrippina, whose master had gone on board of the Alabama,
as soon as she came in sight, got under weigh, having taken a clearance for Demerara.
The Alabama appeared to be still well provided with fuel, and her commander said
that he would leave during the night.   But be was still at anchor on the moraine of theOPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCK*BURN.
465
19th, wh9ii, about 7 a. m., a Federal war-steamer suddenly made her appearance, which
proved to bo the Sau Jacinto, Captairi Ronckendoff, from Barbados and Trinidad, on a
cruise in search of the Alabama. The latter hoisted the confederate flag, on perceiving
the Federal vessel, whose commander declined to receive the government pilot, or
enter the harbor on learning that, in such case, he would have to regain in port twenty-
four hours after the departure of his adversary. He was then informed, by a letter
from the governor, that he must remain at a distance of three miles from the
nearest land, and that any attempt to violate the neutrality of the port would be repressed by force of arms, ff necessary.
Shirtly afterw.ird a s.nill Fr.nch war-steamer that was in the port was sent out
and took up a position, with steam up and her men at their quarters, between the
rival ships. At the same time, the forts were manned, and twenty rounds of ammunition were served out for each gun bearing seaward ; the officers in charge of those at"
the mouth of the bay having orders to maintain the San Jacinto at the prescribed distance from the land, and fire into whichever vessel might become the assailant.
Meauwhile, the greatest anxiety prevailed on shore; many bearing iu mind the
vagaries of the Federal cruisers elsewhere, and recollecting what had occurred a year
previously to the commander of the Iroquois, when the Suinter made her escape, were
of opinion that the San Jacinto would have attempted, at all risks, to run down the
Alabama where she lay.   No such occurrence, fortunately, took place.
Meanwhile, the Alabama remained perfectly still, her crew being employed in painting and repairing the masts aud riggings. Her captain, it seems, had at first taken
the San Jacinto for another vessel of the force of his own, and he sent a message to
the governor to, say that intending to go out to engage her, he in consequence requested
his excellency to permit him to deposit, at the public treasury, a sum of money,
about £12,000 sterling, which he had on board; this request could not be granted, and
■arrangements were being made with a merchant who was to receive it at a certain percentage, when, having recognized the San Jacinto, Captain Semmes sent word that he
would keep the money on board, having made up his mind to run out that same
night.
He did so, in effect, and accomplished his design so successfully that his adversary
did not even perceive his flight; nor was it until after remaining thirty-six hours, before
Fort de France after the Alabama had left that the captain of the San Jacinto could
believe that she had really got away.
The movements of the Alabama had been well calculated.
Shortly before sunset a boat had conveyed to the San Jacinto one of the masters who
had been lately released from the Alabama, and who was sent by the United States
consul to arrange for the signals to be made from an American schooner anchored near
the Alabama, iu case the latter should attempt to leave during the night.
Suspecting their intentions, Captain Semmes sent word to the captain of the port for
a pilot, who came off forthwith, and at dusk he got under weigh, first running toward
the inner port, and when out of sight of the schooner, altering his course so as to run
out on the south side of the bay. The pilot left him, already, nearly half an hour,
when the master of the schooner, on his return from the San Jacinto, finding the Alabama had gone, sent up three rockets iu the direction which his crew told him she had
taken.
The San Jacinto, under all steam, ran to the south'side of the bay, and not meeting the
Alabama, she having already passed out, Captain  Ronckendoff remained all night oft
the entry to the bay, within which he placed his armed boats in a line, to prevent all
egress.     So certain was he of the result of these measures that, as I have already said,
he was with difficulty brought to believe the escape of his adversary.1
It is thus abundantly clear that it was not because Martinique was
not within British jurisdiction that Captain Semmes did not coal there.
Having thus left the port on the evening of the 19th, on the afternoon
of the next day the Alabama joined the Agrippina, and the two ran together to the appointed place of anchorage, Blanquilla, described by
Captain Semmes as u one of those little coral islands that skirt the South
American coast, not yet fully adapted to the habitation of man.'2 There
the Alabama took in a supply of coal, after which the Agrippina, which
had still another supply of coal on board, was sent to the Areas, small
islands off the coast of Yucatan. The two vessels met there on the 23d
of December. The Alabama took in the remainder of the supply of coal,
after which the Agrippina wassentto Liverpool to procure a fresh supply.3
1 British Appendix, vol. i, pp. 257-259.
'2Semmes's ''Adventures Afloat," p. 516;
3 Semmes's "Adventures Afloat," p. 519;
30 B
United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 431.
United States Doc uments, ubi supra.466
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
At Jamaica.
On the 11th of January, the Alabama encountered the United States
ship of war the Hatteras, when, after, a short engagement, the latter
went down, there being just time to save the crew.
After this, the Alabama with her prisoners made for Jamaica, and arrived at Port Boyal on the evening of the 20th.
This was her first appearance in a British port after her departure
from Liverpool on the 29th of July, 1861. It is observed in the Case of
the United States that the "promised orders" of Earl Bussell to detain
her for a violation of British'sovereignty were not there..
Earl Bussell had promised no such orders. The only orders ever
spoken of were those sent to Queenstown and to Nassau, as recommended by the law-officers immediately on the escape of the Alabama from
the Mersey, before any transfer to the Confederate States was known to
have been made.2 At. the time the Alabama was at Jamaica she was a
commissioned ship of war, and as such, in the opinion of Her Majesty's
government, protected from .seizure.
The same question arises in respect to the Alabama as arises in respect of the Florida, namely, whether her commission as a ship of war
of the Confederate States gave her immunity from seizure for the breach
of British law when she was again found iii a British port. But this
question it is unnecessary to consider if the British government is liable,
as we are all agreed it is, in respect of this vessel, by reason of the want»
of due diligence in not preventing her departure.
The morning after the arrival of the Alabama at Jamaica, Captain
Semmes called onCommodore Dunlop, the officer in command at the
station, who reported to the admiral:
Aboukir, at Jamaica, January 23, 1863.
Sin: I have the honor to inform you that on the evening of the 20th a screw-steamer,
apparently a man-of-war, was seen off this port about sunset, under French colors.
After dark the vessel entered the harbor, and upon being boarded proved to be the
screw gun-vessel Alabama, under the so-called Confederate States flag.
2. On the morning of the 21st, her commander, Captain Semmes, called on me, and
asked for permission to land seventeen officers and one hundred and one men,- the crew
of the late United States gun-vessel Hatteras, which had engaged the Alabama twenty-
five miles southeast of Galveston, Texas, during the night of the 11th January, and
was sunk. The action, according to Captain Semmes's account, lasted from 13 to 15
minutes, when the Hatteras, being in a sinking state, ceased firing, and the crew were
removed on board the Alabama, which there was just time to effect before the Hatteras-
went down.
5. Captain Semmes then stated that he had six large shot-holes at the water-line,
which it was absolutely necessary should be repaired before he could proceed to sea
with safety, and asked permission to receive coal arid necessary supplies. The necessity of the repairs was obvious, and I informed Captain Semmes that no time must be
lost in completing them, taking in his supplies, and proceeding to sea, in exact conformity with the spirit of Earl Russell's dispatch. Captain Semmes gave me his word
of honor that no unnecessary delay should take place, adding, "My interest is entirely
in accordance with your wishes on this point, for if I remain here an hour more than,
can be avoided, I shaU run the risk of finding a squadron of my enemies outside, for no
doubt they will be in pursuit of me immediately."
6. Owing to the delay in receiving the lieutenant-governor's answer to my letter
relative to landing the prisoners from Spanish Town, it was not until the evening of
the 21st that the permission to do so reached Captain Semmes, aud too late for them to
be landed that night. The crowded state of the vessel previous to the landing of the
prisoners, on the morning of the 22d, made it difficult to proceed with the necessary
repairs, and no doubt caused some unavoidable delay. As soon as these repairs are
completed, the Alabama will proceed to sea.3
The governor at once consented to the landing of the prisoners, observing that | common humanity would dictate such a permission being
1 Case ofthe United States, p. 382.
sSee British Appendix, vol. i, pp. 202, 203, 212, and 219.
3 British Appendix, \o\. i, page 264.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
46'
granted, as otherwise fever or pestilence might arise from an overcrowded ship, to say nothing of the horrors which would ensue should
the Alabama again go into action with them on board." Governor Eyre
added, that, u of course, once landed, no person could be re embarked
against their will from British soil."1 The prisoners were accordingly
lauded.
Assuming that the Alabama was properly received as a belligerent
vessel, no question can arise as to the propriety of allowing the necessary repairs to be done. | The fractures made by six large shot or shell
near the water-line of the Alabama," says Commodore Dunlop in his
report to the admiral, "required extensive repairs."3
I presume it can hardly be said that the ship ought to have been
forced to go to sea without these " large fractures" having been stopped
up.
She had anchored in the port, the commodore reports, after dark on
the evening of the 20th of January; she commenced repairing the damages received in the action with the Hatteras the next morning; but the
commodore adds that the repairs " could not be completed by the unskillful workmen hired here before late in the afternoon of the 25th, and
the Alabama sailed at 8.30 p. m. of the same evening." It cannot, therefore, be said that she was permitted to stay too long in the port. She
received, the commodore states, "a supply of provisions and coal," but
it does not appear what was the quantity. £To complaint has ever been
made, that I am aware of, of any excess having been allowed. Commodore Dunlop certaiuly appears to have been quite alive to his duty of
enforcing the regulations.    He concludes his report by sa3ring:
In conclusion, I have only to state that the confederate vessel was treated strictly in
accordance with the instructions contained in Earl Russell's letter of the 31st January,
1861, aud exactly as I shall act toward any United States mau-of-war that may hereafter call here.
Two United States ships of war, the Richmond and Powhatan, arrived here in 1861,
coaled and provisioned, and remained in port, the Richmond four days, and the Powhatan three days ; the San Jaciuto was also here, and remained four hours.3
I am therefore unable to concur in an opinion expressed by the
president of this tribunal in thinking that | the reception of the Alabama at Jamaica far exceeded the measure of what the duties of neutrality
would admit of." If, by this, reference is intended to be made to the
fa"/C that a young officer, in the absence of his superior, thoughtlessly
allowed the band of a Queen's ship to play a southern national air, a
circumstance afterward fully explained, and for which he was severely
reprimanded, or that the officers on the station went on board of the
Alabama, and treated her captain aud officers as officers of a man-of-
war, or to the possible fact that the inhabitants of the island may have
shown some kindness toward, or sympathy with, the Southerners, I
can only protest agains't such facts being made a ground for fixing a
liability on the British government, when no fault can be fixel on the
local authorities. If the British government has been in any respect
wanting in due diligence, and injury has thence resulted to American
citizens, the British people are ready to make reparation. But to call
in aid, as founding a liability on the part of Great Britain, the fact that
officers of Her Majesty's ships, or the inhabitants of a West Indian
colony, may have shown civilities to the officers of a confederate ship—
-as why should they not? or have exhibited sympathy for the cause of
the South, when the authorities have strictly done their duty, does seem
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 265.
3 Ibid., p. 269.
3 Ibid.468
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
to me, I musPsay, to be going a great deal too far; indeed, further than
the Unted States themselves^ For neither in their case nor argument
have the latter gone so far as to assert that, saving in the matter of not
seizing the vessel, there was any breach of neutrality in what passed at
Jamaica.
But the same exception is also taken to what passed at the Cape.
At the c_i>e or It is necessary, therefore, to review the facts,
coed Hope. rpjjg Alabama arrived in Saldanha Bay on the 29th of
July, 1863. It appears from, a dispatch of the admiral on the station,
Sir Baldwin Walker, to the adrairalty,'of August the 19th, that, on receiving information of her being there, he immediately gave orders to
•Captain Forsyth, of Her Majesty's ship Valorous, to hold himself in
readiness to proceed to any of the parts of the colony in which the
Alabama might anchor, in order to preserve the rules of strict neutrality.1
On the 5th of August, having received a telegram that the Alabama
was off Table Bay, the admiral ordered the Valorous to proceed thither.
As the Alabama was standing into Table Bay, she fell in with and captured a United States vessel, called the Sea Bride, and a question arose
whether the capture had not been made within the waters of the colony.
Mr. Graham, the United States consul, immediately called the attention
of the governor, Sir Philip Wodehouse, to the capture, alleging it to
have been unlawful by reason of its having been made within 4 miles
of the shore.
He writes:
I believe there is no law defining the word. " coastf? other than international law.
That law has always limited neifSpl waters to the fighting distance from land, which,
upon the invention of gunpowder, was extended to the distance of three nautical miles
from land on a straight coast, and, by thigsame rule, since the invention of Armstrong
rifled cannon, to at least six miles.
But all waters inclosed by a line drawn between two promontories or headlands
are recognized by all natious as neutral, and England was the first that adopted the
rule, calling such waters the " King's chambers." By referring to " Wheatou's Digest,"
page 234, or any other good work on international law, you will find the above rules
laid down and elucidated.2
Mr. Graham also sent affidavits of the captain, the steward, and the
cook of the Sea Bride giving the bearings of the vessel at the time of
the capture to prove that the vessel, when captured, was withiu the
waters of the colony.
Captain Semmes having been called upon for an explanation, answered:
In reply, I have the honor to state that it is not true that the bark referred to was
captured in British waters, and in violation of British neutrality, she having been
captured outside all headlands, and a distance from the nearest land of between five
and six miles. As I approached this vessel I called the particular attention of my
officers to the question of distance, and they all agree that the capture was made from
two to three miles outside of the marine league.3
The governor referred the matter to Captain Forsyth, who, after taking
the evidence of the port captain, of the light-house keeper of the Green
Point light, of the collector of customs, of the signalman at the Lion's
Bump telegraph-station, and of a boatman, all of whom had seen the
position of the two vessels, reported that he had come to the conclusion
that the Sea Bride was beyond the limits assigned when captured by the
Alabama.4
The decision of the governor, which, of course, was in accordance
with the opinion of Captain Forsyth, having been aunounced to Mr.
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 306.
2Ibid., p. 302.
3 Ibid., p. 315.
I Ibid., p. 311.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
469
Graham, this gentleman loses all sensa of propriety, and, forgetting that
he is addressing Her Majesty's representative, writes:
Tour decision in the case of the Sea Bride was duly received at 4 o'cloek p. m. on
Saturday. In communicating that decision you simply announce that the vessel was,
in your opinion, and according to the evidence before you, alegal prize to the Alabama;
but you omit to state the principle of international law that governed your decision,
and neglect to furnish me witli the evideuce relied upon by you.
Under these circumstances, I can neither have the evidence verified or rebutted here,
nor am I enabled to transmit it as it stands to the American minister at Loudon, nor
to the United States Government at Washington. An invitation to be present, when
the ex-parte testimony was taken was not extended to me, and I am therefore ignorant
of the tenor of it, and cannot distinguish the portion thrown out from that which was
accepted. If your decision is that the neutral waters of this colony only extend a distance of three miles from laud, the character of that decision would have been aptly
illustrated to the people of Cape Town had an American war-vessel appeared on the
scene and engaged the Alabama in battle. In such a contest, with cannon carrying a
distance of six miles, (three over land,) the crashing buildings in Cape Town would
have been an excellent commentary on your decision.
But the decision has been made, and cannot be revoked here, so that further comment at present is, therefore, unnecessary. It can only be reversed by the government
you represent, which it probably will be when the United States Government shall
claim indemnity for the owners of the Sea Bride.1
Beferring to the Tuscaloosa, he ends by saying:
The capture of the Sea Bride in neutral waters, together with the case of the Tuscaloosa, also a prize, constitute the latest and best illustration of British neutrality that
has yet been given.
The offensive tone which the United States consuls allowed themselves
to assume toward British authorities is not a little remarkable.
The Sea Bride having been put in charge of a prize crew, while the
officer in charge was below, the vessel was, through inadvertence,
allowed to be brought within two milesof the shore, and this also was forthwith brought under the notice of the governor by Mr. Graham, who insisted that the vessel should be seized. But it appeared from Mr. Graham's
own witnesses that the officer, coming on deck, stamped his foot as if
vexed at seeing the vessel where she was, and immediately ordered her to
be kept farther off. The governor therefore treated it as an act of inadvertence, especially as it was afterward apologized for.2
Prior to coming into Table Bay, Captain Semmes had written from
Saldanha Bay to the governor:
An opportunity is offered me by the coasting schooner Atlas to communicate with
the Cape, of which I promptly avail myself.
I have the honor to inform your excellency that I arrived in this bay on Wednesday
morning last for the purpose of effecting some necessary repairs. As soon as these repairs can be completed I will proceed to sea, and in the mean time your excellency may
rest assured that I will pay the strictest attention to the neutrality of your government.3
On the announcement of the Alabama beinj
Graham, the United States consul, wrote to the
her being seized:
From reliable information received by me, and which you are also doubtless in possession of, a war-steamer called the Alabama is now in Saldanha Bay, being painted,
discharging prisoners of war, &c.
The vessel in question was built in England, to prey upon the commerce of the
United States of America, aud escaped therefrom while on her trial trip, forfeiting
bonds of £20,000, which the British government exacted under the foreign-enlistment
act.
Now, as your government has a treaty of amity and commerce with the United
States, and has not recognized the persons iu revolt against the United States as a government at all, the vessel alluded to should be at once seized and sent to England, from
in Saldanha Bay, Mr.
insisting" on
governor
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 304.
2Ibid., p. 316, 317, and 329.
31 bid., p. 308.470
ARBITRATION AT   GENEVA.
whence she clandestinely escaped. Assuming that the British govern-
The Alabama at the jjjqq^j wa8 8jucere I__ exacting the bonds, you have doubtless been instructed to send her home to England, where she belongs. But if, from
some oversight, you have not received such instructions, and you decline the responsibility of making the seizure, I would most respectfully protest against the vessel remaining in any port of the colony another day. She has been at Saldanha Bay four
[six] days already, and a "vflfek previously on the coast, and has forfeited all right to
remain an hour longer by this breach of newl|lpy. Painting a ship does not come
under the head of "necessary repairS?' and is no proof that she is uuseaworthy ; and
to allow her to visit other ports'afljlr she has set the Queen's proclamation of neutrality at defiance would not be regarded as in accordance with the spirit and purpose
of that document.1
Mr. Graham received for answer:
His excellency has no instructions, neither has he any authority, to seize or detain
that vessel; and he desires me to acquaint you that he has received a letter from the
commander, dated the 1st ittllant, stating that repairs were iu progress, and as soon as
they were completed he intended to go to sea. He further announces his intention of
respecting strictly the neutrality of the British government.
The course which Captain Semmes here proposes to take is, in the governor's opinion,
in conformity with the insMjictions he has himself received relative to ships of war
and privateers belonging to the United States and the States calling themselves the
Confederate States of America visiting Briwh ports.
The reports received from Saldanha Bay induce the governor to believe that the vessel will leave that harbor as soon as her repairs are completed ; but he will, immediately on receiving intelligence to the contrary, take the necessary steps for enforcing
the observance of the rules laid down by Her Majesty's government.-
Called upon afterward to advise as to the propriety of what had taken
place with reference to the Alabama at the Cape, the law-officers, Sir B.
Palmer, Sir B. Collier, and Sir B. Phillimore, the latter so deservedly
held up as an authority by the United States, on the 19th of October
advised :
i clearly of opinion that neither the gov
With respect to the Alabama herself, we are
ernor nor any other authority at the Cape could exercise any jurisdiction over
and that, whatever was her previous history, they were bound to treat her as a ship
of war belonging to a belligerent power.3
It strikes me that this tribunal should hesitate before it decides that
three such legal authorities were wrong. Or are we to suppose that an
" insincere neut^lity " lurks .beneath their opinion, though given in the
course of official duty ?
On his arrival in Table Bay, ou the 5th of August, Captain Semmes
wrote to the governor, informing him that he had come in for supplies
and repairs, and requesting to be allowed to land his prisoners, thirty-
three in number, lately captured on board two ships destroyed by him
at sea. The governor gave permission to land the prisoners, but desired that Captain Semmes would | state the nature and extent of the
Supplies and repairs required, that he might be enabled to form some
estimate of the time it would be necessary for the Alabama to remain in
the port."
Captain Semmes replies:
In the way of supplies I shall need some provisions for my crew, a list of which will
be handed you to-morrow by the paymaster, and as for repairs my boilers need some
iron-work to be done, and my bends require calking, being quite open. I propose to
take on board the necessary materials here, and to proceed with all dispatch to Simon's
Bay, for the purpose of maeng these repairs.4
On the morning of the 6th the paymaster of the vessel called on the
governor, with the merchant who was to furnish the supplies, and leave
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p.
2 Ibid., p. 301.
3 Ibid., p. 323.
4 Ibid., p. 314.
300.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
471
was giveu to the vessel to remain till the next day, the 7th.   In a
dispatch to the Duke of Newcastle Sir Philip Wodehouse states :
On the night of the 5th Her Majesty's ship Valorous had come round from Simon's
Bay. During the* night of the 6th the weather became unfavorable; a vessel was
wrecked in the bay, and a heavy sea prevented the Alabama from receiving her supplies by the timg arranged. On the morning of the 8th, Captain Forsyth, of the
Valorous, and the port captain, by my desire, pressed on Captain Semmes the necessity for his leaving the port without any unnecessary delay; when he pleaded the continued heavy sea aud the absence of his cooking-apparatus, which had been sent on
shore for repairs, and had not been returned by the tradesman at the time appointed,
and intimated his own anxiety to get away. Between 6 and 7 a. in., on the 9th, he
■sailed, and on his way round to Simon's Bay captured another vessel, but on finding
that she was in neutral waters, immediately released her.1
With reference to the latter circumstance, Sir B. Walker, in his dispatch to the admiralty, says :
During his passage to this port Captain Semmes chased another American vessel,
the Martha Wentzel, standing iu for Table Bay. On my pointing out to him that he
had done so in neutral waters, he assured me that it was quite unintentional, and, being at a distance from the land, he did not observe that he had got within three miles
of an imagiuary line drawn from the Cape of Good Hope to Cape Hanglip, but on discovering it he did not detain the vessel.   This explanation I considered sufficient.2
Having arrived at Simon's Bay on the 9th, the vessel was calked,
and had other slight repairs done. She took in no coal on this occasion. She left on the 15th. I Captain Semmes," says the admiral,
•" was guarded in his conduct, and expressed himself as most anxious
not to violate the neutrality of these waters."3
The Alabama again put into Simon's Bay on the 16th of September
to coal and have repairs done.   It has never been suggested that, either
in respect of the stay of the vessel on either occasion, or the amount of
repair, or the quantity of coal, any indulgence was allowed to her in
excess of the Queen's regulations.4
Courtesies and sympathy may have been shown by the inhabitants
to the officers and crew of the ship. But, as I have already observed,
these are things which a neutral government cannot prevent, and for
which it would be simply absurd to say it could be responsible. Probably, as was very sensibly remarked by a Cape newspaper, the Argus,
cited by Captain Semrnesin his journal, wheu speaking of the sympathy
shown by the inhabitants, 1 It was not, perhaps, taking the view of
either side, Federal or confederate, but in admiration of the skill, pluck,
and daring of the Alabama, her captain and her crew, who afford a general theme of admiration all the world over."5
From the Cape of Good Hope the Alabama proceeded to the Eastern
Seas. She touched at Singapore in December, 1863, and vis- i the Easteni
ited the Cape on her way back to European waters in March, Seas-
1861. It is mentioned, in the Case of the United States,6 as afresh instance of the violation of the duties of Great Britain as a neutral, that,
having taken in coal at Singapore on the 23d of December, she was al:
lowed to commence coaling again at Cape Town on the 21st of March—
two days too soon. But I can hardly suppose this will be seriously insisted on. Moreover, it appears from the British Counter Case7 that
the charge, such as it is, resting on no better foundation than Captain
Semmes's journals, is founded on a miscalculation of dates. The Alabama seems to have taken in her supply of coal at Singapore, not on
British Appendix, vol. i, p. 312.
2Ibid., p. 307.
3 Ibid.
4 Ibid., p. 325.
6 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 497.
6 Pages 316, 386.
7 Page 117.472
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
the 23d, but on the 22d of December; and, although she arrived at
Table Bay on the 20th of March, she did not commence coaling till the
22d, when the period of three months prescribed by the regulations had
exactly elapsed. Indeed, she could not have done so earlier had it been
wished, on account of the heavy gale that was then prevailing.
The career of the Alabama was now drawing to a close. On the 11th
of June, 1861, she entered the port of Cherbourg. The
United States war-steamer, the Kearsarge, appeared shortly
afterward in the neighboring waters. A challenge ensued between the
commanders of the two vessels, and, on the morning of the 39th of
June, the Alabama steamed out of Cherbourg to encounter her formidable opponent. The fire of the.Kearsarge proved too heavy for the
Alabama, and the latter sank under it and went down, affording to the
victors the opportunity for the boastful taunt—which even the peaceful
occasion of this arbitration could not restrain—that " thus this British-
built, British-armed, and British-manned cruiser went down under the
tire of American guns.
.i
As if everything connected with this vessel must give birth to controversy, the sinking of the Alabama gave rise to a discussion, not uninteresting in a juridical point of view, though beside the purpose of
the present inquiry. As the Alabama was rapidly sinking, an officer in
one of her boats came to the Kearsarge, said they had surrendered,
and that the ship was going down, and asked for assistance to save the
crew. The Deerhound, a steam-yacht belonging to an English gentleman, who had gone out of Cherbourg to witness the combat, coming
up at the moment, was begged by the captain of the Kearsarge to help
to save the people of the Alabama. The boats of the Deerhound having been lowered succeeded in saving Captain Semmes and many of the
crew, who were struggling in the water.2
Others were saved by the Alabama's boat, with the before-mentioned
officer in her. All the persons saved were taken on board the Deer-
hound, and were carried by the owner, Mr. Lancaster, into Southampton, and there set free.
They were claimed as prisoners by the United States Government on
the ground that, the Alabama having surrendered, her crew were necessarily prisoners. If saved they could only be saved as prisoners, or, as
the alternative, they should have been left to drown.
Mr. Adams having written complaining that the owner of the Deer-
hound had taken away the persons thus saved, Lord Bussell answered:
I have the honor to state to you, in reply, that it appears to me that the owner of
the Deerhound, of the Royal Yacht Squadron, performed only a common duty of humanity in savingfrom the waves the captain and several of the crew of the Alabama. They
would otherwise, in all probability, have been drowned, aud thus would never have
been in the situation of prisoners of war.
It does not appear to me to be any part of the duty of a neutral to assist in making
prisoners of war for one of the belligerents.3
The alternative is thus sternly put by Mr. Seward in a dispatch to Mr-
Adams :
The earl argues that if those persons had not been so taken from the sea they would,,
in all probability, li&ve been drowned, and thus would never have been in the situation of prisoners of war. Earl Russell further observes, in that connection, that it does-
not appear to him to be any part of the duty of a neutral to assist iu making prisoners-
of war for one of tbe belligerents.
I have to observe, upon these remarks of Earl Russell, that it was the right of the
Kearsarge that the pirates should drown, unless saved by humane exertions of the
1 Case of the United Stilus, p. 387.
2 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 384.
3 United States appendix, vol. iii, p. 263.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
473
officers and crew of that vessel, or by their own efforts, without the aid of the Deer-
hound. The men were either already actually prisoners, or they were desperately pursued by the Kearsarge. If they had perished, the Kearsarge would have had the advantage of a lawful destruction of so many enemies ; if they had been recovered by the
Kearsarge, with or without the aid of the Deerhound, then the voluntary surrender of
those persons would have been perfected, and they would have been -prisoners. In
neither case would they have remained hostile confederates.
The Deerhouud, by taking the men from the waves and conveying them within a
foreign jurisdiction, deprived tbe United States of the lawful benefits of a long and
costly pursuit and successful battle.
I freely admit that it is no part of a neutral's duty to assist in making captives for
a belligerent; but I maintain it to be equally clear that, so far from being neutrality,,
it is direct-hostility for a stranger to intervene and rescue men who had been cast into
the ocean iu battle, and then convey them away from under the conquerors guns.1
Possibly, in strictness of law, Mr. Seward was right in contending
that a belligerent is entitled to the death of his enemy, and that a neutral cannot interfere to save the latter from destruction. But it is idle
to propound legal theories in such a case; the instinct of humanity will
be certain to prevail over all considerations of legal right—God forbid
that it should not!—and the neutral who has rescued a sinking fellow-
creature from impending death may be excused if he does not deliver up
as a prisoner the man whom he has saved from perishing.
Be this as it may, the British government had but one answer to make
to the demand that these persons should be given up as prisoners,,
namely, that, however they had reached British soil, when on it they
were entitled to the protection of its laws; and that the government,
which had had nothing to do with the manner of their escape, even if it
had the will, had not the power to deliver them up.
CASE  OF THE TUSCALOOSA.
Immediately connected with the case of the Alabama is that of the
Tuscaloosa.
.  This vessel, originally called the Conrad, was a merchant-
vessel of the United States.    She was taken by the Alabama when off
the coast of Brazil, being then loaded with a cargo of wool.
Captain Semmes, the commander of the Alabama, put an officer and
ten men on board of her, with two small rifled 12 pounder guns, gave
her the name of Tuscaloosa, and, bringing her to the Cape, where she
arrived on the 7th of August, 1863, requested that she might be admitted to the harbor of Simon's Bay as a tender of the Alabama, in
other words, as a ship of war.
The admiral on the station, Sir Baldwin Walker, learning that the
so-called tender had never been condemned in a prize court, conceived
doubts as to the legality of considering her. in the light of a tender. He
therefore wrote to the governor, Sir Philip Wodehouse, requesting him
to obtafh the opinion of the law-officers as to whether the vessel ought
not to be looked upon as a prize, and as such prohibited from entering
the bay.2
The attorney-general of the colony reported that the Tuscaloosa could
not be looked upon as a prize, on the ground that she purported to be a
ship of war, and there was no legal proof to satisfy the local government
that such was not her true character; that Captain Semmes, as commanding a ship of war of the Confederate States, had authority to convert a captured vessel into a ship of war, and so to invest her with all
the rights and immunities accorded to such vessels, and that it was not
for the local authorities, but for the courts of the captor, to determine
1 United States Appendix, vol. iii, p. 273.
3 British Appendix, vol.i, p. 308.*f*m
474
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
her real character, while no means existed in' the colony for determining
whether she had or had not been legally condemned.1
Having afterward found that the vessel had her cargo of wool still
on board, and that her armament was only what has been stated, Sir B.
Ipffiiiker felt still more doubtful as to the real character of the vessel.
Writing to the governor on the 9th of August he says:
The admission of this vessel into port will, I fear, open the door for numbers of vessels captured under similar circumstances being denominated tenders, with a view to
avoid the prohibition contained in the Queen's instructions; and I would observe that
the vessel, the Sea Bride, captured'J.y the Alabama off Table Bay a few days since, or
all other prizes, might be in like manner styled tenders, making the prohibition entirely null and void.
I apprehend that to bring a captured vessel under the denomination of a vessel of
war she must be fitted for warlike purposes, and not merely have a few men and
two small guns on board her, (in fact nothing but a prize crew,) in order to disguise
her real character as a prize.
Now, this vessel has her original cargo of wool still on board, which cannot be required for warlike purposes, aud her armament and the number of her crew are quite
insufficient for any services pther than those of slight defense.
Viewing all the circumstances of the case, they afford room for the supposition that
the vessel is styled a ''tender," with the object of avoiding the prohibition against her
entrance as a prize into our ports, where, if the captors wished, arrangements could be
made for the disposal of her valuable cargo, the transshipment of which, your excellency
will not fail to see, 'might be readily effected on any part of the coast beyond the limits
of this colony.
My sole object in calling your exceUency's attention to the case is to avoid any
breach of strict neutrality.2 *
The attorney-general, however, on beingagain referred to, reported that
i if the vessel received the two guns from the Alabama or other confed-
CD
erate vessel of war, or if the person in command of her has a commission
of war, or if she be commanded by an officer of the confederate navy, in
any of these cases there will be a sufficient setting forth as a vessel of
war to justify her being held to be a ship of war. If all of these points
be decided in the negative, she must be held to be only a prize and
ordered to leave forthwith."3
The admiral ou this gave way, a.nd the Tuscaloosa was treated as a
ship of war, and as such admitted into the harbor and allowed to obtain
provisions. She left the bay on the 14th of August,4 and Captain
Semmes having contrived to dispose of her cargo of wool at a place on
the coast beyond the precincts of the colony, dispatched her on a cruise
to Brazil.5
While thus occupied she is said to have done some mischief to United
States vessels.
The Tuscaloosa again put into Simon's Bay on the 26th of December,
1863.6
In the meau time, the government having reported to the secretary of
state for the colonies what had happened on the occasion of her former
visit, the Duke of Newcastle had deemed it right to take the opinion of
the law-officers of the Crown as to the law applicable to such a case.
On the 19th of October the law-officers reported as follows:
Upon the point raised with regard to the vessel called the Tuscaloosa, we are not able
to agree with the opinion expressed by the attorney-general of the Cape Colony, that
she had ceased to have the character of a prize captured by the Alabama, merely because she was, at the time of her being brought within British waters, armed with two
email guns, in charge of an officer, and manned with a crew of ten men from the Alabama, and used as a tender to that vessel, under the authority of Captain Semmes.
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 309.
2 Ibid., p. 310.
'Ibid., p. 311.
4 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 313.
5 Uuited States Documents, vol. vi, p. 499.
6 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 330.OPINIONS   OF   SIR   ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
475
It would appear that the Tuscaloosa is a bark of 500 tons, captured by the Alabama
off the coast of Brazil on the 21st of June last, and brought into Simon's Bay on or before the 7th of August, with her original cargo of wool (itself, as well as the vessel,
prize) still on board, and with nothing to give her a warlike character, (so far as appears
from the papers before us,) except the circumstances already noticed!
We therefore do not feel called upon, in the circumstances of this case, to enter into
the question whether, in the case of a vessel duly commissioned as a ship of war, after
being made prize by a belligerent government, without being first brought infra prcesidia
or condemned by a court of prize, the character of prize, withiu the meaning of Her
Majesty's orders, would or would not be merged in that of a national ship of war. It
is enough to say that the citation from Mr. Wheaton's book, by the colonial attorney-
general, does not appear to us to have any direct bearing upon this question.
Connected with this subject is the question as to the cargoes of captured vessels,
which is noticed at the end of Sir Philip Wodehouse's dispatch of the 19th August last.
We think that, according to the true interpretation of Her Majesty's orders, they apply
as much to prize cargoes of every kind which may be brought by any armed ships or
privateers of either belligerent into British waters as to the captured vessels themselves.
They do not, however, apply to any articles which may have formed part of any such
cargoes, if' brought within British jurisdiction, not by armed ships or privateers of either
belligerent, but by other persons who may have acquired or may claim property in them
by reason of any dealings with the captors. «
We think it right to observe that the third reason alleged by the colonial attorney-
general for his opinion assumes (though the fact had not been made the subject of any
inquiry) that "no means existed for determining whether the ship had or had not been
judicially condemned in a court competent of jurisdiction;" and the proposition that,
"admitting her to hare been captured by a ship of war of the Confederate Slates, she was entitled to refer Her Majesty's government, in case of dispute, to the court of her States,
in order to satisfy it as to her real character," appears to us to be at variance with Her
Majesty's undoubted right to determine, within her own territory, whether her orders,
made in vindication of her own neutrality, have been violated or not.
The question remains, what course ought to have been taken by the authorities at the
Cape, first, iu order to ascertain whether this vessel was, as alleged by the United States
cousul, au uncondemned prize, brought within British waters in violation of Her
Majesty's neutrality; and secondly, what ought to have been done if such had appeared
to be really the fact? We think that the allegations of the United States consul ought
to have been brought to the knowledge of Captain Semmes while the Tuscaloosa was
still withiu British waters; and that he should have been requested to state whether
he did or did not admit the facts to be as alleged. He should also have been called upon
(unless the facts were admitted) to produce the Tuscaloosa's papers. If the result of
these inquiries had been to prove that the vessel was really an uncondemned prize,
brought into British waters in violation of Her Majesty's orders made for the purpose
of maintaining her neutrality, it would, we think, deserve very serious consideration
whether the mode of proceeding in such circumstances, most consistent with Her
. Majesty's dignity and most proper for the vindication of her territorial rights, would
.not have been to prohibit the exercise of any further control over the Tuscaloosa by
the captors, aud to retain that vessel under Her Majesty's control and jurisdiction until
properly reclaimed by her original owners.1
It will "be observed that in the foregoing opinion of the law-officers?
the question whether the Tuscaloosa should, under the circumstances,
have been detained for the purpose of being restored to her original
owners, is suggested as one deserving, should the. like case recur, of very
serious consideration; it is by no means one on wtiich a positive opinion
was intended to be given. The governor and the admiral, however, considered it as establishing not only that they'ought to have detained the
Tuscaloosa, when formerly within their jurisdiction, but as imposing on
them the duty of doing so now that, having returned to the Cape, she
was again within their power. They accordingly took possession of her.
Her commander, Lieutenant Low, thereupon addressed the following
protest to the governor:
Tuscaloosa, Simon's Bay, Cape of Good Hope,
December 28,1863.
Sir : As the officer in command of the Confederate States ship Tuscaloosa, tender
to the Confederate States steamer Alabama, I have to record my protest against the
recent extraordinary measures which have been adopted toward me and the vessel
under my command by the British authorities of this colony.
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 323.476
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
In August last the Tuscaloosa arrived in Simon's Bay. She was not only recognized
in the character which she lawfully claims to be, viz, a commissioned ship of war belonging to a belligerent power, but was allowed to remain in the harbor for the period
of seven days, taking in supplies and effecting repairs, with the full knowledge and
sanction of the authorities.
No intimation was given that she was regarded merely in the light of an ordinary
prize, or that she was considered to be violating the laws of neutrality. Nor, when
she notoriously left for a cruise on active service, was any intimation whatever conveyed that on her return to the port of a friendly power, where she had been received
as a man-of-war, she would be regarded as a " prize," as a violator of the Queen's proclamation of neutrality, and consequently liable to seizure. Misled by the conduct of
Her Majesty's government, I returned to Simon's Biv on the 23th instant, in very
urgent want of repairs and supplies; to my surprise I find the Tuscaloosa is now no
longer considered as a man-of-war, and she has, by your orders, as I learn, been seized for
the purpose of being handed over to the person who claims her on behalf of her latfe
owners.
The character of the vessel, viz, that of a lawful commissioned man-of-war of the
Confederate States of America, has not been altered since her first arrival iu Simon's
Bay; and she having been once fully recognized by the British authorities in .command
in this colony, and no notice or warning of change of opinion or of friendly feeling
having been communicated by public notification or otherwise, I wasentitled to expect
to be again permitted to en'ter Simon's Bay without molestation.
In perfect good faith I returned to Simon's Bay for mere necessaries, and in all honor
and good faith in return I should, on change of opiniou or of policy on the part of the
British authorities, have been desired to leave the port again.
But, by the course of proceedings taken, I have been (supposing the view now taken
by your excellency's government to be-correct) first misled, and next entrapped.
My position and character of my ship will most certainly be vindicated by my government. I am powerless to resist the affront offered to the Confederate States of
America by your excellency's conduct and proceedings.
I demand, however, the release of my ship ; and, if this demand be not promptly
complied with, I hereby formally protest against her seizure, especially under the very
peculiar circumstances of the case.1
Upon this proceeding being reported to the government at home, the
opiuion of the law-officers was again taken. It was felt that what had
been done could not be properly upheld. It was obviously one thing to
have seized the Tuscaloosa on the former occasion, as a prize brought
into a port of her Her Majesty; a very different thing, after she had
been treated as a ship of war, and allowed to go free, to let her come
again into port in the like character without notice of any hostile intention, and then to seize and practically condemn her. Assuming—of
which, however, I must say I entertain very serious doubts—the right
and power of the government to take such a course, it savors too much
of perfidy to be a course which Her Majesty's government could pursue
with a due regard to honor and good faith. Orders were therefore sent
out by the secretary of state for the colonies " to restore the vessel to
the lieutenant of the Confederate States who lately commanded her;
or, if he should have left the Cape, then to retain her until she can be
handed over to some person who may have authority from Captain
Semmes, of the Alabama, or from the government of the Confederate
States, to receive her."2
The order to restore this vessel has been reflected upon in the case of
the United States;3 but I cannot but think that the decision come to by
the government was, under the circumstances, perfectly right; not only
for the reason assigned, but also because, whatever might have been the
power of the British government to seize this vessel while still retaining the character of a prize, she had now been invested with that of a
vessel of war belonging to a belligerent, and was therefore no longer
amenable to the municipal jurisdiction.
1 British Appendix,
3 Ibid., p. 342.
3 Page 273.
l, p.OPNIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
477
The question is, however, of no practical importance whatsoever.
The Tuscaloosa* never was delivered up. Lieutenant Low having left
the Cape when the order of the Duke of Newcastle came out, she remained in the custody of the local authorities till the end of the war,
and was then delivered up to the United States. No claim of damages
can arise, therefore, with regard to her in this respect.1
A serious question of law, however, presents itself in respect of whatsoever damage may have been done by the Tuscaloosa, while cruising
in the interval between her leaving the Cape and her return to it. This
liability may be asserted on two grounds: first, it may be said that,
the Alabama having been enabled to make war on the commerce of the
United States through the want of due diligence on the part of the British government, and the Tuscaloosa having been taken by the Alabama
and converted into a ship of war employed in the same warfare, the mischief done by her must be looked upon as the consequence of such
original default of the government, and must be answered for accordingly ; a proposition obviously involving very serious consequences, as
leading to a liability of a most extensive and unlimited character.
Secondly, it may be said that the Tuscaloosa ought to have beeu seized
and delivered up to her origiual owners, when first found at the Cape,
and that the British government must, as having allowed her to go free,
be held liable for any damage afterward done by her. But this argument, of course, assumes, first, that the government had the power and
right to seize this vessel; secondly, that it was under any obligation to
do so; thirdly, that if such an obligation existed, it rendered the government liable to do more than compensate the original owners, and involved them in liability toward the United States Government.
The question, though of some legal interest, is otherwise but of small
importance by reason of the very small amount of damage done by this
vessel. On the whole I am disposed to think, though not without some
doubt as to whether the damage may not be too remote to found a legal
liability, that the mischief done by the Tuscaloosa being the direct consequence of the equipment of the Alabama, on the principle that
"oinne accessarium sequitur suum principale," those who are answerable for the one must be answerable also for the other. I acquiesce,
therefore, in the decision of the rest of the tribunal in respect of this
vessel.
CASE  OF  THE  GEORGIA.
The case of the Georgia is one in which not even the desire to establish
great principles of  neutrality at the expense of Great
Britain can, as it appears to me, find matter on which to
found a charge of want of due diligence.
This vessel was built at Dumbarton, on the Clyde, and was evidently
originally intended as a blockade-runner, which may account for the in-'
teresting fact, thrice repeated in the American case and argument, that
she was christened by a young lady, the daughter of Captain North,
who was in some way connected with tfie insurgent service.
The Georgia was evidently not constructed as a vessel of war, though
afterward applied to that purpose. The vigilance of the government
having been aroused by the escape of the Florida and the Alabama, the
building of ships of war for the confederate service had become a matter of extreme difficulty, and recourse was had to the contrivance of
converting ships, originally built as blockade-runners, into vessels of
war.
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 363.
The Georgi;■■■ 1~-
JW
478
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
She was. registered on the 20th of March, 1863, as the property of a
Mr. Thomas Bold, a merchant of Liverpool, on his declaration that he
was the sole owner.1 She was advertised at the Sailors' Home at Liverpool, as about to sail for Singapore; seamen were engaged for her as
bound to that port, and her crew signed articles for a voyage to Singapore, or any intermediate port, for a period of two years.2
On the 1st of April this vessel, the name of which had been changed
to the Japan, cleared out in ballast for a vrifiage to Point de Galle and
Hong Kong;3 Her crew, the number of which, as appears from the
deposition of Thomas Mahon, one of them, was about 50,4 but which,
according to the report of the chief officer of customs, was iu fact 48,3
though magnified by Mr. Dudley into 70 or 80,5 having been hired at
Liverpool by the firm of Jones & Co., of that place, were sent by
steamer to the Clyde. They had shipped for a two years' voyage to
Singapore, there and back, and beyond all question had shipped in the
honest belief that the ship was bound for that place. The vessel sailed
on the 2d of April from Greenockj but appears only to have dropped
farther down the river, and not to have finally left till the 6th or 7th.
Mr. Dudley, on the 3d of April, writing to Mr. Seward on the subject of
this vessel, adds:
My belief is that she belongs to the confederates, and is to be converted into a
privateer; quite likely to cruise in the East Indies, as Mr. Young, the paymaster from
the Alabama, tells me it has always been a favorite idea of Mr. Mallory, ihe secretary
of the confederate navy, to send a privateer in these waters. I sent a man from here
to Glasgow to accompany these men, to endeavor to find out the destination of the
vessel, &c. He has not been successful yet in his efforts. He has been on board, and
writes that she has no armament, and he is still there watching her. I have directed
him, before he returns, to visit the yards in the Clyde, and to go down to Stockton and
Hartlepool.3
From a letter from Mr. Adams to Mr. Seward, of the 9th, it appears
that that gentleman "had long been in possession of information about
the construction and outfit of this vessel in the Clyde; but,'' he adds,
1 nothing has ever been furnished me of a nature to base proceedings
upon.'6 Neither had there been, assuredly, up to this time, anything
which would have justified Mr. Adams in applying to Her Majesty's
government to seize this vessel, or the government in seizing her.
The measnipng surveyor, who had surveyed her on the 17th of
January, and had been on board on two subsequent occasions for the
purpose of completing his survey, swfced that she | appeared to him to
be intended for commercial purposes, her frame-work and plating being
of the ordinary size for vessels of her class."7 The collector of customs,
upon an inquiry being afterward directed by the government, reported :
I have questioned the officer who performs tide-surveyor's duty afloat, and who
visited her on the evening of the 1st instant, to see that the stores were correct. He
informs me he saw nothing on board which could lead him to -suspect that she was
intended for war purposes. I can testify that she was not heavily sparred; indeed,
she could not spread more canvaS- than an ordinary merchant-steamer. I beg to add,
when the tide-surveyor was on board, the joiners were fitting doors to the cabins.8
The vessel left ostensibly for the purpose of trying her engines, and
an intention was professed of-returning to land the joiners who were
on board.
1 British Appendix, vol'. 1, p. 424.
2 Ibid., p. 426.
3 Ibid., p. 404.
4Ibid.,j&-ig^_.?
^Ipited States Documents, vo"
6United .States Documents, vol
7 British Appendix, vol. 1, p. 404.
8 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 404
vi. p. 509.
ii, p. 637.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
47 9
But while thus leaving in the disguise of a peaceful merchant-vessel
trying its engines, the Japan was intended to be converted into a ship
of war, and was not to return to Greenock. When she got well away
from Greenock, the joiners, who had been fitting up cabin-doors when
she left, were employed to fit up a magazine, and were afterward landed
lower down in the Clyde. Up to this time no information had been
furnished, or communication made, to Her Majesty's government on the
subject of this vessel.
Having left the Clyde, the Japan proceeded to the .coast of France,
where, as we know, she was joined by the small steamer Alar, which
brought out to her her armament of guus and munitions of war.
Let us pause, here for a moment to see whether, thus far, there was
anything in respect of which negligence could be, with the slightest
show of reason, imputed to Her Majesty's government.
It is certain that, though the attention of Mr. Underwood, the United
States consul at Glasgow, had been for some time fixed on this vessel,
there was nothing on which it was thought that the action of the government could be invoked.
It is said, indeed, in the argument of the United States, that the
reason was that he "had not and could not, with his means of information, produce ' such evidence as would support au indictment for misdemeanor 1 and nothing short of that, Mr. Adams had been informed
in the July previous, would, in the opinion of the solicitor of the customs
at London, furnish 'justifiable ground of seizure.'" But, whatever
might have been said in the preceding July, at this time there was
everything to encourage Mr. Adams, if he had possessed any ground
for asking for the interposition of the government, to take that course.
During the last three months he had made representations to the British
government ou the subject of three different vessels, the Georgiana,
the Phantom, and the Southerner, iu regard to which, at the time of his
first communication, he had no evidence to produce beyond the statements or suspicions of the United States consul at Loudon or Liverpool; and inquiries had been instantly made in each case, and in regard
to the latter two vessels, Mr. A.dams was writing at this very time
(April 6) to express his satisfaction at the steps which had been taken.1
He was, moreover, in correspondence with Earl Bussell on the subject
of another vessel, the Alexandra, which was seized on the 5th April by
order of the government, a fact of which he was informed on the same
day, and at which ho also wrote to testify his "lively satisfaction."2
He knew, too, that on no better authority than public report, the government had of themselves instituted an inquiry in the month of March
with a view to ascertaining whether vessels of war were being built at
Glasgow for the confederates, the result of which inquiry had been communicated to him on the 21st of March.3 The reason why Mr. Adams
made np communication to the Government relative to this vessel was;
as he expressly stated when writing to Mr. Seward three days later than
the date of the vessel's departure, that " nothing had been furnished
to him of a nature to base proceedings upon."
Upon what, then, can any charge of negligence against Her Majesty's
government be founded in respect of this vessel? Simply upon the old
allegation of the notoriety of the fact that it was being fitted out as a
vessel of war for the service of the confederate government. And how
is this notoriety attempted to be established1?   Solely by an anonymous
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 71.
* Ibid., 1 231.
3 United States Documents, vol. ii, p. 203.480
ARBITRATION
GENEVA.
letter, purporting to be addressed to Lord Palmerston, published in the
Daily News of the 12th of February, 1863, in which the vessel is spoken
of.1 The letter is a very long one, and not written in a style to command
much attention, the changes being rung on "pirates" and " slaveholders" in a very sensational style. The probability is, that this letter
was never seen by any of Her Majesty ministers; still more so that,
if it was, it was not read through. If it is meant to be suggested that
the author was writing upon facts notorious to the world, and not from
his own private sources of knowledge, it is only necessary to turn to
the letter to see that this could not have been so. The writer is personally familiar with the whole subject of vessels built for, or iu the interest of, the confederates, and was doubtless some official connected
with the United States. But what form did the notoriety, of which this
anonymous writer was the organ, take in respect of the Japan, afterward the Georgia? Did it treat her as a vessel of war, as the passages
in the American case and argument would lead us to suppose? Not
so. Her destination was expected to be of an humbler kind—that of a
blockade-runner. This is what is said by "Anonymous" respecting
this vessel:
Mr. Peter Denny, of Dumbarton, has constructed two fine screw-steamers. They are
lying in the Clyde. Report, of a somewhat authentic kind, says one of them is partly
owned by the I Chinese" and partly by individuals at Nassau, New Providence. It is
publicly announced that she is soon to be employed on the line between Nassau and'
Charleston. Her name is the Virginia. The term • | Chinese " is in general use in the
building-yards of the Clyde and the Mersey to designate the confederates, and the
"Emperor of China" has no other signification, in this connection, than to personify
Jefferson Davis. The " Chinese" have been striving very hard to purchase the sister-
vessel to the Virgiuia, through one of their agents at Liverpool, but Mr'. Denny built
and lost the Memphis, and he requires the " Celestials " to pay cash down before he
parts with his property.2
It need hardly be pointed out that, being " employed on aline," with
reference to a vessel, means being employed in carrying goods or passengers backward and forward between two or more given places.
There was, therefore, nothing in this letter, any more than in the facts,
to lead to any supposition on the part of the government that the Japan
was intended for a ship of war.
But let us follow the vessel. Having, left the Clyde, the Japan first
made towards the Isle of Man, then suddenly .changed her course, and
went north, through the North Channel, then down the west coast of
Ireland, passed Cape Clear, then steered eastward, and then made
straight for Ushant, Ushant light being the first light sighted. She
then kept on and off near the French coast.3
In the mean time a small steamer called the Alar, of London, having
taken the armament of the Georgia on board at Newhaven, as well as
some twenty to thirty men, who were to form an addition to her crew,
set sail from Newhaven on the 5th of April, having cleared out for
Alderney and St. Malo. Keeping clear, however, of both these places,
she steered straight for the west coast of France; which, however,
owing to accidents which happened to her machinery, she did not reach
till Wednesday, the 8th. The Georgia was then sighted far away to the
westward, and the machinery of the Alar having again broken down,
the former vessel came and took her in tow, and took her into, the narrow passage between Ushant and the main-land. There the transshipment of the guns and munitions of the Georgia from the Alar took
1 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 503.
6 Ibid., vol. vi, p. 505.
3 British Appendix, vol. i. p. 412.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
481
place, the whole being finally accomplished by the afternoon of Thursday, the 9th, when the Georgia stood out to sea, while the Alar returned,
but her machinery having again broken down, she was obliged to put
into Plymouth.1
Prior to the Alar parting company with the Georgia, a Captain
Lamont, or Dupont, who had come out in the Alar, assumed the command of the Georgia, and, having called the crew together, informed
them that the vessel was not bound for Singapore, but was intended for
the confederate service, to " sink, burn, and destroy vessels belonging
to the United States." He then proposed to them to sign articles to
serve for three years. Part of the crew agreed to sign articles accordingly, but some seventeen refused, were paid their wages then due, and
returned in the Alar.
In the mean time Mr. Dolan, the collector of customs at Newhaven,
had, the day after the Alar left Newhaven, written to the commissioners of customs respecting her:
Custom-House, Newhaven, April 6, 1863.
Honorable Sirs : The steamship Alar, of London, 85 tons, owned by H. P. Maples,
sailed on Sunday morning, 5th instant, at 2 a. m., bound, according to the ship's papers,
viz, the accompanying content, for Alderney and St. Malo. On Saturday, at midnight,
thirty men, twenty of whom appeared to be British sailors, ten mechanics, arrived by
train. Three gentlemen accompanied them—Mr. Lewis, of Alderney, Mr. Ward, and
Mr. Jones. The men appeared to be ignorant of their precise destination; some said
they were to get £20 each for the trip. A man, rather lame, superintended them.
Shortly after midnight a man arrived from Brighton on horseback, with a telegram,
which, for purposes of secrecy, had been sent there, and not to Newhaven, it is suspected. Mr. Staniforth, the agent, replied to my inquiries this morning that the Alar
had munitions of war on board, and that they were consigned by 3to
a Mr. Lewis, of Alderney. His answers were brief, and with reserve, leaving no doubt
on my mind, nor on the minds of any here, that the thirty men and munitions of war
are destined for transfer at sea to some second Alabama. The private telegram to
Brighton intimated, very probably, having been reserved for the last hour, where that
vessel would be found. Whether the shipment of the men, who all appeared to bo
British subjects, can, if it should be hereafter proved that they have been transferred
to a Federal or confederate vessel, be held as an infringement of the foreign-enlistment
act, and whether the clearance of the Alar, if hereafter proved to be untrue, can render
the master amenable under the customs-consolidation act, is for your consideration re-
spectfuUy submitted.
R. J. DOLAN, Collector.3
Thus, Alderney was supposed to be the place to which the Alar had
gone. Similar information appears to have reached Mr. Adams, though
we are not informed from what quarter, On the 8th of April he writes
to Earl Bussell:
Legation of the United States, London, April 8,1863.
My Lord : From information received at this legation, which appears entitled to
credit, I am compelled to the painful conclusion that a steam-vessel has just departed
from the Clyde with the intent to depredate on the commerce of the people of the
United States. She passed there under the name of the Japan, but is since believed
to have assumed the name of the Virginia. Her immediate destination is the island
of Alderney, where it is supposed she may yet be at this moment. A small steamer
called the Alar, belonging to Newhaven, and commanded by Henry P. Maples, has been
loaded with a large supply of guns, shells, shot, powder, &c, intended for the equipment of the Virginia, and is either on the way or has arrived there. It is further alleged, that a considerable number of British subjects have been enlisted at Liverpool,
and sent to serve on board this cruiser.
Should it be yet in the power of Her Majesty's government to institute some inquiry
into the nature of these proceedings, in season to establish their character, if innocent,
or to put a stop to them, if criminal, I feel sure that it would be removing a heavy
burden of anxiety from the minds of my countrymen in the United States.
I pray, &c,
CHARLES FRANCIS ADAMS.3
1 British Appendix, vol. i, pp. 409, 412.
3 Blank in original.
3 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 405.
31 BH.'JJJ
l   iu 11
jaa-
482
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
This was the first communication received by the government on the
subject of this ship. Not a moment was lost by the government in instituting inquiries, and a letter was dispatched the same day to the
lieutenant-governor of Guernsey, Major-General Slade, from the home
office, to whose department the Channel Islands belong:
Whitehall, April 8,1863.
Sir : I am directed by Sir George Grey to transmit to you herewith, as received
through the foreign office, a copy of a letter from the United States minister at this
court, respecting a steam-vessel named either the Japan or the Virginia, reported to
have left the Clyde for Alderney,*where she is to receive on board an armament conveyed to that island by a smaU steamer, the Alar, belonging to Newhaven, and is to
he eventually employed in hostilities against the United States; and I am to request
that you will make immediate inquiry into the truth of the allegations contained in
that communication.
I have to caU your attention to the statute 59 Geo. Ill, cap. 69. Section seven appears to be applicable to this case if the information which has been given to the
minister of the United States of America,should turn out to be correct. In that case
the law-officers of the Crown should be instructed to take, without delay, the proper
proceedings authorized by tbe law of Alderney, to enforce the provisions of the act in
question, and the officers of customs may be called upon to assist, if necessary.
Sir George Grey will be glad to be informed of the result of the inquiry, and of any
steps that maybe taken in consequence.
I have, &c,
H. WADD1NGTON.1
On receipt of this letter, General Slade immediately se*t a ship of
war to Alderney; but as neither the Japan nor the Alar had gone to
Alderney, of course neither of them was to be found there.
I should have thought it difficult under these circumstances to raise an
accusation of negligence against Her Majesty's government. Nevertheless, the government are charged in the American case with neglect in
not having, on receipt of Mr. Adams's letter of the 8th, dispatched ships
of war from Portsmouth and Plymouth to seize the two vessels. " The
sailing and the destination," it is said, " were so notorious as to be the
subject of newspaper comment."2 A single newspaper, the Liverpool
Journal of Commerce, of April 9, is referred to in support of this assertion. I turn to it, and I find it there stated, indeed, that the vessel had
sailed, but "for unknown destinations."^ The only direction, therefore, given
to the government inquiry was Alderney. To that island it is said to
have been incumbent on the government to send ships of warfrom Portsmouth and Plymouth, because "Alderney and the Channel Islands were
on the route to St. Malo and Brest; and it is not at all probable,
scarcely possible, that the Alar and the Georgia would not have been discovered."4 There is. in this statement a geographical confusion pardonable only in parties writing from the other side of the Atlantic. Brest
and St. Malo are on different sides of the French coast, and at least one
hundred and fifty miles apart, and according as a vessel was bound to
the one or the other, she would steer a totally different course. But
still more startling is the statement that Alderney and the Channel
Islands would have been in the course of a vessel coming round the
west coast of Ireland, and bound for Ushant and the northwest part of
the French coast, as the Georgia undoubtedly was. To a vessel coming
round Cape Clear, and intending to make her way towards the Bay of
Biscay, or to stand out into the Atlantic, Alderney would have heen
from two hundred and fifty to three hundred miles out of her way!
Independently of the absurdity of supposing that the Georgia would
1 i.ntisn Appendix, vol. i, p. 4U1.
2 Case of the United States, p. 398.
3 United States Documents, vol. ii, p. 668.
4 American Case, np. 398, 399.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
483
have come to Alderney at all—more especially as she would there have
been' exposed to seizure, as being in a British port, if any suspicion
should have arisen respecting her real character—when it was much easier
for her to take in her armament off the French coastj I must express
my surprise that it should be deliberately stated, by those who know
that she never went to or near Alderney at all, and that no other destination of the vessel was known or surmised, to which ships could have
been sent after her, that, by reason that Earl Bussell, " instead of directing action to be taken by the navy, directed inquiries to be made
by the treasury and home office, the Georgia escaped."
Is it to be said that without having the least idea of any other destination than Alderney, the government were to send ships of war in
all directions in quest of two vessels, neither of which could possibly be
known to any officer in Her Majesty's navy ? Even had the spot where
the two vessels were to meet been known, it would scarcely have been
possible for a ship from Plymouth—much less from Portsmouth, which
is more than one hundred miles further off—to have overtaken them.
The letter from Mr. Adams was not written till the 8th, and would
appear, from Mr. Hammond's letter to that gentleman of the same date,
to have been received in the afternoon of that day. Had instructions
been telegraphed to Plymouth that afternoon, it would have taken some
short time to carry the orders into execution. Steamships are not ready
to start at five minutes' notice. From Plymouth to Ushant is some
one hundred and twenty miles; and, on the 9th, the Georgia had left
the French coast and was on her way upon the ocean. But for the
delay occasioned by the breaking down of the Alar's machinery she
would have been gone several hours sooner.
There is a homely, but expressive, English saying, that " Any stick
serves to beat a dog with," but one must have a most determined intention to beat the creature to make such a case as this a ground of
complaint.
It has been sought to fix the British government- with the responsibility for damage done by this vessel on the ground that, until the 23d
of June, Bold continued to be on the register as owner. It is true that
it was not until this date that Bold informed the collector of customs
that he had parted with the vessel, and returned the certificate of registry. No such consequence, however,as is contended for, atall follows.
The ownership of a British vessel may be transferred, though the evidence of it, as afforded by the register, remains incomplete; and it
would be absurd to suppose that Mr. Bold, if the true owner, lent his
vessel to the confederate government, or failed to take care to be paid
for her before he parted with her. The delay in canceling the registration was, no doubt, for the purpose of delaying as long as possible the
disclosure of the real transaction.
Mr. Squarey, the Liverpool solicitor engaged for the United States,
being consulted on this point, gave the following very sensible advice:
It does not appear to me the engagement of the crew can be treated as an offense
against the act, because the only legal contract binding upon the crew was that appearing upon the articles. The men were not liabhj to do anything except what they
had agreed, to do by the articles ; aud from the statements of the men whom I saw, it
did not appear that they knew, when they shipped, that it was expected or intended
that they should serve on board a man-of-war or privateer. As regards the liability
of the British registered owner to make good to the owners of the American vessel
destroyed the loss sustained by them, I conceive it must depend upon the question
whether those iu command of the vessel at the time can be considered to have been the
agents of the British owner. If they were such agents, and there was any evidence to
show that the destruction of the American -ship could be considered as an act within
the scope of their authority, I have no doubt that the owners would be liable; but itARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
appears to me that tbe circumstances to which I have previously referred go very far
to rebut the presumption that such agency existed, and to prove that, in destroying
the AmeriSn vessel, the officers and crew were acting, not for the British owner, but
for the governn.ent.of the so-called Confederate States. In such case I do not think
that any liability could be established against the British owner, for it is now well
established that the mere fact of being on the register of the ship does not involve
liability for the acts or engagements of the master and crew, and that such liability is
in fact a question depending upon express or implied agency in every case.
Although, therefore, I do not see how a British owner is to be made liable, there is,
in my opinion, a case which justifies the American Government in bringing the matter
before the notice of the British govesiiment, and requiring explanations from that government of the circumstances under*which a British vessel is- found to be engaged in
the destruction of vessels belonging to American citizens.1
It appears to me, therefore, beyond all question clear that no charge
of negligence can by possibility attach to Her Majesty's government in
respect of this ship. And I confess it was not without surprise that
I heard one member of this tribunal say that, but that Mr. Adams had
declared in favor of the British government on this occasion, he should
have been prepared to pronounce " a.more severe" judgment. If such
views are to prevail, the responsibility of neutrals will be a serious thing
indeed.
It only remains to be added iu respect of this vessel that a prosecution was instituted by the government under the foreign-enlistment
act, against Jones and Highatt, two members of the firm of Jones &
Co., of Liverpool, by whom the men had been engaged to serve on board
the Japan, and as to whom it was alleged that they had engaged the
men for the purpose of their enlisting in the confederate service when
the true character of the vessel was declared. The case was tried before
me at Liverpool, when both defendants were found guilty by the jury,
but points of law were reserved involving considerable difficulty, particularly that the men, at the time they were engaged at Liverpool, were
not aware of the ulterior purpose which the defendants were alleged to
have had in view.
On the defendants being brought up for judgment, the defendants
having consented to abandon the points reserved, and to forego an intended application for anew trial; an arrangement was come to between
the counsel for the Crown and the counsel for the defendants that a fine
of £50 should be imposed on each of them. The punishment might, at
first sight, appear inadequate, but looking to the legal difficulties, it
was, on the whole, I think, a prudent arrangement; it having been better that the law should be vindicated, though with a less degree of
punishment, than that the chance of a defeat should be risked.
CASE OF THE SHENANDOAH.
This vessel, originally known as the Sea King, was a screw-steamer
_, J    |jy       built at Glasgow in the year 1863, for the purpose of being
The Shenandoah. , ,   . , /~.^   . -•     o       r>,\ Jr       £r o
employed m the China trade.2 She had been seen by Mr-
Dudley at Glasgow in 1863, who represented her as well adapted for warlike purposes, and thought she was likely to be bought for such purpose
by the confederates.3 But in this he was mistaken. She was bought
by private owners; Messrs. Bobertson & Co., of London, acted as managing owners.4
She had from the beginning two 12-pounder carronades, such as mer-
1 British Appendix,, vol. i, p. 428.
sIbid., p. 724.
3 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 554.
4 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 494.sss
.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
48
b
chant-vesse
i
but nothing
s are in the habit of carrying as signal-guns,
more.
In November, 1863, she left London on a voyage first to New Zealand^
taking out troops for Her Majesty's government to Auckland, aud from
thence to Hankow for a cargo of tea, and with the latter she returned
to London. She was a vessel built entirely for commercial purposes,
and was in no respect whatever adapted for war.
In September, 1864, she was sold by her owners, in the ordinary way
of business, to a Mr. Bichard Wright, a ship-owner of Liverpool.' On
the 7th of October, 1864, Wright granted a certificate of sale to Mr. P.
S. Corbett, the master of the ship, empowering him to sell her within
six months from the date of the certificate, at any port out of the
United Kingdom, for a price not less than £15,000.2
After this the vessel cleared out, as for a trading voyage | to Bombay, calling at any ports and places on the passage, and any other ports
or places in India, China, or Japan, or the Pacific or Atlantic Oceans,
trading to or from, as legal freights might offer, until the return of the
ship to a final port of discharge in the United Kingdom or continent of
Europe; the voyage not to exceed two years.'53 A crew was hired, and
signed articles for the voyage in question, and the vessel sailed as if
upon it, without any suspicion on the part of the crew, or of any one
not in the secret, that she was intended for any other destination.
The vessel underwent no change prior to her ^leaving; no equipment
of her for the purpose of receiving any armament took place; she remained as she had been from the beginning, fitted for commercial purposes only. She was wholly unadapted to receive guns. She had on
board only two small 12-pounder guns she had always had,"such as.,
merchant-vessels of her class always carry as signal-guns. She had no
arms or munitions of war.
When afterwards examined at Melbourne by Captain Payne, the latter reported that " everything indicated that she was nothing more than
an ordinary merchant-ship." He could not discover any magazine; there
were no stands for small-arms, cutlasses, or pistols; no shot-racks were
fitted, nor could he see any shell-room aloft. "There is nothing," he
says, "to protect her machines from shot and shell; in fact, her boilers
and the principal part of her machinery are above the water-line. Her
bunkers certainly are between the machinery and the ship's side, but
from their small dimensions they would offer but small resistance to
shot. The most vulnerable part, viz, the boilers, is left quite unprotected." i "I am altogether of opinion," adds Captain Payne, "that there
is nothing in her build, armament, (with the exception of two Whitworth
guns,) and equipment that should call for more special notice than that
she is an ordinary merchant-vessel, armed with a few guns."
It is plain, therefore, that till the Whitworth guns in question were
put on board, there was nothing whatever on board the Sea King to attract attention, or to excite the slightest suspicion about her. That this
was so is shown by the fact that the crew fully believed that she was
really bound for the voyage to the East.
But it appears that the Mr. Bichard Wright who had bought the
vessel was the father-in-law of Mr. Prioleau, the managing partner of
the firm of Fraser, Trenholm & Co., of Liverpool; whereupon we are
gravely told, in the case of the United States, that " the acquisition, by
a near connection of a member of their firm, of a fast-going steamer,
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 725.
3 Ibid., p. 495.
:) Ibid., p. 496.
1 Ibid., p. 397.486
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
capable of being so converted, and the proposition to send her to sea in
ballast, with nothing ou board but two mounted guus and a supply of
provisions and coal, ought, of itself, to have attracted the attention of
the British officials; and that the omission to take notice of the fact is
a proof of want of the due diligence required by the treaty."1
Not the slightest intimation, however, is given as to what notice .
should have been taken, or what could possibly have been done.   There
was nothing that could, in any way, have justified the detention of the
vessel.   In the foregoing statement we have, therefore, as it seems to
me, an unwarrantable assumption.
The Sea King left the port of London on the 9th October, and proceeded to Madeira, where she arrived on the 18th.2 In the mean time a
small steamer called the Laurel had left Liverpool, having cleared for
Matamoras and Nassau. She took out cases marked as machinery,3 but
in reality containing two 33-pounder Whitworth guns, and four 8-inch
smooth-bore guns of 55 hundred-weight each, together with shells,
small-arms, and ammunition for the use of the Sea King.
Mr. Dudley was somehow informed that the cases contained guns and
gun-carriages, and believing they were intended to be mounted on the
decks of the Laurel, wrote to Mr. Adams that he apprehended s"he was
intended as a privateer. At the same time he admitted that he had no
evidence to implicate her except the taking on the guns in cases.4 It is
plain, therefore, that Mr. Dudley did not surmise any connection between
the two vessels, one of which was starting from London, the other from
Liverpool, and I am at a loss to see how any could possibly have been
surmised.
Lieutenant Waddell, the future captain of the Sea King, and the
other officers, and seventeen men who were to form part of her crew,
were also passengers in the Laurel.
Before the Laurel left Liverpool, Mr. Dudley began to suspect that
the guns put on board her were intended for another vessel, as they
were more in number than would be required for a vessel of her size;5
but he was evidently altogether without any definite information about
her.
The Sea King arrived at Madeira about the 18th of Octoher; the
Laurel about the same time. The following day both vessels proceeded
to some small islands called the Desertas, where the guns and warlike
stores intended for the Sea Bang were transferred to her from the Laurel.6 Either then, or prior to-leaving England, Corbett, acting1 on the
power of attorney received from the owner, Wright, sold the vessel to
the confederate government. According to his account the sale took
place on the 19th.7 On that day the captain and officers took possession of her as a confederate ship. Captain Corbett informed the crew
that he had sold the ship to the confederate government, that she was
henceforth to be a cruiser in their service, and that he had delivered her
up to them.
Every effort was made, by persuasion and offers of large bounties and
high wages, to induce the former crew to enter the confederate service
on board the vessel; but, with the exception of two or three, all the
rest, forty-two in number, refused, and were conveyed in the Laurel to
1 United States Case, p. 113.
2 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 485.
3 Ibid., p. 493.
4 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 556.
5 Ibid., p. 558.
6 British Appeucff§:, vol. i, pp. 478-482, 486-489.
7 Ibid., p. 481.-OPINIONS' OF  SIR. ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
487
Teneriffe, from whence they afterward returned to London. The confederate flag having been hoisted on the Sea King, she cruised thenceforward under the name of the Shenandoah.
It must be, indeed, a stern stickler for neutral responsibility who
could say that up to this point there had been anything for which blame
could be attributed to Her Majesty's government. Not the slightest
suspicion had attached to this ship, which was only known as a
merchant-vessel, prior to her leaving England. But besides this, no
offense whatever had been committed against British law.
The ship had not been either "fitted out," "equipped," or " armed,"
within the United Kingdom or within Her Majesty's dominions. Built as
a merchant-vessel she had been sold, as she stood, to the confederate
government; and neither by the municipal law of Great Britain, any
more than by that of the United States, nor by international law, was
such a sale in any way illegal.
The argument of the United States itself admits that 1 if the Shenandoah at this point of her history stood alone, and there had been no
other cause of complaint against Her Majesty's government, the United
States could not now hold Great Britain responsible for her original
escape and armament."
No question, therefore, can arise as to the responsibility of Great
Britain in respect of any damages done by this vessel prior to her arrival
at Melbourne.
The first that was heard of the Shenandoah by Her Majesty's government was from a letter of the 30th of October from Mr. Grattan, the
British consul at Teneriffe. Ou the Laurel arriving at that place, the
master, J. F. Bamsay, on presenting himself at the consular office, stated
that he wished to laud 43 passengers, who were to proceed to England
by the next Liverpool steamer, and that these persons were the master
and crew of the British steamer Sea King, of Loudon, which vessel had
been wrecked off the Desertas. The Laurel continued her voyage on
the 22d instant. The master, on getting up steam, and not before,
landed the above-mentioned seamen.
The master of the Sea King, P. S. Corbett, did not call at the consular
office, as is usual in such cases, either for the purpose of making a protest or to claim assistance. Therefore, on the 25th instant, Consul
Grattan sent to desire his attendance, and demanded the certificate of
registry of his vessel, in pursuance of instructions contained in paragraph No. 13 of the board of trade instructions. On handing in his
certificate Corbett informed Mr. Grattan that his vessel had not been
wrecked, but that she" had been sold in London, and delivered to her
owners on the high seas ; and that himself and his crew had landed
here for the purpose of returning to England as passengers in the West
Coast of Africa mail-steamer, due at the port on the 31st instant.
The consul, having been struck by the discrepancy between the statements of the" two masters, made inquiries of some of the former crew of
the Sea King, and having taken their depositions, and being of opinion
that they contained evidence sufficient to substantiate a charge against
the master, Corbett, of an infringement of the foreign-enlistment act,
sent him in custody to England, at the same time forwarding the depositions of the men in a dispatch to Earl Bussell.1
I will conclude the narrative as to what further happened in relation
to Corbett before I pursue the further history of the Shenandoah.
On the arrival of the depositions in England, the law-officers at first
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 477.
_i' *■'»"■*
wm
488
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
advised that no prosecution could be sustained against Corbett, as all
the facts had taken place on the high seas, and a British ship on the
high seas could not properly be considered as " within Her Majesty's
dominions, or a place belonging to or subject to Her Majesty."1 Two
further affidavits having been afterward furnished by Mr. Adams, of
men who had been engaged by the defendant in London, and who spoke
to language of a suspicious character then used by him, the law-officers,
on being again consulted, thought that there was sufficient evidence on
which to found a prosecution.; and they further thought that as the
ship had left the country as a TBritish ship, she might, prima facie, be
considered as such, that is, till a sale and transfer of property in her
was shown; and that it might be deserving of serious consideration
whether her deck might not be considered as 1 aplace belonging to Her
Majesty," within the language of the act.2 A prosecution against Corbett was accordingly instituted by-the government, for a breach of the
second section of the foreign-enlistment act, in endeavoring to procure
men to enlist and serve, or to embark and go out of Her Majesty's dominions to enlist and serve, in the confederate service. The case came
on before myself and a special jury, at Westminster Hall, in December,
1865. The witnesses for the prosecution were six sailors who had
formed part of the crew of the Sea King, and who deposed that, after
Captain Corbett had informed the crew that he had sold the ship to the
confederate government, he endeavored to persuade the men to enlist,
pointing out to them the advantage of so doing in the way of pay and prize-
money. There was, however, considerable inconsistency in the evidence
of these men, some of them ascribing to the defendant what others put
into the mouth of Captain Waddell, and vice versa. The men appear
to have had a strong feeling against the captain, by reason of their intended voyage to the east having come to an abrupt termination, and
to their not having received as much wages as they expected for the
time they had been out.
The first mate, the steward, and the chief engineer of the crew of the
Sea King, one of the crew of the Laurel, and two or three confederate
sailors who had joined the confederate ship, all of whom had witnessed
all that passed, denied positively that Corbett had taken any part in
persuading the men to sign articles, but attributed to Captain Waddell,
exclusively, the language which the witnesses for the prosecution had
represented as spoken by Corbett.
It having been objected on the part of the defendant that while, in
order to constitute an offense under the enactment in question, the act
complained of must have been done within Her Majesty's dominions,
what was here alleged to have been done by the defendant had taken
place in Spanish waters, it was answered by the solicitor-general that,
if the act had been done on board a British vessel, that would be sufficient to satisfy the statute, and that, though he could not deny that a
sale of the vessel had taken place, yet that, so long as the British crew
remained on board, the vessel could not be considered as having been
delivered up to the purchasers, and must still be looked upon as a British ship. I was, however, clearly of opinion that the defendant Corbett
having openly announced the sale of the ship, and that he had delivered
her over to Waddell, and the latter having assumed the command, and
with his officers taken possession of her, the delivery had been completed and the property effectually transferred. I, however, desired the
opinion of the jury on this point, as well as on the questions whether
1 British Appendix, ^Bpl. i, p. 483.
i Ibid!, p. 490.m
m
•"%*«•
OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
489
the defendant had endeavored to induce the men to enlist in the confederate service, as crew of the Sea King; and if so, whether, when he
engaged the men in London, he had the ulterior design of inducing
them to enlist when beyond the Queen's dominions. The jury thought
the evidence too conflicting upon which to convict the defendant, and,
it being very doubtful whether the witnesses for the Crown were not
confounding what had been said by Waddell with what was said by
Corbett, I think the jury acted wisely on the whole in acquitting the
defendant.1
I have adverted to these circumstances in justice to the government
and the solicitor-general who conducted the prosecution. No public
prosecutor could have discharged his duty more honestly or zealously,
or with a greater desire to obtain a conviction if it could legitimately
and properly be done.
1 return to the Shenandoah. Nothing more was heard of her by Her
Majesty's government till she arrived at Melbourne on the
r.t-ii        /V   _- -. r./.- At Melbourne.
25th of January, I860.
Before relating the events which occurred during her visit at this
port, it may be well briefly to describe the locality, some knowledge of
which is necessary to a thorough appreciation of the facts. Port Philip,
at the northeasterly end of which Melbourne is situated, is a bay of
irregular oval shape, some sixty or seventy miles in circuit, opening
into the sea by a narrow entrance to the southwest, called the Heads.
The harbor of Melbourne, situated as has been said at the opposite end,
is called Hobson's Bay, and forms the estuary of the Yarra-Yarra. Melbourne itself is about two miles inland up the Tarra-Yarra; on either
side of Hobson's Bay are two suburbs of Melbourne, named respectively
Williamstown and Sandridge. They are each connected with the town
by a railway, and a steam-ferry runs between the two, from one railway
pier to another across the bay, which is here two and a half miles wide.-
Williamstown is the place where shipping operations are for the most
part carried on, and where seafaring men principally frequent. It
should be added that the governor had, at the time of the arrival of
the Shenandoah, a small military force at his disposal, but no vessel of
war of any kind; the Bombay, which is spoken of in the argument of
the United States as such, being merely a contract steam-packet belonging to the Peninsular and Oriental Company, with a naval agent on
board iu charge of the mails. The authorities were therefore dependent upon the customs officers and the ordinary water-police for the surveillance of the harbor.
Immediately on the arrival of the Shenandoah, her commander, Waddell, wrote to Sir C. H. Darling, the governor, to announce his arrival:2
CONFEDERATE STATES STEAMER OF WAR SHENANDOAH,
E>„,,* 7>7,;7,-v, 7V,,,,,,,,.,, OK i_!i;.-.
Port Philip, January 25, 1865. .
Sir : I have the honor to announce to your excellency the arrival of the Confederate
States steamer Shenandoah, under my command, in Port Philip, this afternoon, and
also to communicate that the steamer's machinery requires repairs, and that I "am in
want of coals.
I desire your excellency to grant permission that I may make the necessary repairs
and supply of coals to enable me to get to sea as quickly as possible.
I desire also your excellency's permission to land my prisoners. I shall observe the
neutralitv.
I have, &c,
JAS. J. WADDELL.
1 See reports of the trial, printed in United  States Documents, vol. iv, pp. 618
et.seq.
3 Appendix to British Case, vol. i, p. 500.
I490
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
The conduct of the governor and of the executive council of the colony
seems to have been marked by the most anxious desire to do what was
strictly right.
The commissioner of trade and customs was directed to communicate
with the commander of the Shenandoah in the name of the governor,1
requesting him to inform the government of Victoria of the nature and
extent of the repairs of which he stated his vessel to be in need ; and
informing him that permission would be granted for the Shenandoah to
remain in the waters of the colony a sufficient time to effect her repairs,
and to receive the provisions or things necessary for the subsistence of
her crew—but not beyond what would be necessary for immediate use;
and that when the government of Victoria were in possession of the
nature and extent of the supplies and repairs which were necessary, he
should be informed of the time which his vessel would be permitted to
rema§ in the waters of the colony;. and that, as to that part of his letter
which referred to prisoners, he must communicate to the government
the names of the prisoners, and any other particulars relating to them
which he might be willing to supply.
The application of Lieutenant Waddell to land his prisoners was also
directed to be communicated to the United States consul.
Mr. Blanchard, the consul of the United States at Melbourne, protested against the Shenandoah being admitted to the privileges of a
belligerent, maintaining that, as she had been sold at sea to the confederate government, a sale under such circumstances was unlawful; that,
being a British-built merchant-ship, she could not be converted into a
war-vessel of the Confederate States on the high seas, but only by proceeding to, and sailing in such a character from, one of the ports of the
confederacy; and that " not being legally a man-of-war, she was but a
lawless pirate, dishonoring the flag under which her status was to be
established and under which she decoyed her victims."
Having consulted the law-officers of the colony, who advised that the vessel purported to be, and in their opinion should be treated as, a ship of war
belonging to a belligereut power, the governor and council decided that,
whatever might be the previous history of the Shenandoah, the government of the colony was bound to treat her as a ship of war belonging
to a belligerent power.
It is clear that the law-officers of the colony were perfectly right.
Even had there been any foundation for the notion of Mr. Blanchard
that the sale of the vessel on the high seas was invalid, the Shenandoah
arrived at the colony as a commissioned ship of a belligerent power,
which, according to the usage of maritime nations, was a sufficient ground
for her reception as a vessel of war. It is to be observed that no question can arise in respect of this vessel as to its having been the duty of
the British government to seize her in spite of the commission of the
Confederate States. She had neither been equipped, nor armed, iior
"specially adapted, wholly or in part, for warlike use, in British territory,
nor was .the sale of her to a belligerent on the high seas any violation
of the rights of Great Britain as a neutral. To have seized "her would
therefore have been utterly unjustifiable.
A question, it appears, arose as to whether the officer in command
should not be required to show his commission, and the majority of the
council decided that there was no necessity for doing so. And nothing
having then occurred to lead to any doubt as to the vessel being commissioned by the confederate government, or as to the honor of the
1 Appendix to British Case, vol.
i, p. 511.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
491
officer who commanded her, to have demanded to see the commission he
professed to bear would have implied an unworthy suspicion.
What followed is thus related in a narrative signed by the gentlemen
who were at that time chief secretary, minister of justice, comicissioner
of trade and customs, and attorney-general of the colony:
On receiving the communication from the governor, Lieutenant Waddell employed
Messrs. Langlands, Brothers & Co., iron-founders, of Melbourne, to examine the vessel
and to undertake the repairs, and they, on the 30th January, reported that it was absolutely necessary to put the Shenandoah on the government slip, as the diver who inspected the vessel had reported that the lining of the outer stern-back was entirely gone,
and would have to be replaced; and that, as three days would elapse before the vessel
was slipped, it would take ten days from date to accomplish the repairs.
It may be here remarked that the slip (termed the "government slip" in the report
of Messrs. Langlands, Brothers & Co.) was not in possession of, or under the control
of the government, the fact being that, although it was originally built by the government, yet it had been for many years leased, and at that time was under lease to Mr. Enoch
Chambers.
This report was submitted to the commissioner of trade and customs, who wrote, by
direction of his excellency the governor, for a list of the supplies required for the immediate use of the vessel, and stated that his excellency had appointed a board, consisting of Mr. Payne, inspector and secretary of the steam navigation board; Mr. Elder,
the superintendent of the marine yard at Melbourne; and Mr. Wilson, the government
marine engineer, to go on board the Shenandoah, and to examine and report whether
that vessel was then in a fit state to go to sea, or what repairs were necessary.
Lieutenant Waddell furnished a list of the supplies he required, and permission Avas
given for the shipment on board of reasonable quantities of the supplies asked for.
The board appointed by his excellency had the vessel examined by a diver, and then
reported—
1st. That the Shenandoah was not in a fit state to proceed to sea as a steamship.
2d. That repairs were necessary.
3d. That the part or parts requiring repair being the inner stern-post bearing of the
screw-shaft, the extent of the damage could not be ascertained without the vessel
being slipped.
His excellency, en the receipt of this report, gave permission for the vessel to be
placed on the patent slip, and he requested the commissioner of trade and customs to
make arrangements for obtaining daily reports of the progress of repairs and provisioning of the Shenandoah, and directed every precaution to be taken against the possibility of the commander of that vessel in any way extending its armament, or
rendering the present armament more effective; and these instructions were carefully
acted on.
On the 6th of February, 1865, an application was made for permission to land some
surplus stores from the Shenandoah, which was refused on the advice of the attorney-
general.
The repairs of the Shenandoah not having been proceeded with, the commissioner of
trade and customs wrote on the 7th of February to Lieutenant Waddell, stating that
his excellency desired that a day should be named for proceeding to sea; and that he
was directed' to say that, after carefully considering the question of the position of
Great Britain as strictly neutral in the present contest, the use of appliances, the property of the government, could not be granted, nor any assistance rendered by it, directly
or indirectly, toward effecting the repairs of the Shenandoah.
Lieutenant Waddell replied that he could not name a day for proceeding to sea till
the vessel was taken on the slip, when the injury could be ascertained, and the time
estimated for its repair, the recent gales having prevented him from lightening the ship
to the necessary draught preparatory to going on the slip, in which matter he had
been guided by those in charge of the slip. He hoped the weather would permit the
engineer in charge of the slip to take the Shenandoah on the slip the following morning.
The vessel was not hauled up on the slip until the morning of the 10th, when the
board appointed by the governor had another inspection, and they then reported as
follows:
1st. That the lignum-vitse staves forming the bearing of the forward'end of the outer
length of the screw-shafb were entirely displaced.
2d. That the inner stern-post bracket in which the staves of lignum-vita. were fitted,
forming also the support for the foremost end of the screw-frame, was fractured on the
starboard side to the extent of about 4 inches.
3d. That these repairs, necessary to render the steamship sea-worthy, could be effected
in or about five clear working days from that date.1
British Appendix, vol. v, p. 60.492
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
It thus appears that on the 3d of February, the commissioner of trade
and customs was instructed by the governor to make arrangements for
obtaining daily reports of the progress of the repairs and provisioniug of
the Shenandoah, and communicated to him the Information so obtained;
and to take every precaution in his power against the possibility of the
commander of that vessel in any degree extending his armament, or
rendering the present armament more effective.1
Thus matters stood when, on the 10th of February, the United States
consul wrote to the governor, inclosing a deposition on oath of one John
Williams, who had been a prisoner on board the Shenandoah, and who,
having been one of the crew of the ship D. Godfrey, captured by the Shenandoah, had escaped from the latter by swimming ashore on the 6 th.
In this deposition Williams stated that fifteen or twenty men had joined
the ship since her arrival in port, and were concealed in various parts of
her, and that three others, who were wearing the ship's uniform, had
also come aboard since her arrival.2 To this was added, on the 13th, the
affidavit of one Madden, another of the crew of the D. Godfrey, who
stated that "when he left the vessel on the 7th, there were men hid in
the forecastle of the ship, and two working in the galley; all of whom
came on board the vessel since she arrived in the port; and that the
officers pretended they did not know these men were hid."3
The proceedings of the governor and council on the 13th of February
are marked by the same attention to their duty in the matter as before,
as appears from the following minute of their proceedings:4
The further report of the board of survey on the Shenandoah, after viewing tha t
vessel on tbe slip, is submitted and considered. •
His excellency states to the council that, in consequence of a letter which he had
received from the Ufiped States consul, dated the 10th instant, and inclosing a testimony
on oath of one John Williams, he had deemed it his duty to refer itfor the consideration
of the law-officers of the Crown ; as, presuming the statements therein containad to be
correct, it would appear that the commander of the Shenandoah was taking advantage
of the aid and comfort which had been afforded to him in this port to increase the
number of his crew by enlisting British subjects in contravention of the foreign-enlistment act.
In consequence of this reference, the law-officers of the Crown had directed the attendance of the man John Williams, and that he had, with other men, attended that
morning at the Crown law-offices, and had made statements to the effect that a number
of men representing themselves to be Englishmen had gone on board the Shenandoah
since her arrival in this port, with the intention of joining her, and were now concealed
on board.
The law-officers being of opinion that there was sufficient evidence to take steps for
prosecuting, had instructed the police to lay informations against these men for a mis-
defneanor, and to apply for a warrant for their apprehension.
On consultation with the council, it was not considered necessary by his excellency
to take any further steps in the matter until the result of the police-officer proceedings
were known ; but Mr. Francis is instructed again to inquire by letter when Lieutenant
Waddell would be ready to proceed to sea.
A report from the detective police at Sandbridge, of this day's date, on matters relating to the Shenandoah, is laid upon the table of the council; and as from information which had reached the government some suspicion had been attached to the movements of a vessel called the Eli Whitney, now lying in the bay, the honorable the
commissioner of trades and customs undertakes that her movements shall be carefully
watched.
The honorable the attorney-general then submits to his excellency depositions taken
on oath by eleven persons before the consul of the United States in Melbourne, which
depositions have been placed in his hands by the consul.
The Eli Whitney was watched accordingly, and if any intention of
using her as a means of shipping the men had been entertained, it was
abandoned.
1 Appendix to British Case
-Ibid., p. 60*6.
vol. i, p. 529.
3 Ibid., p. 608.
Ibid., p 520.
■%■OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
:93
On the 13th of February a warrant was granted by a magistrate at
Williamstown, for the apprehension of a man known as James Davidson, or " Charley," who was stated to be concealed on board the Shenandoah. The superintendent of police, who was charged with the execution of the warrant, went on board the ship, and Captain Waddell
not being on board, saw the officer in charge, told his business, and requested to see the man on board to execute his warrant. This was refused. He showed his warrant, which the officer looked at, saying,
"That is all right, but you shan't go over the ship." The next morning
the police officer returned to the ship, and stated that information having been sworn that persons had joined the vessel from Melbourne, and
were now on board, he had come with a warrant. Captain Waddell replied, "I pledge you my word of honor as an officer and a gentleman
that I have not any one on board, nor have I engaged any one, nor will
I while 1 am here." The superintendent answered that he understood
that the .persons he wanted were wearing the uniform of the Confederate States, and were working on board, but this Captain Waddell distinctly denied. The superintendent asked to go over the ship and see
if the men he wanted were on board. This being refused he said that
he must execute his warrant, even if he had to use force. To which
Waddell replied that he would use force to resist; that he dare not
allow his ship to be searched; it was more than his commission was
worth; and that such a thing would not be attempted to a ship of war
of any other country; that a great slight had been put upon him by
sending any one to the ship with a warrant. On the superintendent
again asking if the captain refused to allow him to look for the man for
whom he had a warrant, Waddell answered, that he " did refuse it, and
would fight his ship rather than allow it."1
The governor having called the attention of the council to the circumstances, and to the necessity of considering what steps should be
taken, by the advice of the council directed the commissioner of trade
and customs to write to Captain Waddell, and to request him to reconsider his determination, and further to inform him that, pending his reply, the permission which had been granted to him to repair and take
in supplies had been suspended. The governor then issued a direction
that, on receipt of an instruction to that effect from the chief commissioner of police, none of Her Majesty's subjects in the colony should
render any aid or assistance to, or perform any work in respect of the
so-called confederate steamship Shenandoah, or in launching the same.
The chief commissioner of police was instructed to send some police to
Williamstown, to take care that the direction above mentioned was
duly observed.2
On the 11th a letter was addressed to Captain Waddell, informing
him that the government conceived it had a right to expect that those
who were receiving in the port the assistance claimed as a belligerent,
should not oppose proceedings intended to enforce the maintenance of
neutrality. He was therefore appealed to to reconsider his determination, and was informed that, pending his answer, the permission granted
to him to repair and take in supplies was suspended, and that Her
Majesty's subjects had been duly warned accordingly.3
Captain Waddell replied on the same day in the following terms:
I have to inform his excellency the governor that the execution of the warrant was
not refused, as no such person as the one therein specified was on board; but.permis-
1 British Appendix, vol. i, pp. 524, 525.
3 Ibid., p. 524.
British Appendix, vol. i, p. 643.494
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
sion to search the ship was refused. According to all the laws of nations, the deck of
a vessel of war is considered to represent the majesty of the country whose flag she
flies, and she is free from all executions, except for crimes actually committed on shor,e,
when a demand must be made for the delivery of such person, and. the execution of the
warrant performed by the police of the ship. Our shipping articles have been shown
to the superintendent of police. AU strangers have been sent out of the ship, and two
commissioned officers were ordered to search if any such have been left on board.
They have reported to me that, after making a thorough search, they can find no person on board except those who entered this port as part of the complement of men.
I, therefore, as commander of the ship, representing my government inBritish waters,
have to inform his excellency that fhere are no persons on board this ship except those
whose names are on myshipping articles, and that no one has been enlisted in the service of the Confederate States since my arrival in this port, nor have I in any way violated the neutrality of the port.
And I, in the name of the government of the Confederate States of America, hereby
■enter my solemn protest against any obstruction which may cause the detention of this
ship in this port.
I have, &c.,
• JAS. J. WADDELL,
Lieutenant Commanding, Confederate States Navy.1
Hon. J as. G. Francis,
Commissioner of Trade and Customs, Melbourne.
It appears from a report of the superintendent of police that, in order
to carry out the instructions of the government, he proceeded to Williamstown. on the afternoon of the 11th, took possession of the slip on
which the Shenandoah was placed, and cleared the yard of the workmen
employed on the vessel. The effect of this determined course of proceedings soon showed itself. At about 10 p. m. four men were seen to
leave the vessel in a boat pulled by two watermen. They were pursued
by the water-police, and brought back to the superintendent. On being
questioned, they said they had been on board a few days, unknown to
the captain, and that as soon as he found they were on board, he ordered them to go ashore.2 The men were detained, and the American
consul was communicated with respecting them. Toward morning tug-
steamers came to tow the vessel off, but were ordered away by the superintendent, who also took steps for preventing- the vessel being furnished with a pilot. The four men were taken before a magistrate on
the 16th. One, being an American, was discharged; the three others,
one of whom was the man Davidson, (" Charley,") were committed for
trial. Two of them, after awaiting their trial in prison for a month,
were sentenced to a further imprisonment of ten days; the other, being
a mere youth, was, on that account, discharged.3 tThe vessel still remained on the slip.
On the 15th of February, the lessee of the slip wrote to the chief secretary, stating that his manager had informed him that should a gale of
wind occur, he would either be compelled to launch the ship, or run a
great risk of her sustaining serious damage iu consequence of her unsafe position on the cradle.4 This being so, and all motive for searching
the ship being now at an end, the man against whom the warrant had
been directed having been taken, and there being no reason for supposing that there were other Melbourne men secreted in the vessel, it was
thought advisable that the order suspending the permission to repair
should be revoked, and the necessary repairs to the ship be allowed to
be comple'ted, the commander being informed that he was expected to
use every dispatch in getting to sea by the time previously fixed.
Captain Waddell having written to complain of the ship having been
seized, was informed, in reply, that the ship had not been seized, but
1Britsh Appendix, vol. i, p. 644.
2 Ibid., p. 527.
3 Ibid., vol. v, p. 62.
SaSd., vol.
p. 05.8.OPINIONS
that further progress with the repairs had been arrested by reason of his
refusal to allow the ship to be searched. He was also reminded of the
four men having been caught leaving the ship, notwithstanding his statement that there was no stranger on board; but he was at the same time
informed that, as the man against whom the warrant had been issued
was now in custody, and he (Captain Waddell) had given his assurance
that no person other than those on her shipping articles were now on
board the ship, the work might proceed. In acknowledging this communication Captain Waddell took the opportunity of observing as follows, with reference to the four men :
The four men alluded to in your communication are no part of this vessel's complement of men; they were detected on board by tho ship's police after all strangers were
reported out of the vessel, and they were ordered and sent out of the vessel by the
ship's police immediately on their discovery, which was after my letter had been dispatched informing his excellency the governor that there were no such persons on
board. These men wore here without my knowledge, and I have no doubt can be
properly called stowaways, and such they would have remained but for the vigilance
of the ship's police, inasmuch as they were detected after the third search, but. in no
way can I be accused, in truth, of being cognizant of an evasion of the foreign-enlistment act.1
On the evening of the 15th, the repairs having been completed, the
vessel was launched from the slip and anchored in the bay, where she
proceeded to reship her_stores and coal, of which latter article she was
allowed to take in a further supply of 250 tons.2
She finally quitted Port Philip on the morning of the ISth of February.
Blame has been cast on the governor for having allowed the repairs
of the vessel to be completed and the vessel to be launched, or coal to
be supplied to her, in consequence of the attitude of defiance assumed
by Captain Waddell in refusing to suffer his ship to be searched.
The position was, however, an embarrassing one.
It was very doubtful how far the police officer, after having received
the word of honor of Captain Waddell, as an officer and a gentleman,
that the man against whom he had a warrant was not on board, had
done right in insisting on searching the ship, and in threatening to use
force in order to execute the warrant. The position taken by Captain
Waddell that a ship of war of another nation is not subject to local jurisdiction is undoubtedly true. Upon a request of Sir 0. Darling to be
informed as to the propriety of executing a warrant under the foreign-
enlistment act on board a confederate ship of war, the law-officers of the
Crown, on being consulted, advised as follows:
It appears to us that, in the circumstances stated, his excellency the governor acted
with propriety and discretion; and there does not appear to us, at present, to be a
necessity for any action on the part of Her Majesty's government.
With respect to his excellency's request, that he may receive instructions as to the
propriety of executing any warrant under the foreign-enlistment act on board a confederate (public) ship of war, we are of opinion that, in a case of strong suspicion, he
ought to request the permission of the commander of the ship to execute the warrant;
and that, if this request he refused, he ought not to attempt to enforce the execution;
but that, in this case, the commander should be desired to leave the port as speedily
as possible, and should be informed that he will not be re-admitted into it.3
There can be no doubt as to the soundness of this advice. While a
ship of war is thus exempt from local jurisdiction, the right of the local
authority to withhold the accommodation of the port is equally undoubted ; and the exercise of this power, applied here in the first in-
1 British Appendix, vol i, p. 646.
3 Ibid., vol. v, p. 85.
3 Appendix to British Case, vol. i, r496
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
stance, might no doubt have been prolonged. But, the honor of the
commander of the ship having been pledged, ought the search of the
vessel to have been further insisted on ? By the comity of- nations the
word of a commissioned officer is held to be sufficient guarantee for the
truth of anything to which it is officially pledged. The rule is a sound
one. The best security for honorable conduct is unhesitating confidence whenever honor is pledged. It is of infinitely greater moment
that such a rule should be maintained than that a § Charley" should
be arrested and undergo a month's imprisonment. Any vaporing
language, or, in trans_Mantic phrase, "lldl talk" of Captain Waddell
might be excused owing to the impropriety of the police-officer's threat
of using force to search the ship under his command.
It is true that the fact to which the word of the commander has been
pledged turned out to be otherwise. But Captain Waddell explained
this by saying that the men had secreted themselips in the bottom of
the vessel, and had only been discovered on a third search. Now it is
well known that men do contrive to secrete themselves in ships so as
to elude search. A striking instance occurred in the case of the United
States ship the Kearsarge. When that ship left Cork in November,
1863, sixteen men contrived to hide themselves in her, nor was their
presence in her known to Captain Winslow, her commander, till the
day after the vessel had gone to sea, notwithstanding that search had
been made, and other men, found concealed on board, had been sent
out of the ship just before her departure.1 It should be- added that
Williams and Madden having stated in their depositions that certain of
the subordinate officers of the ship had been aware of the presence of
"Charley" in the forecastle of the ship, these officers immediately published in the Melbourne Argus dedications signed by them, denying
in the most positive terms the statements affecting them. Sir Eoundell
Palmer puts the pertinent question : " Can it be imputed as a want of
due diligence to the government of Melbourne (whose good faith and
vigilance had otherwise been so manifestly proved) that although not
entirely satisfied with Captain Waddell's demeanor or conduct, they
accepted the solemn assurances of not one, but several, officers of the
same race and blood, and with the same claims to the character ot
gentlemen as the officers of the United States??'
The matter was further complicated by the fact that the owner of the
slip had reported that the position of the vessel on the cradle was one
of danger; and that, if a gale of wind should arise, a disaster would
probably ensue. It is obvious that, if such a lliing had happened it.
would have been very awkward for all parties. The wisest thing, therefore, as it appeared to the governor and his couJjJal, was to allow things-
to be completed and to get rid of this unpledljant visitor as early as possible. That the conduct of Captain Waddell in augmenting his crew
from the colony, as it afterward turned out that he did, in spite of his
solemn promise to observe neutrality in this respect, was conduct disgraceful in an officer and a gentleman, there can be no doubt; but, as I
have before observed, no governor or other authority can be blamed for
trusting to the word of any one bearing the commission of an officer. I
am bound to respect, but I certainly cannot share, the opinion of some of
my colleagues that Sir C. DaJIng showed any indulgence to the commander of the Shendsadoah, in further-Intending to him the privileges of a
belligerent, inconsistent with what, as the governor of a neutral government, he was fully empowered and entitledyin the exercise o^l^P-idgment
1 See United States Documents, vol. ii, p. 429.JL_
OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
497
Apply of coal.
and discretion, to extend. Still less can I think that, even if there was
any error of judgment in this respect, and the governor of Melbourne
was, under the circumstances—as I heard it two or three times said in
the course of the discussion—too civil (" trop poli") to Captain Waddell,
that the British nation is therefore to incur a liability to a claim of
some $6,000,000. If such a conclusion is to be arrived at upon such
facts, I shall be half disposed to agree with M. Staempfli, that there is,
indeed, no such thing as international law, but that we are now creating
it for the first time.
I pass on to another subject of complaint, namely, the
supply of coal which the Shenandoah was allowed to receive
and which is said to have been excessive—an assertion which, I confess,
I have heard with no little surprise. It is true that the Shenandoah
still had on her arrival at Melbourne,-if reliance is to be placed on a
journal kept by a midshipman on board, 400 tdos of coal in. her bunkers;
it is true that she was there allowed to take in 250 tons more.
But international law, as we have seen, imposes no limitation on the
quantity of the supplies which a belligerent vessel may obtain in a neutral
port. The only restriction in this case would therefore arise from the gov-
ernment regulation that no vessel should be allowed to take more than
sufficient to convey her to her nearest port. Now the nearest port of
the country of the Shenandoah was some thirteen thousand to fourteen
thousand miles from Melbourne; and all the coal which could possibly
have been stowed in the vessel would have fallen infinitely short of
what she must have consumed on such a voyage if she had had recourse
to her steam-power. It is true we are told that she was an excellent
sailer. Mr. Evarts informed us, I believe, on the authority of a midshipman's journal,, after ward published under the title of "The Cruise
of the Shanandoab," that her speed under canvass was at times equal to
sixteen knots an hour; but it did not occur to that distinguished counsel
to tell us how the governor and his council could possibly know that
fact, unless, indeed, they were to know it by intuition. Although, from
the vessel's build and appearance, she might be thought likely to be a
fast vessel, all they knew of her was that she was a screw-steamer,
adapted to sail or steam.
The argument that a vessel is not to be allowed coal because she is
not likely to use it, strikes me, I must say, as a very singular one. If
she does not use it, what harm can arise to any one from her having it on
board % " Yes, but," says Mr. Evarts, " this coal was to enable her. to
have an advantage over the whalers when among the ice." But here
we must have recourse again to the intuitive powers of the governor
and his council. For how else, in the name of common sense, were they
to know that the intention of Captain Waddell was to go among the
icebergs in pursuit of the whaling-vessels % Captain Waddell knew his
business too well to let his intentions in this respect be known. Nor is
it at all reasonable to say that, because a vessel can both sail and steam,
she is not entitled to have whatever is necessary for navigation in both
forms. The government regulations, which allow a vessel to have the
quantity of coal necessary to take her to the nearest port, make no distinction (any more than does international law) between vessels depending wholly upon steam, and others navigating both by steam and sail.
The regulation must be taken to have reference to the quantity of coal
which would be required to take the vessel to her nearest port, if she
had to depend on steam alone.
It would be absurd to suppose that, in every ease, the local authority
is to enter upon a nice calculation of the sailing power of the particular
32 B498
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
vessel, and allow a greater or less quantity of coal according to the
estimate that may be formed of the rate of speed under canvas.
A vessel is entitled to the advantage of all her motive-power, however
derived. Either may fail. A vessel under sail may carry away her
masts. In this instance, had the Shenandoah been going homeward
this might have happened when she was thousands of miles from home.
It seems to me, therefore, that it was not a qngistion for the local government whether this vessel was a good sailer or not. The only question w_fij| what amount of obal she was at liberty to have according to
the regulation. Beferring to that, and looking to the immense distance
between her and her nearest port, no one, as it seems to me, can reasonably say that she was allowed a s||igle ton too much.
M.i.o_r_e a base But it is said that by taking in coal at Melbourne, with
of navaioperations, f^g ulterior purpose of making war on the whaling-vessels
of the United States, this vessel was enabled to make the port of Melbourne a " base of naval operations."
As I have already observed, when the law on this subject was under
discussion, the application of such a rule in favor of the United States
to the prejudice of Great Britain would be a flagrant iffiustice, seeing
that, as 1 then showed, ships of war of the United States obtained
many thousand tous of coal, under exactly the same circumstances, that
is to say, when they had particular " naval operations " in immediate
view. If this doctrine is to hold, every time a vessel, having a particular belligerent purpose in view, takes in coal, and proceeds on such
purpose, the port will be at once converted into a base of naval operations. The same reasoning would of course apply, and in the same
degree, to repairs.
This proposition is, to my mind, utterly unreasonable, as being altogether inconsistent with any idea that ever has been, or properly can
be, attached to the term " base of operations;" and is, moreover, in
the most flagrant degree unjust, if it is to have the effect of imposing on the neutral any responsibility to the other belligerent. For it is
obviously inconsistent with common justice that the neifllral state shall
suffer for that to which it is not only no party, but of which it has also
no knowledge. By the common practice of natious, as well as by the regulations of the government, a belligerent vessel is allowed to have the
benefit of necessary repairs, and to take a supply of coal Without the
local government being entitled to inquire into her ulterior destination.
No such inquiry is prescribed by the regulations in question, or by those
made by any other nation; nor has any publicist ever suggested that
such a proceeding should be adopted. No such inquiry couffl| with propriety, be made; nor could the commander of the ship be called upon
to answer it if made. The knowledge of his intended course might
expose him to the attack of an enemy. No such quesf|on, so far as I
am aware, was ever put to a belligerent vessel during the whole course
of the war. None such was ever put to a ship of the United States
when applying for coal at a British port. This bei% so, to say that,
the local government being in ignorance of the destination of the vessel, a responsibility is to be incurred because the belligerent, in obtaining this accommodation, has an ulterior operation in view, as to which,
by some violent distortion of language, the port may be said to be thus
rendered a base, but of which ulterior operation the neutral knows
nothing, appears to me to be an outrage not only on the first principles
of justice, but also upon the plainest dictate of common sense.
TKus far I am un_p_e to discover anything bujs^^sire on the part of
the local government to comply with the Queen's regulations, and to^^JKg
OPINIONS   OF   SIR   ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
499
discharge their duty, faithfully and conscientiously, in preventing any
breach of neutrality on the part of the commander of the Shenandoah
in the enlisting of men; nor does it appear to me that any blame can
reasonably or justly attach to them in respect of permitting necessary
repairs to be done to the ship, or as to the time allowed for, that purpose, or as to the quantity of coal which the vessel was suffered to take
on board.
The only question which presents any real difficulty is whether sufficient care was exercised to prevent men from enlisting in the Shenandoah immediately prior to her departure.
For, it is an undoubted fact that, on the night before the vessel left,
which it will be remembered was on the morning of the 18th, a considerable number of men contrived to get on board and sailed away in the
Shenandoah, as part of her crew.
In addition to the suspicious circumstances connected with the secretion of the man " Charley" and the other three men, it appears that a
detective named Kennedy, having been directed to make inquiries, on
the 13th of February, reported as follows:
That twenty men have been discharged from the. Shenandoah since her arrival at
this port.
That Captain Waddell intends to ship forty hands here, who are to be taken on
board during the night, and to sign articles when they are outside the Heads.
It is stated that the captain wishes, if possible, to ship foreign seamen only, and all
Englishmen shipped here are to assume a foreign name.
McGrath, Finlay, and O'Brien, three Melbourne boarding-house keepers, are said to
be employed in getting the requisite number of men, who are to receive £6 per month
wages, and £8 bounty, &c.
Peter Kerr, a shipwright, living in Railway Place, Sandridge, stated about a fortnight ago, in the hearing of several persons, that Captain Waddell offered him £ L? per
month to ship as carpenter. A waterman named McLaren, now at Sandridge, is either
already enlisted, or about to be so.
. The detective has been unable, up to the present, to collect any reliable information
as to whether ammunition, &c, has been put on board the Shenandoah at this port, or
Whether arrangements have been made with anv person for that purpose.
D. S. KENNEDY,
First-class Detective.1
in forwarding this report, added the following
has been informed—in fact he overheard a person repre-
The superintendent,
statement:
Mr. Scott, resident clerk,
sented as an assistant purser state—that about sixty men engaged here were to be
shipped on board an old vessel, believed to be the Eli Whitney, together with a quantity of ammunition, &c, about two or three days before the Shenandoah sails. The
former vessel is to be cleared out for Portland or Warrnambool, but is to wait outside
the Heads for the Shenandoah, to whom her cargo and passengers are to be transferred.
Hereupon, the commissioner of trade and customs undertook, by
the desire of the government and council, that the Eli Whitney should
be watched, and that vessel was watched accordingly.
Notwithstanding that the foregoing report of the detective Kennedy
appeared to point to specific facts, and the police were on the lookout
to detect any attempts to enlist men, nothing of a definite or certain
character came to light. In the report afterward made by the- minister of justice, the attorney-general of the colony, the chief secretary,
and the commissioner 6f customs, which has been before referred to,
it is stated that—
Whilst the Shenandoah was in port, there were many vague rumors in circulation
that it was the intention of a number of men to sail in her; but although the police
authorities made every exertion to ascertain the truth of these rumors, yet (with the
British Appendix, vol. i, p. 523.500
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
exception of the four men already alluded to) nothing sufficiently definite to justify
criminal proceedings could be ascertained; indeed, at the best, these rumors justified
noihing more than suspicion, aud called only for that watchfulness which the government exercised to the fullest extent in its'power. It was not until after the Shenandoah had left the waters of Victoria that the government received information confirming in a manner the truth of these rumors.1
On the 16th, (as appears from a report of the chief commissioner of
police on this subject, made in October last,)2 representations were
again made to the government that the _^.eign-enlistment act was being violated, and the police .w'ere instructeilfe) use their utmost efforts to
prevent it.   Nothing, however, appears to have ocSJlrrred on that day.
But about 5 o'clock on the afternoon of the 17th, a man of the name
of Forbes came to the American con^Hl, Mr. Blanchard, and informed
him that at 4 o'clock that afternoon he had seen, at the pier at Sandridge, five men, most of whom, if not all, were British subjects, and
that one of them had told him that they aijp others were going on board
a l_J§fe called the Maria Boss, then lying in the bay, and were to join
the Shenandoah when she was out at sea, and taSt boats from the-
Maria Boss were to come for them at 5 o'clock.3
The consul thereupon took Forbes to the office of the Crown solicitor $
but, according to the statement of the consul made to the governor on
the ensuing day, the Crown soliciSpr refused to take the information,
and the consul further comipained that the language and manner of
that officer in doing so had been insulting to him. The Crown solicitor,.
however, disclaimed any intention of giving offense to the consul, as
appears from the letter of the private secretary of the governor to Mr.
Blanchard, the consul, which is as follows:
February 21,1865.
Sir : I am desired by his excellency the governor to acquaint you that he received^
your letter of the 18th instant in the afternoon of that day, Saturday, and that on Monday, the 20th, he caused it to be referred, through the honorable the attorney-general,,
to the Crown solicitor, for any explanation he might wish to offer.
2. After stating that it was only in consequence of his accidentally returning to hie
office at half past 5 p. m., after it had been closed for the day, that the interview between you and. Ifikiself occurred at aU, Mr. Gurner states that he informed you thatJI
not being a magistrate, he could not take an information, and adds that he was in a
_3pirry to save a railway train, and there_l|re left more suddenly than he otherwise!
should have done; but he positively asserts that neither-in manner nor language did
he insult you.
3. His excellency feels sure that the Crown solicitor's tone aiid manner have been, a
misapprehended, and confidently assures you that there was no intention on the part
of that officer to fail in the respect due to your posit ion as the consul of the United
States of America.4
What occurred after the consul left the Crown solOTfcor's office is to be I
found iu the statement of a Mr. Lord, an American i&Jntleman residing
at .Melbourne, made for the use of the consul, M|&Lord having accom- I
panied that gentleman in his endeavors to seeiijire the arrest of the men.
Mr. Lord states as follows:
We left and went first to the office of the chief commissioner of police, and, not find- %
ing either him or Mr. Lyttleton in, we ilmvc tn the houses of parliament, and, on sending your name to the attorney-general, he at once came out and asked us into the
side-room. He patiently listened to all you had to say, and then suggested that if you
would place the matter in the shape of an affidavit he would lay it before his colleagues;
that a verbal statement was not sufficient for the government to proceed upon. We
then left and' drove to the office'of the detective police, and saw Mr. Nicholson, the
chief, who heard the man's statement in lull; hni. as he could not act without a warrant, advised us to go to the police magistrate, Mr. Stum and get a warrant; then he
would at once act upon it.   Leaving there, we wem to the residence of Mr. Start, in
1 British Appendix, voL i, p. 62..
*Ibid., p. 121.
3 Ibid., p. 616.
% Ibid., p. 619.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
501
."Spencer street, who received you very politely, listened to what you had to say, examined the man, but stated that he could not take the responsibility of granting a warrant on the evidence of this man alone, and advised your going to Williamstown, to
Mr. Call, who perhaps would be in possession of corroborative testimouy through the
water-police. We then left, it being about half past 7, and you, finding such a disinclination in any one to act in the matter, decided to take the deposition yourself and
send it to the attorney-general, leaving it to the government to take such action on it
as it might deem proper. Going to your consulate, the deposition was taken and a
.-copy inclosed to the attorney-general, with a request for me to deliver it.
I took it to the houses of parliament, which I found closed; and it being then late,
((about 9,) I decided it was too late to stop the shipment of the men, as we understood
the vessel was to leave at 5, and I went home and returned the letter to you on Sunday
morning. Previous to going home, however, I again went to the detective office, saw
Mr. Nicholson, told him how you had been prevented from getting the evidence before
the government in the shape they required it. He expressed his regret, but could not
act in so important a matter without a warrant.1
From the foregoing statement it appears that it was suggested, by the
attorney-general to the consul to embody the matter of his communication in the shape of an affidavit. This the consul, having the power to
take affidavits, could readily have done, in which case the responsibility
of further action would have rested with the colonial authorities. Instead of this the consul proceeded to the office of the detective police,
but, as the chief officer could not act without a warrant, he very properly advised Mr. Blanchard to proceed to the residence of Mr. Sturt, the'
police magistrate, to procure a warrant. This accordingly Mr. Blanchard did, but it appears that Mr. Sturt, having heard the statement of
the man Forbes, was not satisfied with it or disposed to act on his unsupported testimony. He therefore declined to grant the warrant, but
advised that the consul should proceed to Williamstown, to Mr. Call,
the head of the water-police, who would probably be able to procure
evidence of a more conclusive character.
It being by this time almost 7 o'clock, the consul decided upon doing
what the attorney-general had desired him to do some two hours before,
namely, take the deposition himself, and dispatch it by Mr. Lord to the
attorney-general, leaving it, as Mr. Lord says, to the government to take
such action as it .might deem proper. The consul himself proposed to
follow Mr. Skirt's advice, and proceeded to Williamstown; but we learn
from his own statement that when Forbes, his informant, | found he had
to go among his acquaintances, he was afraid of bodily harm, and refused to proceed."2
In the mean time Mr. Lord proceeded with the deposition taken at the
consulate to the house of parliament to find the attorney-general, but,
on arriving there, found the house was up, and it being then about 9
o'clock, concluded it was too late to stop the shipment of the men, as it
had been understood the vessel was to leave at 5, so Mr. Lord gave the
matter up, and went quietly home.
I am at a loss to see wherein it can be said that there was here negligence on the part of any one, unless it may have been on that of Mr. •
Lord, who, having undertaken to deliver Forbes's deposition to the attorney-general, left the task he had undertaken incomplete, because he
did not succeed in finding that officer at the only place where he sought
him. But, in truth, the whole matter becomes perfectly immaterial from
the fact that what was desired to be done had reference solely to the preventing of the men from being taken off to the Maria Boss by the boats
of that vessel. But, as it turned out, no intention whatever existed of
conveying the men to the Shenandoah by means of the Maria Boss, or, if
such intention ever did exist, it was afterward abandoned.   No boats of
!1502
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
that vessel came to take the men off, and she left the next morning upon
her own destination. But, as showing the anxiety of the local authorities to prevent men from joining the Shenandoah, it should be mentioned that it appears from the report of the detective officer subse-
sequently employed to make inquiry on the fibject that the Maria Boss
was searched to see that no men for the Shenandoah were onboard of
her, both before she left and again when off the Heads, Mat is, before
she finally quitted the bay.1
As has, however, been said, there can be no doubt that men did contrive to get onboard the Shenandoah late that night under cover of the
darkness. It appears from the statement of the consul that one Bobbins, a master-stevedore, having observed boats taking off men with
their luggage from the pier at Sandridge, went up to the American consulate about 11 o'clock at night, and gave information to Mr. Blanchard
of what was going on. Mr. Blanchard, however, did not think himself
called upon to repair to the spot, or deem it necessary to call upon the
police to take any steps to prevent the men from being conveyed to the
Shenandoah. He contented himself with telling Bobbins."that Mr.
Sturt, the police magistrate, had told him the Avater-police were the
proper persons to lodge any information with," and that | as a good
subject, he (Bobbins) was bound to inform them of any violation of law
that came under his notice."2 This Bobbins promised to do, and to convey a message from Mr. Blanchard to the police.
Thus the interests of the American Government were transferred by
their proper representative, who no doubt went quietly to bed, hoping
for the best, to Bobbins, the stevedore, who, however, seems to have*
been, " as a good subject," more zealous in the maintenance of neutrality than the consul, for it appears that. Bobbins actually went to Will-*
iamstown and gave information to the police. He crossed over to Williamstown, however, only in time to see the last boat-load going toward
the ship. In the mean time, the water-police having heard reports of
what was likely to take place, were out in the bay in their boat; but
Williamstown, on the opposite side of the bay, being the principal shipping-place, and the place irom which men would be the most likely to embark, their attention had to be directed to that quarter; and it would
seem that when they approached the pier at Sandridge, from which the
men were putting off, the latter secreted themselves in some rough wood
in the immediate vicinity, called scrub, and, as soon as the police-boat
had gone in another direction, slipped off in watermen's boats, and managed to reach the Shenandoah unseen by the police. They were seen
by two constables who were successively on duty at this spot, who
must, one would suppose, have been pretty well aware of what was
going on, as the men had their luggage with them, and at that hour of
the night could have had no business on board the Shenandoah; besides
which, two American officers, one in uniform, the other in plain clothes,
were o the pier directing the embarkation of the men;3 but neither of
these constables did anything toward preventing the men from getting
off.
It is possible that, not having any warrant for the apprehension of the
men, they did not think they had any power or authority to detain them;
or, the numbers being formidable and the place lonely, they may have
thought it wiser to abstain from interfering. By the time Bobbins
arrived at Williamstown and gave information of what had occurred,
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 121
2 Ibid., vol. i, p. 587.
3 Ibid., pp. 551, 553.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
0
08
the last boat-load of men must have been already on board;1 and the
police were powerless to act without orders from the authorities, which
would have involved a forcible search of the ship, and which, therefore,
the latter could not properly have given.2
I will not go to the length of saying that, in my opinion, the police
were on this occasion as vigilant and active as they might have been.
There was reason to suspect the officers of the Shenandoah of a design
to recruit their crew from the port; aud as that purpose had so far been
prevented by the lookout kept in respect of the two ships, the Eli
Whitney and the Maria Boss, suspected of being intended to take the
men to the Shenandoah when outside the waters of the colony, it was not
unlikely that, on the eve of the ship's departure, some attempt would
be made by the men who wished to ship in her to get on board. The
police had received instructions to use the utmost vigilance to prevent
anything of the kind being done, but they appear to have failed to carry
out their instructions at a critical moment. A few resolute officers, stationed on the two piers of Williamstown and Sandridge, would probably
have prevented the men from embarking, or deterred the watermen from1
conveying them to the ship. But the governor aud council acted
throughout under an honest and thorough sense of duty, and exhibited
in all their relations with the commander of the Shenandoah the fullest
determination to prevent, as far as in them lay, any infraction of neutrality.
Possibly their suspicions may have been removed too easily by the
positive word of honor of the American commander and his officers,
but, as has been more than once observed, it has ever been a received
rule of official conduct to trust implicitly to the honor of an officer.
To hold, under such circumstances, that because the local police were
not as vigilant as they might have been, or because under cover of the
darkness men may have contrived to elude their vigilance, a nation is
to be held liable- for damage done by a vessel to the extent of a claim of
many millions of dollars, would be, as it appears to me, to carry the
notion of " due diligence" to an unheard-of and unwarranted length, and
would be calculated to deprive the decisions of the tribunal of respect
in the eyes of the world.
Questions have been raised as to the number of men thus added to the
crew of the Shenandoah, and as to the proportion which the number thus
added bore to the number of her crew on- her arrival in the port. But to
this I attach no value. The second rule of the treaty prohibits any recruitment of men. There can be no doubt that the number was sufficient
to constitute a recruitment. And though it may be true that, independently of the addition thus made, the number of the crew remaining after
the desertions at Melbourne would have been sufficient to enable the
vessel to carry on operations against ordinary merchant-vessels, and,
therefore, if the operations of this ship had been directed against the
same class of vessels as before, the augmentation of the crew would
have made no difference as to her capacity for mischief, yet I agree with
the counsel of the United States that it is unlikely that without such
augmentation she would have ventured into the dangerous polar seas
to destroy the whaling-vessels. My.opinion is based on the ground that
the authorities cannot justly be held responsible for what happened in
spite of their anxious desire and endeavor to insure the observance of
neutrality.
It only remains to be stated that on hearing that men had been em-
British Appendix, vol
S53.
2 Appendix to United States Counter Case, p. 111504-
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
harked in the Shenandoah prior to her departure, the governor caused
inquiries to be nilide, and finding that a violation of neutrality had taken
place, he announced his intention of refusing the hospitality of the port
to the captain or any other officers of the Shenandoah, should they again
visit the colony. He, moreover, wrote to the governors of the other
Australian colonies, and to the commodore of the station, to warn them
of what had occurred. As the Shenandoah did not visit any other
British port until she ajfiHved at Liverpool to be surrendered at the end
of the war, no opportunity occurred of taking- proper notice of the conduct of her commander on thW"occasion.
Importance has been attached to the language of this letter of the
governor.   It is in the following terms:
GOVEBKMENT House, Melboi&WL February 27,1865.
Sir : I consider it my duty to place your excellency in possession of the accompanying
correspondence and other documents connected with the proceedings of the commander
of the Confederate States vessel Shenandoah, while lying in Hobsou's Bay, for the purpose of having necessary repairs effected and taking iu supplies, under permission
granted by me in accordance with the conditions prescribed by Her Majesty's proclamation and instructions for the observance of neutrality.
2. I have also the honor to forward copies of letters from the chief commissioner of
police in Victoria, accompanied by reports and statements which leave no doubt that
the neutrality has been dagrantly violated by the commander of the Shenandoah, who,
after having assured me of his intention to respect it, and pleaded the privilege of a
belligerent ship of war to prevent the execution of warraaps under the foreign-enlist-
menfcact, nevertheless received on board his vessel, before he left the port ou the 16th
instant, a considerable number of men destined to augment the ship's company.
3. I have thought it right to communicate to your excellency thipabiformation, in the
event of Lieutenant Waddell or any of his officers hereafter claiming the privileges of
a belligerent in any port of the colony under your government.
I have, &c,
C. H. DARLING.1
Our distinguished president dwelt, as one of the governing motives
of his decision against the British government as to this ship, on the
admission thus made by the governor, that the neutrality had been
flagrantly violated by the commander of the Shenandoah, as though this
were an admission made by the governor as against himsllf. The governor is complaining that the neuiiality of a British port has been violated by a belligerent, in spite of the endeavors of the authorities to
main$__in it, and. of the pledge given by the belligerent to respect it.
To hold the governor responsible for what he thus complains of is to
reverse the nature of things aft. to mWce the parti/ wronged liable instead
of the wrong-doer. The violation of the neutrality of a British port by
the commander of the Shenandoah could only affect British liability if
there had been negligence on the part of the British authorities, whereby
the" violation of neutralffcy had been allowed to occur.
I cannot, therefore, concur in the decision of the majority of the tribunal that the British government is responsible for anything that
happened with reference to the Shenandoah at Melbourne. Looking to
the regulations, and the distaiice of the vessel from her nearest port, I
cannot agree with the president that too much coal wasffkllowed. I cannot agree that repairing or taking in coal at a particular port, on the
way to some ulterior operation, makes the port a base of naval operations ; still less that the neutral can be affected thereby when he is
ignorant of the ulterior operation so contemplated. I cannot agree
that where the government of a colony is hone^py desirous of doing its
duty and maintaining neutrality, the fact that men anxious to ship on
board a belligerent vessel elude the vigilance of the police in the nighttime is to make the parent state liable for all the damage such vessel
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 565.OPINIONS  OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
501
0
may afterward do.    And I protest, respectfully but   emphatically,
aigainst a decision based on grounds to my mind so wholly untenable.
The remainder of the history of the Shenandoah may be told in a few
words. On leaving Melbourne in February, 1865, she pro- After Is.aving Mel.
ceeded. to the arctic seas in quest of the whalers of the bourne-
United States; and does not appear to have touched at any port, with
the exception of the island of Ascension, until she arrived and surrendered at Liverpool, on the 6th of November, 1865. Meanwhile, however, the great contest between Federals and confederates had been
finally decided. General Lee had been forced to evacuate the lines of
Petersburgh and Bichmond, aud had surrendered with the remnant of
his army. The president and vice-president of the confederacy had
been arrested and the principal European powers had withdrawn the
recognition of belligerent rights accorded in 1861. Under these circumstances, Mr. Mason, the confederate agent in England, applied to
-Her Majesty's government, on the 20th of June, 1865, for permission to
send, through the British authorities, letters to the commander of the
Shenandoah directing him to desist from any further hostile proceedings. This application was acceded to, and the letters of recall were
sent to Nagasaki, Shanghai, and the Sandwich Islands, and copies
were also sent to the governors of the British colonial possessions and
to the officers,, commanding the British squadrons in the Pacific and
China seas, and on other foreign stations.1 In August, reports were
received by the British government from Washington, that the Shenandoah was continuing her depredations although her commander had
been informed of the termination of the war, and orders were in consequence given to the various colonial authorities, and to the officers
commanding British squadrons, to detain the vessel whenever she
should come within their reach. The vessel herself was to be surrendered to the United States authorities, but the crew was to be allowed
to go free.2 She arrived at Liverpool on the 6th of November, 1S65,
and was at once placed under detention by the authorities. A party of
men from Her Majesty's ship Donegal was placed on board of her, and
a gun-boat lashed alongside to prevent her leaving the port. Her
commander addressed, the same day, a letter to the British government surrendering the vessel. He explained that the captures made by
him after the close of the war had been made in ignorance of that fact,
and asserted that he had received the first intelligence of the extinction
of the government, under whose authority he was acting, ou communicating at sea with a British bark on the 2d of August, and that he
had then suspended all further warlike action.3
Acting upon the advice of the law-officers, the British government
decided upon setting free such of the crew of the Shenandoah as could
not be prosecuted under the foreign-enlistment act, and upon giving up
the vessel herself to the United States Government, who had claimed
her through their minister in London. This was accordingly done. The
captain of Her Majesty's ship Donegal, who had been placed in charge
of the Shenandoah, interrogated the crew, and having satisfied himself,
as he afterward reported, that none of them were British subjects, the
whole of them were set at liberty.4 It is certain that, at the time, no
evidence to prove the British nationality of any of the crew was offered
to, or in the possession of, Her Majesty's government.     About seven
1 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 654.
2 Ibid., p. 657; United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 701.
3 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 667.
"Ibid., pp. 682,711.506
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
weeks afterward, the deposition of a man named Temple,, who asserted
among other things that part of the crew were British subjects, was
communicated by Mr. Adams to the government, and investigations were
made with a view to instituting prosecutions. But Temple was found
to be himself unworthy of credit, and, no further evidence being forthcoming, the matter was allowed to drop.1 The Shenandoah was finally
delivered up to the American consul at Liverpool, and sailed for New
York in November, 1865.2
The act of the British government in thus giving orders for seizing
the Shenandoah has been referred to in the United States argument as
an instance of the exercise of the prerogative. And in a certain sense
it is true that it was so. But the case was altogether exceptional. It
was supposed that the Shenandoah being, owing to the extinction of the
confederate government, from whom her character as a ship of war had
been derived, without a commission, was continuing her hostile operations on the high seas. Such acts done in the absence of a commission
would have assumed the character of piracy, and the party committing
them have become a hostis communis, who might be taken by any one
having the means of stopping such proceedings. Instructions might
therefore well be given to any officers of Her Majesty to seize the vessel
wheresoever found.
Cases of the Sumter, Nashville, Chickamauga,
bution.
Tallahassee, and Retri
Tbe  Sumter
Trinidad.
The five cases we are now about to enter on belong to a class differing altogether from those which have hitherto occupied our attention.
We have here no question as to the fitting out or equipping on British
territory; none of those vessels having been fitted out or equipped,
for the purpose of war, in a British port. The complaint with respect
to them is that they were permitted unduly to enter and remain in.
ports of Great Britain, and to procure coal, beypnd what Her Majesty's
regulations of the 31st of January, 1862, prescribed ; or that they were
treated with a degree of indulgence refused to ships of the United States,
FIRST, AS TO THE SUMTER.
This vessel was a steamship ; she was purchased at the commencement of the war, by the government of the Confederate
States, fitted out, and armed, and duly commissioned as a
ship of war. As such she left the Mississippi, on the 30th of June,
1861, under the command of an officer of the name of Semmes, holdinga
commission from the confederate government. She cruised for a period
of six months, and during that'time made seventeen prizes. She coaled
once, and once only, at a British port, namely, at Trinidad, where she
arrived ou the 30th of July. But prior to arriving at Trinidad, she had
putiu and coaled at the Spanish port of Cienfuegos, and the Dutch port
of St. Ann, Curagoa. After her visit to Trinidad, she put in and coaled
at the Dutch port of Paramaribo, and after that at Martinique. Besides stopping at these ports, she put into Cadiz for repairs.
It was in respect of the Sumter, the first ship of war of the Confederate States which appeared npon the ocean, that the United 'States
.Government asserted the untenable position that, while itself treating
those States as a belligerent power, and shrinking from treating confederate prisoners as rebels, or confederate ships, when taken, aspirates,
|British Appendix, vol. i, p. 720.
2 Ibid., pp. 683, 689.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
507
they were entitled to call upon all other nations to treat these ships as
such, and to refuse the ordinary shelter, accorded by the universal comity of nations to vessels of war in neutral ports. Upon this assertion,,
which was at once repudiated by every other country, I have already
taken the opportunity of making such remarks as occurred to me. I
refer to the subject iu this place only for the purpose of pointing out
that, as regards the assistance afforded to the Sumter at Trinidad, the
complaint preferred by the United States Government was not in
respect of any excess in the accommodation afforded, but to the ves-
sel having been permitted to enter the port and receive any assistance at all.
On the 7th of August, Mr. Francis Bernard, an American gentleman
residing at Trinidad—there being at the time no United States consul
at that place—wrote tor inform Mr. Seward that, | on the 30th ultimo, a
steam sloop-of-war, (Semmes, commander,) carrying a secession flag,
five guns, some of a large caliber, and a crew of from 120 to 150 men,
sailed boldly into our harbor, and reported herself to the authorities of
this island as being on a cruise. She was last from Puerto Cabello; and
since she succeeded in getting out of the Mississippi Biver she has already captured no less than eleven American vessels."
Having given the names of some of these, he adds : | The Sumter remained here till the 5th instant, and was allowed to supply herself with
coals and other necessary outfits. The British flag was hoisted on the
government flag-staff for her arrival, and the officers'of the British war-
vessel Cadmus appeared to be on amicable terms with those of the Sumter. The merchant who supplied the Sumter with coals did it with the
consent and approval of our attorney-general."1
On the 30th September Mr. Adams, transmitting to Earl Bussell an
extract from Mr. Bernard's letter, writes as follows:
Legation of the United States,
September 30, 1861.
The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United/
States, regrets to be obliged to inform the Right Honorable Earl Russell, Her Majesty's
principal secretary of state for foreign affairs, that he has been instructed by the
President of the United States to prefer a complaint against the authorities of the-
island of Trinidad for a violation of Her Majesty's proclamation of neutrality, by
giving aid and encouragement to the insurgents of the United States. It appears, by
an extract from a letter received at the Department of State from a gentleman believed
to be worthy of credit, a resident of Trinidad, Mr. Francis Bernard, a copy of which
is submitted herewith, that a steam-vessel known as an armed insurgent privateer,
called the Sumter, was received on the 30th of July last at that port, and was permitted to remain for six days, during which time she was not only furnished with all
necessary supplies for the continuance of her cruise, under the sanction of the attor-
nev-ffeneral, but that Her Maiesty's flag was actually hoisted on the government flag-
staff in acknowledgment of her arrival.
.The undersigned has been directed by his Government to bring this extraordinary
proceeding to the attention of Lord Rnssell, and in case it shall not be satisfactorily
explained, to ask for the adoption of such measures as shaU insure, on the part of the
authorities of the island, the prevention of all occurrences of the kind during the
continuance of the difficulties in America.
The undersigned deems it proper to add, in explanation of the absence of any official
representation from Trinidad, to substantiate the present complaint, that there was
no consul of the United States there at the time of the arrival of the vessel. The
undersigned had the honor, a few days since, to apprise Lord Russell of the fact that
this deficiency has been since supplied by preferring an application for Her Majesty's
exequatur for a new consul, who is already on his way to occupy his post.2   .
It will be observed that, in these communications, nothing is said as
to the quantity of coal ;• all that Mr. Bernard reports is that the vessel
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 3.
2 Ibid.508
ARBITRATION AT   GENEVA.
'" was allowed to supply herself with coal and necessary outfit." In the
case of the United States this is converted, without any reference to the
actual quantity, into "a,full supply of coal."1
In point of fact, the vessel took in eighty tons, which, as we shall see
presently, was not a third of what she could actually carry.
The facts which occurred On the arrival of the Sumter at Trinidad
were these:
The governor, evidently a little embarrassed afthis, the first visit of
a confederate ship of war to tbe island, sent off a dispatch to Captain
Hillyer, commanding Her Majesty's ship Cadmus, then supposed to
be at St. Vincent, requesting his presence. Before receiving the letter
Captain Hillyer, as appeaiJs from his report to Admiral Sir A. Milne of
the 6th August, being about to enter the harbor of Granada, was
informed by the harbor-master there that a large privateer, belonging
to the southern confederation, was at Trinidad, and that the governor
of the latter island had dispatched a letter to him at St. Vincent the
day before; whereupon he proceeded with his ship to Trinidad, arriving
there on the 4th.
He reports farther as follows:
I found a heavy bark-rigged steamer, with South federal flag, with ten stars and
pendent, flying. An officer from her boarded us as soon as we anchored, with the
capt__|_i.'s respects. Soon after I sent the senior lieutenant, Mr. Sittingstone, with my
compliments, requesting he would be good enough to show his commission and papers,
which, after some hesitation, aud not before Mr. Sjpfingtone produced his commission,
he did.
From his report, it is a regular commusion as commander to Captain Semmes, late
■of the United States Navy, to the Sumter, as a man-of-war, signed by President Davis.
•She mounts five guns between decks, viz, four heavy 32-pounders and one pivot 68-
pounder; but, having been a passenger-boat, her scantling is so light (not more than
• 5 or 6 inches) that I do not think she conld stand any firing, and the guns being only
from 4 to 5 feet from the water, would not be worked in bad weather.
She broke the blockade at New Orleans, and was nearly captured; since then she
has been most successful, having eleven prizes; two she sank and the rest are at St.
■ Jago de Cuba, under the protection of the government, with the sanction of the gov-
vernors-in-chief, il||_il they receive orders from Spain as to the matter.
She has been supplied with a new main-yard, eighty tons of coal, and provisions
from this place, the attorney-general having given the governor his opinion that it was
quite legal to supply her.
I called- on Captain Semmes next morning as he was getting his steam up, and he
gave me full assurance that he would in no way interfere with British or neutral
trade, but complained gre»ly of the southerners having no port to send their prizes
to, and that he would be obliged to destroy all he took, in consequence of the strict
blockade on the southern ports and the stringent proclamations of all the great powers.
He thinks himself safe at Cuba, as the government of Spain's proclamation is only
•against privateers aud their prizes, and says nothing about men-of-war.
She sailed yesterday under steam, at 1 p. m., and from the signal station was reported
going to windward, and, from his questions, I should fancy he is going to cruise for
some of the California and China homeward-bound ships, aUd there is no doubt he will
do an enormous amount of damage before he is taken, for he seems a bold, determined
man, and well up to his work.2
The governor, Mr. Keate, appears to have been much on his guard
against any compromise of the neutrality he had been enjoined by Her
Majesty's government to observe. In his dispatch to the Duke of Newcastle, of the 7th of August, announcing the arrival of the Sumter, he
writes:'
I have the honor to report that a steamer, purporting to be a man-of-war, and to belong to the so-called Confederate States of Nooti America, put into the harbor of Port
of Spain on the 30th ultimo. The vessel is called the Sumter, and appears to be a converted passenger-steamer. She now carries, as I am given to understand, five powerful
euus.
1 Case of the United States, p. 321.
2 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 4.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
509
2. On the day of her arrival, one of her officers (all of whom seem to have been in
the naval^service of the United States) called upon me, sending in his card, with the
words written under his name, "Lieutenant, Confederate States Navy." Before receiving him, I directed my private secretary to inquire of him whether my doing so, after
reading these words, would be construed into any sort of recognition of him or his ship
in their assumed character. I did this in consequence of the injunction in your grace's
dispatch "on no account to recognize" any ship "in any other capacity than that of
a United States vessel." Mr. Evans, for such was this officer's name, replied that he
was sent by his commanding officer, Captain Semmes, who was himself unwell, simply
to pay his respects, and tha* to prevent any such construction he would withdraw his-
card and only send in his name verbally. I then received him, and had some conversa—.
tion with him, taking occasion to refer expressly to the neutral position occupied by
Great Britain in regard to the two belligerent parties in North America.1
It seems pretty plain that the presence of the Sumter was by no means
agreeable, for Governor Keate adds:
The avowed and principal object, no doubt, with which the Sumter ran to this port
was to obtain coals and provisions. A great deal of trade goes on between Trinidad
and the northern ports of North America, and Captain Semmes, I imagine, has not
failed to take this opportunity of obtaining information with regard to the vessels employed under the flag of the United States in this traffic. Fears are entertained with
regard to one or two now expected. It is to be hoped that the presence of the Sumter
in these waters will soon be made generaUy known, and that, while the civil war continues, the lumber and provision trade, any interruption of which would cause serious
embarrassment to this community, will be carried on in British bottoms. I have communicated with Admiral Sir Alexander Milne, now, I believe, at Halifax, on the subject,
and since the arrival of the Sumter, Her Majesty's ship Cadmus has come into the harbor, and her commander, Captaiu Hillyer, has verified the character of the Sumter,
and the commissions of her officers, and recognized her as a man-of-war. 1
It appears from these letters that the governor, beyond recognizing,
the Sumter as a belligerent, as he was bound to do, acted with the utmost caution as to recognizing her nationality; that the production of
Captain Semmes's commission was insisted on before any accommodation
was afforded ; that the supplies which the ship obtained, beyond provisions, were confined to a new main-yard and 80 tons of coal; that even this
was not conceded before the advice of the attorney-general of the colony
had been taken; that the ship came into port on the -30th of July, and
left on the 5th of August; a period of about six days.
We are now able to estimate the correctness of Mr. Bernard's opinion
as to the amicable terms on which the officers of the British war-vessel
were with those of the Sumter. Their intercourse appears to have been
purely of an official character.
It is important to observe that what thus took place at Trinidad occurred in August 1861, several months before the issuing of the regulations restricting the stay of belligerent vessels and the supplies to be
obtained in British ports, and when the matter stood simply on the principles of international law.
The Sumter, in her short career of six months, put in and obtained
supplies of coal, as has been stated, at ports of four different nations,
Spain, Holland, the Brazils, and France.
It may be interesting to see how the governors of these ports understood and acted upon the principles of neutrality which they were bound
to observe.
Before arriving at Trinidad the Sumter, as has been stated, put into
the port of Cienfuegos.
It appears from the remonstrance of the United States consul to the
captain-general of the Havana that she arrived there on the 7th July
and took in coal; from the journal of Captain Semmes we learn that the-
quantity was 100 tons.3
1 British Adpendix, vol. ii, p. 1.
2Tbid.
3 British Appendix, vol. virpp. 101, 105
Semmes's "Adventures Afloat," p. 145.510
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
It appears from a dispatch of Mr. Secretary Seward to the United
States minister at the Hague, of the 15th August, that the Sumter
arrived at St. Ann's, Curacoa, on the 17th July, and that she there received 120 tons of coal. It appears from Captain Semmes's journal and
from a letter of the United States minister at the Hague of October 8,
1861, that she remained there six or seven days.1
After her stay at Trinidad we next find her at the Dutch port of
Paramaribo. She arrived, as appears from a letter of the United States
consul at tbat port to the United States minister at the Hague, on the
19th August, and left on the 31st, making a period of twelve days, having been allowed to coal and refit.2 The quantity of coal is stated, in a
letter of the 15th October, from the Netherlands minister for foreign
affairs to the United States minister, to have been, as he terms it, " the
very restricted quantity of 125 tons—at the most, sufficient for four days
progress.3
The vessel next arrived at the Brazilian port of Maranham. It ap-:
pears from a letter from the United States consul at that port to Mr.
Seward, of the 15th September, 1861, that she arrived at Maranham on
the 6th and remained there nine days, and obtained 100 tons of coal,
having already 150 tons on board, | which," he adds, | would make an
ample supply for ten or fifteen days of constant running." Other supplies she was allowed to procure ad libitum, and when she left her commander stated that she had enough to last for three months.4
She appears to have arrived at Martinique on the 9th of November.
She remained there fourteen days. Permission was given by the government to take on board as much coal as her commander required.
He took sufficient to enable him to cross the Atlantic.5
The ship arrived at Cadiz on the 4th January, 1862, as appears from a
dispatch of the United States minister to Mr. Seward of the 8th of that
month.6 As she needed repairs, her commander requested the use of
the government dock for that purpose. The request was granted,
though with the limitation to such repairs as were strictly necessary.
She remained at Cadiz thirteen days.7
It thus appears that in every instance on which the Sumter had occasion to coal she was allowed to take in a considerably larger quantity
than she took at Trinidad, and that on every one of such visits, with
the exception of the one to Cienfuegos, she remained a greater number
of days than in the British ports.
On the receipt of Governor Keate's dispatch, this being the first time
.such a thing as the arrival of a confederate ship of war at a British
port had occurred, the secretary of state for the colonies required the
opinion of the law-officers of the Crown " as to the propriety of the course
pursued by the governor and the commander of Her Majesty's ship
Cadmus;" and also 1 as to whether vessels of war or privateers belonging either to the United States or to the so-styled Confederate States
can properly be required to leave British ports in the West Indies and
British North America, if the state of the weather permitted their
doing so."
The law-officers, on the 16th September, a fortnight prior to the letter of Mr. Adams to Lord Bussell, reported as follows:
| British Appendix, vol. vi, pp. 69, 81; Semmes's "Adventures Afloat," pp. 154^160.
2British Appendix, vol. vi, p. 81.
3 Ibid., p. 84.
4 Ibid., p. 2.
6 British Case, p. 17.
6Brrtish Appendix, vol. vi, p. 108.
"Ibid., pp. 113, 116.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
511
We do not precisely understand what was the course pursued toward the Sumter
by the commander of Her Majesty's ship Cadmus ; there is nothing from this officer;
and Governor Keate's dispatch of August 7 only states that " Captain Hillyer has
verified the character of the Sumter and the commissions of her officers, and recognized her as a man-of-war."
Governor Keate appears to have carefully avoided any such recognition whatever.
We know not upon what instructions eithei) of these officers may have acted ; but as
at present advised we see no reason to disapprove of the conduct of either. The Sumter certainly appears not to be a privateer, and is (we presume) a vessel of war commissioned by a de facto belligerent government.
Your lordship's second question must, in our opinion, be at present answered in the
negative.
Although
moi
or
{■
Of ____•_!  uoiiig __--./v_i_j--iiJ._e__ Kjy jji._z.i_a 111 tilt? ^pnuucu; luouiu.nuii. _._._» uue x,
at the present time, therefore, expressio unius est exclusio alterius ; and Her
government should determine upon and make public some other general instructions
on the point, if this should be considered expedient on grounds of imperial and international policy; unless or until this be done the ships of war or privateers of either
party, unaccompanied by prizes, should not, in our opinion, be required to leave British ports by the local authorities.1
This opiuion having been given by the law officers, Earl Bussell, on
receiving the letter of Mr. Adams of the 4th October, replied as follows:
Foreign Office, October 4, 1861.
The undersigned, Her Majesty's principal secretary of state for foreign affairs, has
had the honor to receive a complaint from Mr. Adams, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States at this court, against the authorities of the
island of Trinidad for a violation of her Majesty's proclamation of neutrality, by giving
aid and encouragement to the insurgents of the United States.
It appears, from the accounts received at the colonial office and at the admiralty, that
a vessel bearing a secession flag entered the port of Trinidad on the 30th of July last.
Captain Hillyer, of Her Majesty's ship Cadmus, having sent a boat to ascertain her
nationality, the commanding officer showed a commission signed by Mr. Jefferson
Davis, calling himself the President of the so-styled Confederate States.
The Sumter, which was the vessel in question, was allowed to stay six days at Trinidad, and to supply herself with coals and provisions; and the attorney-general of the
island perceived no illegality in these proceedings. x
The law-officers of the Crown have reported that the conduct of the governor was
in conformity to Her Majesty's proclamation.
No mention is made by the governor of his hoisting the British flag on the government flag-staff; and, if he did so, it was probably in order to show the national character of the island, and not in acknowledgment of the arrival of the Sumter.
There does not appear, therefore, any reason to believe that Her Majesty's proclamation of neutrality has been violated by the governor of Trinidad, or by the commanding officer of Her Majesty's ship Cadmus.2
The Government of the United States instructed Mr. Adams to inform Her Majesty's government that | the President deeply regrets that
T ord Bussell is unable to give to our complaint a satisfactory solution."3
"The armament, the insurgent flag, and the spurious commission,"says
Mr. Seward, "told the governor, as they sufficiently prove to Her Majesty's government, that the Sumter is and can be nothing but a piratical vessel." Consequently her officers and crew ought not to be received
in foreign ports. At another time she was said to be a privateer, and
that Great Britain ought to adopt toward her, as such, the rule established by some European governments of not allowing privateers to
stay in their ports longer than twenty-four hours at a time. Such was
the language of Mr. Seward to Lord Lyons, as appears from a dispatch
of the latter to Earl Bussell of November.4,1861.4   But the assumption
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 2.
s Ibid., p. 5.
3 United States Documents, vol. ii, p, 487.
* Ibid., p. 488.512
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
that the Sumter was a privateer was a mistake.    She was a commissioned ship of war of the Confederate States.
Now, we have seen, when considering how far, according to international law, a neutral sovereign is bound to place any restraint on the-
stay iu his ports of belligerent vessels, or on the supplies they are allowed to procure,.that by that law no such obligation exists. Indeed
it is admitted in the case of the United States1 that there were "not-
any precedents which settled absolutely the quantity of coal that might
be furnished to a belligerent man-of-war by a neutral," and I observe
that it is nowhere asserted by the United States that the law of nations
imposes any such restraint. There is, therefore, an end to the claim of
the United States in respect of this vessel having been permitted to
coal at Trinidad. Eor, I need hardly say that the Queen's regulations
of January, 1862, cannot be applied ex post facto to create an obligation
which did not previously exist. It would indeed be strange if regulations, more stringent than the rules of international law, framed by a
neutral sovereign for the very purpose of insuring the observance of
neutrality, can be made to create an antecedent liability which never
would have existed without them. Even if the hospitality afforded to
the Sumter at Trinidad should be deemed too great with reference to
the rules laid down iu the regulations, the fact that it occurred some
months^ before those regulations were issued deprives it of all importance.
It is true that iu this-case, as in others, the Government of the United:
States insists that partiality, inconsistent with neutrality, was exhibited
toward confederate vessels by reason that these, as in the present instance, were permitted to coal, while liberty to form a depot of coal at
Bermuda for the supply of their ships of war was denied to the United
States. No one can be misled by such a contention. I have already
pointed out that to allow one belligerent to have a supply always stored
up and ready, and to leave the other to take his chance of the public
market, are things essentially different, and that, far from the refusal
of such an advantage to the United States being a violation of neutrality, the concession of it would have been so in the opposite direction..
Moreover, such a contention involves a forgetfulness of one of the elementary principles of international law. A neutral is only justified ij__
allowing to a belligerent vessel the use of his ports and access to his
shores to obtain the things which the belligerent may lawfully procure.
He has no right to allow the belligerent the use of his territory on shore
for belligerent purposes, which the permission to form a depot would
necessarily involve.
There is one other material fact connected with this vessel to which I
desire to draw attention, the more particularly as it is stated in the
American Case1 that the " excessive supply of coal (80 tons) furnished
to the Sumter at Trinidad enabled her to inflict the subsequent injuries
on the commerce of the United States." The fact to which I refer Is,
that while using the coals furnished at Trinidad, the Sumter did not capture a single prize.
Erom the list of captures contained in the fourth volume of the American Documents, and from the two lists of claims successively put in by
the United States Government, it appears that this ship captured in
the whole eighteen vessels, of which, however, one was recaptured, and
seven were afterward released by the Spanish government. Those captured should be thus distributed :OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
O
13
1
On her cruise back frqm New Orleans to Cienfuegos the Sumter captured eight vessels; on her cruise between Cienfuegos and Curagoa,
none; on her cruise between Curagoa and Trinidad, two; between Trinidad and Paramaribo and Maranham, none; between Maranham and
Martinique, one; bet ween ^ Martinique and Cadiz, five; between Cadiz,
and Gibraltar, two. It thus appears that, of the eighteen vessels taken
by the Sumter, eight were taken before the vessel ever entered a neutral port at all; nine before she arrived at Trinidad; that after leaving
Trinidad she made two cruises without taking a single vessel; and that
it was not till she had obtained at Maranham the supply of 100 tons of
coal, in addition to the 150 she already had on boad, that she again became successful in making a prize. Of the prizes for which fJ-reat Britain is now asked to make compensation, two were taken before the Surnr
ter arrived at Trinidad, and the rest at intervals of two, three, and four
months from the time she left a British port, and when she was cruising
by means of coal furnished from a French port. The tribunal is now in a
position to judge how far the supply, said to have been "excessive,"
furnished at Trinidad, | enabled this vessel to inflict the subsequent injuries sustained by the commerce of the United States."
It is impossible, with any regard to equity and justice, to hold Great
Britain liable for injuries inflicted by the Sumter on United States commerce at a time when this vessel was deriving no benefit from coal sup-
herself of supplies ob-
stav at Gibraltar
uni
ne
plied to her from a British port, but was avai
Jained from other countries.
The facts connected with the Sumter during
At Gibraltar.      may be briefly stated. *
She arrived at Gibraltar on the 18th January, 1862, in need of
some repair, and wholly out of coal. According to the United States
consul, she had but two days' supply in her bunkers. The merchants at
Gibraltar, from what motive is immaterial, refused to supply her with
any. The pecuniary resources of her commander ran short. Many of
the crew having got on shore refused to return, and when force was attempted to be used to compel them, the local police interfered and protected the men against violence. Another crew" could not be got, and,
under these circumstances, the vessel was compelled to remaininthe port.
Mr. Sprague, the United States consul, had from the first protested
against her being allowed to enter or remain in the port, but received
the very proper answer that strict neutrality should be observed. On
the 21st of January he telegraphed Mr. Adams, "The Sumter is still
here, evidently awaiting funds. The British government observes strict
neutrality in conformity with the Queen's proclamation."1 On the 7th
of February Mr. Sprague informs Mr. Seward that 1 the Sumter still
remained in port, not having yet received a pound of coal."2
The helpless condition of the vessel further appears from a letter from
Mr. Sprague to Mr. Adams of the 6th February:
The Sumter remains in port. She took in yesterday 3,000 gallons of water, paid for
by a Mr. R. O. Joyce, of this city, who had previously provided her with an anchor and
chain. To-day her commander made a second attempt to obtain coal from the coal
merchants in this market, and I am informed they have declined supplying him out of
deference to myself.
Since yesterday there are some ten or twelve seamen of the Sumter on shore, and
to-day they have nearly all refused to return to their ship! One of them, in a drunken
state, *called upon me this day for protection. As the officers of the Sumter have attempted to forcibly ship them off from the quay, I to-day called upon the governor of
this fortress to inform him of the circumstance; that I was ready to take under my
charge any of these seamen who might wish to avail of my protection, and who would
66 B
United States Documents, vol. ii, p.
2 Ibid., p. 501.
500.14
ARBITRATION  AT 'GENEVA.
swear allegiance to the Government of the United States; and that I did not believe
that it would be in conformity with strict neutrality to'force these men on board of
the Sumter.
Since my interview with the governor I hear that orders have been given to the police authorities not to permit these men to be forcibly taken on board of the Sumter by
her officers, and up this hour (7 p. m.) they remain on shore, mostly in a state of intoxication,
All these circumstances may probably retard the departure of the Sumter from this
port; still I sincerely hope that a Federal cruiser may soon appear to do away with any
further trouble about this craft.   I have every reason to believe that her boilers are
■ defective, and that she is very badly provided with powder and other munitions of
war.1
On the 10th of February Captain Semmes, having it seems in the
mean time, procured funds, finding the market shut against him, addressed a pressing letter to Captain Warden, the officer of the dock-yard,
to be allowed to purchase coal from the government stores.   He writes :
CoiNEEDERATE STATES STEAMER SUMTER,
Bay of Gibraltar, FebruaryAO, 1862.
Sir : I lmve the honor to inform you that I have made every effort to procure a supply of coal without success. The British and other merchants of Gibraltar, instigated,
I learn, by the United States consul, have entered into the unneutral combination of
declining to furnish the Sumter with coal on any terms. Under these circumstances I
trust that the government of Her Majesty will find no difficulty in supplyiDg me.
By the recent letter of Earl RasseU (January 31, 1861) it is not inconsistent with
neutrality for a belligerent to supply himself with coal in a British port.' In otiier
words, the article has been pronounced, like provisions, unnoxious; and this being the
case, it can make no difference whether it be supplied by the government or an individual, (the government being re-imbursed the expense,) and this even though the
market was open to me; much metre, then, may the government supply me with an
innocent article, the market not being open to me. Suppose I had come into port destitute of provisions, and the same illegal combination had shut me out from the market, would the British government permit my crew to starve ? Or suppose I had been
a sail-ship and had come in -aismantled, and the dock-yard was the only place where I
could be refitted, would you have; denied me a mast; and if you would not deny me a
mast, on what principle would you deny me coal, both articles being declared by your
government to be innocent ? The true criterion is not whether the government or an
individual may supply the article, but whether the article itself is noxious or unuox-
ious. The government may not supply me with powder, why ? Not because I may have
recourse to the market, but because the article is noxious. A case in point occurred
when I was in Cadiz recently. My ship was admitted into a government dock, aud
there repaired, and why ? First, because the repairs were innocent, and secondly because there were no private docks in Cadiz.
So here the article is innocent, and there is none in the market, (accessible to me ;•)
why may-not the government supply me ?
In conclusion, I respectfully request.that you will supply me with 150 tons of coal,
for which I will pay the cash, or, if you prefer it, I will deposit the money with an
agent, 'who can have no difficulty, I suppose, in purchasing the same amount of the material from some one of the hulks and returning it to Her Majesty's dock-yard.2
Here was an occasion where an | habitually insincere neutrality"
might have found grounds for making an exception to rules however
strict. The only answer, however, which Captain Semmes received was,
that I Captain Warden's instructions prohibit him from supplying the
foreign men-of-war of any nation with coal, either by purchase or otherwise, from the government depot, so long as there is any in the market." 3
On the 12th of February theUnited States war-ship the Tuscarora arrived off Algeciras, and was soon followed by the Kearsarge, and later by
the Ino, and these vessels thenceforth lay in wait to intercept the Sumter
if she attempted to leave the bay. In the mean time her condition remained as helpless as before. On the 18th Mr. Sprague writes to Mr.
Adams:  "The Sumter still remains in port.   The coal companies in
1 United States Documents, vol. ii, p. 501.
2 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 18.
3 Ibid., p.18.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
515
this market still persist in refusing to sell her coal, notwithstanding that
$12 per ton is offered for it, which is 50 per cent, over the market price."1
"Whether by reason of not being able to procure coal, or from fear of
ing captured by the United States ships which were waiting to inter-
bei
cept her, or »both\ the Sumter remained at  Gibraltar till December
when it was proposed to sell her.   .Having heard of the intended salej
the United States minister at Madrid desired Mr. Sprague to protest
against it.
Captain Pickering, the commander of the Kearsarge, though considering the vessel | as of little value," yet thinking that she was offered for sale
probably only in order to establish a precedent, and because, in his
opinion, | the sale of the so-called confederate war-vessels in British
ports was an act as unfriendly and hostile to the United States Government "as the purchase of war-vessels in their ports by the same party,"
advised a similar course.2
Mr. Adams took a wiser and more liberal view. On the 24th of December he writes thus to Mr. Seward:
I have the honor to transmit copies of a series of communications received from Mr.'
H. J. Spragne, the consul at'Gibraltar, respecting the movements made at that port to
sell the steamer Sumter. As he desired my advice, I gave it to him in the letter, a copy
of which goes with the papers. The question of the right to sell the property of a
beUigerent to a neutral in a neutral port is not without its difficulties, and I find the
authorities differ materially about it. My own leaning is rather to a liberal construction, especially as iu this case it relieves us from a burdensome process of vigilance.
Besides which, I find that the Government bought a war-vessel of the Greeks while
engaged, in 1826, in their war with the Turks.3
The protest of Mr. Sprague was founded on two grounds: First, that
the Sumter was a United States vessel which had been made prize by
the confederates ; secondly, that the sale was made in order to avoid
capture by the vessels of the United States 2savy.4 The local government refused to interfere to prevent the sale, but gave official publicity
to the protest of the American consul.3   The sale took place,- and the
vessel was sold for
!19,500.6
The purchaser was a Mr. Klingender, said
to have been connected with.the house of Fraser, Trenholm & Co. of
Liverpool. It is probable that the purchase was in reality made on behalf of the latter. It was no doubt believed at the time that the sale
was fictitious, and that the vessel was intended still to remain the property of the confederates, and to be employed in her former service,
(whence the objection to the sale,) more especially when the vessel, taking advantage of a very high wind, slipped away at night and escaped
the vigilance of the hostile cruisers, who had instructions from Mr.
Adams to seize her, notwithstanding the sale, if she quitted the port
and was caught on the high seas. Had the sale been to an unobjectionable purchaser, Mr. Adams was prepared to acquiesce in it. On the
17th of December, three days before the sale, he writes to Mr. Sprague:
You will, first of all, confine yourself to the simple duty of watching all the proceedings. In case of any attempt at a merely fraudulent transfer for the sake of escaping harmless from our cruisers and resuming her former career, you will call their
attention to the fact, deny the validity of any such proceeding, and invoke their interference. Should it appear to you, on the other hand, that the purchasing parties
are foreigners acting in good faith for the conversion of the vessel to some legitimate
and. peaceful trade, I see no better way of getting rid of a burdensome labor of vigilance upon a property of little value than to acquiesce in it.   On the other hand,
1 United States Documents, vol. ii, p. 505.
2 Ibid., pp. 508,510.
3 Ibid., vol. ii, p. 507.
4 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 45.
*                   5 Ibid., p. 44.
6 United States Documents, vol. ii, p. 515.516
TITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
should you have reason to suspec. a spurious transaction for the sole purpose of extri -
eating the vessel from its present position in order to replace it in a more effective attitude of hostility to the United States, you will do well to remonstrate with the local
authorities, and to send a' copy of your remonstrance, together with the evidence on
which youmst it, to this legation.1
The vessel arrived at Liverpool on the 13th of February, 1863. There
she underwent repairs; all fittings for warlike purposes were removed,
and she was reduced to the condition of a freight-carrying merchant-
vessel.2 But Mr. Dudley maintained to the last the belief that she was
again intended to be employed on her former service. The consequence
was, that vigorous remonstrances were addressed by Mr. Adams to Her
Majesty's government for having permitted the sale of the vessel, on
the double ground that the transfer was fictitious, and that the sale of a
belligerent ship in a neutral port, effected to avoid capture, is, b_y the
law of nations, unlawful.3
Three complaints are put forward with reference to the foregoing
lillfts : (1.) That the vessel ought to have been compelled to leave the
portiu conformity with the regulations of January, 1862, as soon as those
regulations came into operation, namely, on the 17th of February. (2.)
That the authorities ought not to have permitted the sale to take place,
more especially as it was fictitious. (3.) That when, after the sale, the
vessel entered the port of Liverpool she ought to have been treated as a
confederate ship of war, and as such compelled to leave the port under
the regulations of January, 1862.4
The first of these heads of complaint is brought forward for the first
time in the case of the United States. It never occurred to the zeal either
of Mr. Sprague or Mr. Adams to insist on the Sumter being driven out
of the harbor into the very jaws of her enemies. It is now insisted on as
a flagrant violatiou of neutrality.
As regards this head of co
aint it is plain that the only way in
which the United States could be prejudiced by the Sumter remaining
in the port is that, if compelled to leave, she would inevitably have been
captured by the Federal ships which were waiting to seize her. But
for this, the longer she remained idle at Gibraltar, incapacitated by
want of coal and want of funds, the better; while there, she could do no
damage to the commerce of the United States. From the hour she entered the harbor of Gibraltar all complaint of prizes taken or destroyed
necessarily ceases. All that the United States could have gained' by
the Sumter being forced to leave Gibraltar, and being taken by their
war-vessels, would have been the few thousand pounds which this old
steamer would have sold for; to which, however, should perhaps be
added, that the employment of ships to watch her would h*ave ceased to
be necessary.
But was'the government under any obligation to compel the ship to
leave on the expiration of the twenty-four hours? The answer is that
the regulations of January 31,1862, did not apply to, but on the contrary excluded, the Sumter, which entered the harbor on the 18th of
January, 1862, the regulations applying in terms only to such vessels
as should enter ports of Her Majesty, | after the time when the order
should be first notified and^pnt in force," iu the particular place; which,
in this instance, was not till the 1st of February. Even had this been
<Hherwise it would have been impossible with any pretense of justice to
supply, ex post facto, to a vessel which had entered the port, when
1 United States Documents, vol. ii, p. 514.
2 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 64.
3 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 58.
4 Case of the United States, p. 325.
noOPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
O
17
such regulations existed, a rule which. must inevitably have had the
effect of delivering her into the hands of her enemies.
Again, even if the third article of the regulations had been applicable
to the Sumter, the fact that the necessary effect of forcing her to leave
the harbor would have been to give her up to hostile vessels, waiting
just outside to seize her, would have afforded, I think, a sufficient ground
for suspending the regulation, and extending the time beyond the
twenty-four hours, under the discretionary power which admits of such
extension in cases of necessity. No governor, as it seems to me, is
bound to force a vessel to quit a port in which she is iu safety, when
the necessary effect of doing so must be to throw her into the hands of
a more powerful enemy who is waiting for her outside. It is admitted
that by the law of nations'a vessel taking refuge, when pursued by an
enemy, in _a neutral port, cannot be pursued. She is protected by reason
of the inviolability of the neutral territory and its waters, and by the
right of asylum which the neutral concedes to her.
But of what avail would this be, if the neutral were bound, at the
expiration of twenty-four hours', to say, " You must quit my port. I am
aware that your enemy is waiting outside to seize you, but your time is
up and you must go. If, indeed, your enemy were inside the port, I
could give you twenty-four hours start of him, which would probably
enable you to escape; but he is just outside the port instead of within
it, and I must therefore leave you to your fate." I cannot think that
any governor would be bound to drive a vessel out of a port where she
is in safety, when the necessary consequence must be her capture or
destruction, any more than he would be bound to do so if the consequence would be her exposure to a hurricane. The regulation never
was intended to apply to such a case.
Furthermore, I cannot help thinking that giving an equitable construction to the third article of the Queen's regulations, the inability to
procure a supply of coal, also brought the vessel within-the exceptions
contained in it, although coals are not specifically mentioned.
The Sumter, indeed, had her sails and could have put to sea; but it
is obvious that a steamer without coal, in the face of powerful steamships, would have but a poor chance. Thus crippled, her power of
navigation on the ocean or of escape from enemies being seriously im--
paired, she would be the crippled duck in the comparison of M. Drouyn
de Lhuys. Supposing a sailing-vessel dismasted,.in a port at which no
mast suitable to her size could be procured, the local authority would
certainly not be bound to compel her to leave; the case would be within
the exception; but what masts and sails are to the sailing-vessel, coal,
in addition to her machinery, is to the steamer.
If, as I have shown, the Queen's regulations did not apply to the
Sumter, a fortiori in the exercise of his discretion the governor ought
not to have compelled her to leave under the circumstances stated.
In answer to the remonstrances of Mr. Adams as to the sale of the vessel
having been allowed to take place, Her Majesty's government, under
the advice of its law-officers, took this position. The sale of a belligerent ship in a neutral port to avoid capture has in it nothing unlawful. It may possibly be invalid against the other belligerent, into
whose hands,*but for such sale, the vessel would have fallen; but it is
good against the rest of the world. The vessel may be subject 'to capture, when again at sea, by a ship of the belligerent, and the new owner
must abide by the decision of a prize court of the belligerent as to the
validity of his purchase; he cannot claim protection from his own government in respect of the seizure.   But the government of the neutral518
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
port cannot interfere to prevent, the sale, nor can it prevent the purchaser from dealing with the vessel as he pleases. It is under no obligation to do so; and, what is still more to the purpose, it has no power
to do so.
It was, therefore, impossible that the British authorities could, consistently with the law, interfere with the sale or movements of this
vessel.
They had no power to try the question whether the sale was real or'
fictitious; even if the transfer had been plainly fictitious, they had no
power to prevent-the vessel* leaving the port  as freely as she had
entered it.
This position appears to me impregnable. I will only add that I do
not find anywhere pointed out by what power, whether derived from
statute or common law, the British authorities could have Seized or
interfered with this vessel after h'er sale.
Even ifflhe British government could be held to have incurred any^
liability in respect of the Sumter having'been "Suffered to lfeave Gibraltar,, as she never again appeared on the seas as a vessel of war, or
did injury to an American ship, no claim to damages can arise in respect of her being permitted to leave, beyond, possibly, the inconsiderable sum which may have been her value.
The position at first taken by M. Staempfli that, by analogy to the
case of a military force taking refuge in a neutral country, in which
case an established rule of international law requires that such force
should submit to being disarmed and disbanded, a ship of war taking
refuge in a neutral port must in like manner be disarmed and dismantled
is, as I have shown elsewhere, wholly untenable, the distinction between
military and naval forces in this/respect beijig universally admitted. I
am glad to find the honorable gentleman no longer insists on it.
After tbe arrival of the-Ship at Liverpool, Mr. Adams addressing Earl
Bussell insisted on her being still considered as a confederate vessel of war, and therefore within the Queen's regulations relating to the stay of ships of war in British ports.1
Earl Bussell gave the proper answer :
I have the honor to inform you that Her Majesty's government have had under their
consideration, in communication with the proper law-advisers of the Crown, your letter
of the 18th ultimo, stating that you had received information of the arrival of the
steamer Sumter at Liverpool, and calling my attention to the bearing on this case of
Her Majesty's proclamation, limiting the stay within British ports of vessels of war
belonging to either of the belligerent parties.
I have now to inform you that Her Majesty's government, in the present state of
their information on the subject, are unable to assume, as you appear to do, that the.
ship lately called the Sumter has not been legally and bona fide sold to a British owner
for commercial and peaceful purj.oses; and unless it were established that the sale was
merely fictitious, Her Majesty's proclamation, to which you refer, cannot be deemed
applicable to that vessel in the port of Liverpool.3
' To this might have been added that she was no longer a vessel of
war.
Even if this view were erroneous, the Sumter, never having done further mischief to United States vessels, no claim to damages can possibly
arise in respect of her having been allowed to remain at Liverpool.
This being so, it may be scarcely worth while to say mdre about her.
But as this pitiful claim is made the occasion of studied insult to Great
Britain, on the score of her "habitually insincere neutrality," it is right
to observe that as soon as this vessel was known to be at Liverpool, sheOPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
519
became the object of watchful attention on the part of Her Majesty's
government.
On the 4th of April Earl Russell writes to Mr. Adams as follows:
My attention having been drawn to a paragraph which appeared in the Daily News
of the 17th ultimo, in which, under the heading of " Confederate War-Vessels," is included the Sumter, now called the Gibraltar, as having heen thoroughly repaired at
Birkenhead, and being ready for sea, I deemed it advisable at once to request the
proper authorities to cause particular attention to be paid to this vessel.
• I have now the honor to acquaint you that it appears from a Teportiiwhieh has been
received from the collector of customs at Liverpool, and Which has been communicated to me by the lords commissioners of Her Majesty's treasury, that,* since the arrival of the Sumter at Liverpool on the 13th of February last, she has been carefully
watched by the custom-house officers, and that, although the vessel has received some
repairs, nothing has taken place regarding her of a suspicious character.
The Sumter appears to be laid up in the upper part of the great float, at Birkenhead, and there seems to be no sign of her being at present intended for sea.
I have the honor to add that the authorities at Liverpool are instructed to continue
to observe this vessel, and to report without delay any circumstances of an unusual
character which may happen to take place with regard to her.1
To which Mr. Adams replies :
I have had the honor to receive your note of the 4th instant, in reference to a paragraph which appeared in the Daily News of the 17th ultimo, respecting the immediate
preparation of the Sumter for departure from the port of Liverpool. I must confess
that the information received by me from Liverpool, frcun wholly independent sources,
had led me to believe the newspaper statement to be true. It is, however, with very great
satisfaction I receive the-contradiction of it from your lordship, as weU as the assurance that the movements of that vessel are under the observation of Her Majesty's
government. I am the more led to indulge this .that the notice appears to have been
spontaneously furnished to me with a degree of courtesy which I should be wanting
in my duty if I were to fail properly to appreciate.2
A month or six weeks later, all her war fittings were removed; and
the vessel, having been adapted for running cargo, it was proposed to
load some heavy ordnance on board of her, the intention being no doubt
to run the blockade and convey the guns, which appear to have been
intended for purposes of fortification, to one of the southern ports. The
authorities immediately interfered, nor would they allow the ship to sail
with the guns till thoroughly satisfied that they were incapable of being
used on board, and were to be carried only as cargo.
On the 1st of July, Mr. Dudley, for once giving credit to the authorities for a desire to do their duty, writes:
The steamer Sumter is still in port. She has taken on the two large guns referred
to in previous dispatches. The collector refuses to clear the vessel until they are. removed and threatens to seize her if she sails without her clearance. Either the government or owners will have to give way. 'This looks as if the authorities were in
earnest; at least, so far as this vessel is concerned.3
On further inquiry all doubt as to the guns being cargo was removed,
and the vessel was allowed to clear with them on board.
■ The confident expectations at first entertained by Mr. Dudley of her
being destined for further use as a vessel of war proved unfounded.
She assumed the humbler character of a blockade-riyiner, aud is supposed to have been lost in attempting to get into Charleston.
It is impossible to say that any responsibility attaches to Great
Britain in respect of this vessel.
THE NASHVILLE.
The facts relating to the Nashville are very similar to the earlier part
of the history of the Sumter.
The NashYfn..
At Bermuda
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 59.
2 Ibid., p. 61.
3 United States Documents, vol. iv, p.
4 Page 328.
20?520
ARBITRATION _AT   GENEVA.
She is stated, in the. case of the United States, to have been
a. large paddle-wheel steamer, formerly engaged on the New York
and Charleston line; to have been lightened to diminish her draught;
to have been armed with two guns, and to have been commanded by an
officer who had been in the Navy of the United States. . She ran out
from Charleston on the night of the 26th of October, 1861, and arrived
at the port of St. George, Bermuda, on the 30th. She was then short
of coal, having, no doubt, taken only a sufficient supply to bring'her to*
Bermuda, the object being to lighten her draught as much as possible,
in order to facilitate her getting over the bar at Charleston. In a dispatch to the Duke of Newcastle, of the 2d of November, Governor Ord
writes:
I have the honor to acquaint your excellency that these islands were visited, on the
30th ultimo, by the Confederate States paddle-wheel steamer Nashville, commanded
by Lieutenant Peagram, aud having on board Lieutenant-Colonel Peyton, of the-Con-
federate States army, said to be a minister from those States to the court of Spain,
with numerous other officers and persons apparently connected with the ship. The
vessel anchored off the dock-yard; and Lieutenat Peagram and Colonel Peyton at once
called upon Captain Hutton, R. N., the superintendent, and requested him to supply
their vessel with 600 tons of coal, it being their wish to proceed to sea as early as
possible.
This request Captain Hutton declared himself unable to comply with,
and the governor, on being applied to, having repeated the refusal,
Lieutenant Peagram supplied himself from private sources.
The governor further states:
The object of the Nashville's visit has not been distinctly stated; but there can be
no doubt that she is bound to England, and that she has on board persons who will
endeavor to excite an interest in the favor of the Confederate States at some of the
European courts, and probably to obtain supplies of material and stores for the support of their cause.
It had been reported that the Nashville left Charleston on the 12th ultimo, with e_s:-
Senators Slidell and Mason, as representatives from the Confederate States to the governments of France and England; that she had $2,000,000 on board for tbe purchase of
material, and was intended to coal at Bermuda. This report no doubt led to the calling in'here, on the 20th ultimo, of the United States steam-vessel Connecticut, which
left here immediately after, and proceeded apparently to cruise south.
It appears from the report of the Nashville officers that these ex-Senators "really did
break the blockade about the time named, but in a smaller vessel, and that 'they
reached Havana on their way to England. The United States steam-vessels being
thus put upon a wrong scent, the Nashville ran the blockade the night of the 26th,
probably with the remainder of the Confederate States representatives and the specie,
and got to Bermuda in safety, from which she has every chance of reaching England
unmolested by the United States vessels of war.
I trust my proceedings ou this occasion will meet your Grace's approval.1
It is stated in the case of the United States, that I the Nashville
took on board at Bermuda, by the permission of the governor, 600
tons of coal, and that this act was approved by Her Majesty's principal
secretary of state for the colonies. This approval seems to have been"
elicited by the complaints which had been made to the governor by the
consul of the United States at that port. It may also be that'Her
Majesty's government preferred to have the question settled, before it
could be made the subject of diplomatic representation on the part of •
the United States."
This statement requires correction. In the first place, no permission
was given by the governor. At that time none was required. No regulations having then been issued as.to the stay of vessels in British
ports, or the supply of coal to be allowed to them, it was free to a vessel of war to purchase as much coal as she required.
In the second place the quantity was, in fact, not .600 tons, but, as
appears from a dispatch from Governor Lefroy to the Earl of Kimber-
ley, eitheii 442£ or 472£ tons, according as the report of an officer of the
'British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 87.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
521
port, who took down the amount, or the memory of the party who supplied the coal, may happen to be correct.1
This fact appearing in the evidence furnished by Her Majesty's Gov-,
ernment, it is now said by the United States Government to " matter
little which is the true account;"2 yet we have seen 150 tons treated as a
considerable'amount; and while on this subject I canuot help observing that although it is true that Governor Ord, in writing to the Duke
of Newcastle, says, -with reference to the amount of coal taken by the
Nashville, he " has been informed they have taken in about 600 tons,"
the United States consul, Mr. Wells, who no doubt kept a sharp eye on
what, was doing, and was more likely to be well informed about it,
states, in a letter to Mr. Seward of the 8th of November, " the Nashville took in about 500 tons of coal."3 Why should the" larger figure at
once be assumed to be the right one, without tiny reference to the statement of Mr. Wells?
When it is stated that the approval of the colonial secretary of what
has been done i seems to have been elicited by the complaints which
had been made to the governor by the United States consul," I am struck
by the fact that there is a total absence of all such complaint. Beyond
an application made by the consul to the governor, on hearing of the
ship's arrival, soliciting that an order may be given that no supplies
shall be granted to the vessel, no remonstrance or complaint of any kind
is made by Mr. Wells.4
When it is insinuated that " Her Majesty's government preferred to
have the matter settled before it could be made the subject of diplomatic correspondence," two things should be added: the first, that the
supplies furnished to the Nashville at Bermuda never did become the
subject of diplomatic correspondence, no complaint having ever been
addressed to Her Majesty's government, either as to the fact of coal
having been supplied to the Nashville, or as to the quantity furnished to
her. The subject is brought forward as a matter of complaint, for the
first time, in the proceedings before this tribunal. Further, it should be
stated that the approval of the secretary of state was elicited by the request of Governor Ord himself, who asked to be informed if he had acted
rightly in allowing the vessel to coal. It is distressing to have so frequently to advert to inaccuracies of this kind.
The approval of the secretary'of state for the colonies was in these
words:
The course pursued by you in the present instance was in strict accordance with the
principles which you will find ]aid down in my circular dispatch.
I have further to state that both you and Captain Uufton showed a very proper discretion in declining to furnish supplies to a war-vessel of one of the belligerent parties
from public stores belonging to the British government.
Her Majesty's government entirely approve of the whole of your proceedings on this
occasion.8
future guidance' in such cases
Havine had occasion to consult the law-officers of the Crown on the subject of remon-
the governors of some of the colonies by consuls of the United
' .ulars in the treatment of vessels bearing the flag of
strances addressed to
States in regard to .certain partie
1 British Appendix, vol. v., p. 13.
3 Argument of the United States, p. 301.
:i United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 207.
4 British Appendix, vol ii, p. 88.
b Ibid., p. m522
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
the States which have seceded frojn the Union, I think it right to communicate to you,
for your information and guidance, the principles which ought to be observed in eases
of the kind which raised the present question.
You will understand, therefore, that no foreign consul has any power or jurisdiction
to seize any vessel (under whatever flag) within British territorial waters, and that the
British authorities ought not to take any steps adverse to merchant-vessels of the Confederate States, or to interfere with their free resort to British ports.
With respect to supplies, even of articles clearly "contraband of war," (such'as
arms or ammunition,) to the vessels of either party, the colonial authorities are not at
liberty to interfere, unless anything should be done in violation of the foreign-enlistment
act, 59 Geo. Ill, cap. 69, which prohibits the equipping, furnishing, fitting-out, and
arming of ships or vessels of foreign belligerent powers, and also the supply of guns or
equipments for .war, so as to increase the warlike force of vessels of war, but which
does not render illegal the mere supply of arms or ammunition, &c, to privatef ships
or vessels.
If it should be necessary for the colonial authorities to act in any such case, it should
only be done*when the law is ragularly put iu force, and under the %dv'ice of the law-
officers of the Crown.
With respect to the supplying in British jurisdiction of articles ancipitis usus, (such,
for instance, as coal,) there is no ground for any interference whatever on the part of
the colonial authorities.1
It is plain from these instructions that Her Majesty's government,
acting under the advice of the council of the Crown, took the same view
of the law applicable to such a case that all writers on international law
had taken, namely, that in the absence of regulations made by the neutral state, a belligerent vessel in a neutral port enjoys perfect liberty to
obtain, from private sources, whatever supplies she may require.
Nor, even if the governor had had any discretion in the matter, could
it be said that he had exercised such discretion unwisely. The Nashville
did not appear to be gojng on a mission of war at all. She was imperfectly armed with only two rifled 6-pounder guns. She was conveying
to Europe agents authorized to communicate with European governments on behalf of the Confederate States. The quantity of coal allowed her was no more than was sufficient for the purpose of such a
voyage, and there was then no rule limiting the supply to the quantity
to take her to her nearest port. As a ship of war she was at liberty
to buy what she wanted.
I am therefore quite at a loss to see how the supply of coal at Bermuda pan be maoTe a ground for asking damages at the hands of this
tribunal. The argument that what was done, at a time when there was
uurestricted freedom in respect of such transactions, is to be tried by
the test of stringent regulations, afterward made for the purpose of
placing restraints on that freedom, is obviously unsound. When it is
said that there was a violation of neutrality iu allowing a_ confederate
vessel to take as much coal as she wanted, while the United States were
not permitted to establish a depot of coal for the supply of their vessels, the argument which confounds the obvious distinction between a
public national store and the resources of private dealers, if indeed
worthy of attention, has already been disposed of.
The Nashville, arrived at Southampton on the 21st November, 1861.'
A o >v On her way she seized and set fire to a United States mer-
At Southampton. ■___. -_'■■_•-_ • _r-v -_   «
chant-vessel, making her crew prisoners of war. On this
ground, as well as-her being a vessel of the insurgent government, Mr.
Adams objected to her being received into a British port.
It was ascertained that the Nashville was duly commissioned as a ship
of war of the Confederate States, and was under the command of a
duly commissioned officer.
The law-officers, on being consulted by  the government, gave anOPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
523
opinion in strict conformity to established principles of international
law:
The Nashville appears to be a confederate vessel of war; her commander and officers
have commissions in the confederate navy ; some of them have written ordets from
'thenavy department, Richmond, to report to Lieutenant Pegram " for duty" on board
the. Nashville, and her crew have signed articles to ship in the "confederate navy."
Her having captured and burnt a United States merchant-vessel on the high seas
cannot, under these circumstances, be considered (to adopt Mr. Adams's words) as
'•' voluntarily undertaken by individuals not vested with powers generally acknowl- .
edged to be necessary to justify aggressive warfare;" nor does it at all approximate
within the definition of piracy; nor is it an unauthorized act of violence; and if (as
Mr. Adams suggests) Her Majesty's government is called on in this case '. either to
recognize a belligerent, or to denounce £ wrong-doer," Her Majesty's government must,
upon the facts and documents now appearing, adopt the former course.
With reference to the allegation that some of her officers are to be put in. command
of vessels now fitting out in British ports for hostile purposes against the United States,
we can only say that if reasonable evidence can be procured that such vessels are being so fitted out, in contravention of the foreign-enlistment act, all parties concerned
therein should be legally proceeded agatnst, with the view to. their being personaUy
punished, and to the forfeiture of the vessels.
We may add (generally) that it will be competent to Her Majesty, as a neutral
power, either to designate the particular ports to whieh alone the national ships of the
belligerents are permitted to resort; to limit the time for whieh, or to define the circumstances under which, they may so resort thereto, or to make and publish such general regulations with reference thereto as she may think proper; but subject to such
limitations, Her Majesty caunot interfere with the national ships of one party resorting to her ports in respect of hostile acts done on the high seas to the ships of the opposite party.1
Sir Hugh Cairns and Dr. Deane. being consulted by the United
States consul as to the possibility of recovering chronometers seized as
prizes on the taking of the Harvey Birch, advised:
■ It appears from the affidavit of Captain Nelson that the Harvey Birch was taken
possession of and burnt on the high seas, outside the limit of British waters, and that
the armed ship Nashville carried the flag of the Confederate States.
•From the statement in the newspaper above referred to, the commander of the Nash- •
ville seems to have held a commission under the Confederate States and in the navy
of those States.
The British government has considered the Federal and Confederate States entitled
to be treated as belligerents, each possessed of the rights of war, one of which rights
is the capture and destruction of vessels belonging to the enemy by the commissioned
vessels of the belligerents.
If, therefore, the Nashville was a commissioned.vessel belonging to the Confederate
States, we are  of opinion that Captain Nelson has no legal rights in this country'
against the Nashville or her commander.2
There is nothing in what was done in relation to the Nashville after
her arrival at Southampton which could give occasion for any complaint.
As soon as it was found that she was about to undergo repairs at that
port, instructions w.ere given by the government-to exercise the ntmost
vigilance to see that nothing was added to her equipment or her power
as a
vessel of war.3   Mr. Adams,
naturally anxious to prevent any
had
attempt of this nature, found, on applying to Earl Bussell, that he hat
been anticipated by the spontaneous action of the government.4   Noth
ing was done to the Nashville beyond necessary repairs, and she eventually left England on the 3d of February, 1862, the same in point of
equipment and strength as she had been on leaving Charleston.
On the 15th of December the United States steamer Tuscarora arrived
also at Southampton, and having taken in 150 tons of coal proceeded
to keep watch on the Nashville, evidently, as the sequel showed, for the
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 99.
- United States Documents, vo1. ii, p. 560.
'British Appendix, vol.ii, p. 91.
I Ibid., p. 102. ^524
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
purpose of seizing her on her departure from British waters. From a
telegram of Captain Patey, senior officer of Her Majesty's ships at
Southampton, to the admiralty, it appears that on the night of the 9th
of January "the dock-master reported having discovered in the dock
two officers and three men from Tuscarora, who stated they were on
shore under orders watching Nashville, and to signal should she get
under weigh.   Dock-master removed them from the dock."1
Earl Bussell, having become acquainted with this state of things,
wrote on the 10th to Mr. Adams.:
I have just been informed that'armed men-were found last night watching the Nashville in Southampton docks, and that they were discovered by Mr. Hoge'the dock superintendent, close at the Nashville's bows.
I think it necessary to state to you that, except in caso of stress of weather forcing
them to land, Her Majesty's government cannot permit armed men in the service of a
foreign government to land upon British ground.
I therefore request that you will inform the captain of the Federal steamer in Southampton waters that he must refrain from acls of this kind, which may lead to a collision between his men and the British authorities.
I have also to inform^ou that no act of hostility can be permitted between the Federal steamer and its enemy within British waters, and that orders to that effect will
be issued to the board of admiralty. j
In the case of the Nashville leaving British waters, the Federal steamer of war will
not be permitted to start from British waters in pursuit of her till after the expiration
of twenty-four hours,
The same rule will be applied to the vessels of the so-called Confederate States.2
On the 10th Ctiptaln Wilcox, of Her Majesty's ship Dauntless, writes
to Captain Craven, the commander of the Tuscarora, as follows :
Having observed preparations for departure in the United States steamer Tuscarora,
under your command, and also in the Confederate States steamer, Nashville, I beg to
acquaint you that I have received instructions to prevent any hostility taking place in
British waters; and I beg to bring to your notice the usual law of nations which requires that twenty-four hours should elapse before the departure of one belligerent
ship in pursuit of the other.
Relying upon your good judgment in this matter, and the friendly feeling existing between the two governments, I have, &c.3
Captain Craven answered, giving, it will be observed, no pled
_re •
_>c •
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication this evening.
I am not aware that I have given cause for your assuming that I meditate an act of
hostility in the waters of Great Britain.
Claiming the right of free access to, and egress from, the waters Of a nation believed
' to be-in aunty with the United States, and sincerely desirous of a v*oiding all semblance
of offense, I am. &c.4
It was not without some difficulty that Captain Patey obtained there-
quired pledge.    On the 25th of January he reports to the admiralty:
The-Nashville's necessary defects have been made good, and she has been coaled;
and, judging from the frequent movements of the Tuscarora up and down the Southampton Water,|fncluding one trip through the Needles and round the Isle of Wight,
that the ship is in all respects ready for sea, I am induced to bring this matter under
the notice of their lordships, because it appears to me, from the course pursued, arid
avowedly so made known to me by the captain of the Tuscarora, in a conversation which
I have had with that officer, he will do his utriiost to render the rule of twenty-four
hours which the Nashville may be inclined to take advantage of null and void-, by constantly keeping up his steam, and having slips on his cable, so that the moment Nashville moves Tuscarora will precede her, and at once claim priority of sailing, returning
in this port again within the lapse of twenty-four hours; it hence follows that the
Nashville is closely blockaded in a neutral port, and this is, no doubt, the special object of the Tuscarora's visit to Southampton.
I would also beg to point out to their.lordships the possibility of the Tuscarora and
Nashville coming into collision in a narrow channel, and at night, aud the probability
of Tuscarora, supposing that the other ship had purposely run into her,  opening
'British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 107.
3 Ibid., p. 108.
3 Ibid., p. 109.
4 Ibid., p. 110.
_JOPINIONS   OF   Ml
ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
525
fire on her, and hence bringing on a grave difficulty in the matter. Under all the circumstances of this peculiar case, I think it my duty to make this communication to
their lordships, that they may take such steps as may by them be deemed necessary,
respectfiilly submitting that the commanders of the Tuscarora and Nashville, respectively, should be called upon to give me a written notice of the date and hour they intend to proceed to sea, and that, having received such notice from either one, the other
should be immediately notified of the fact, and that he would not be allowed to follow
until twenty-four hours had. elapsed.1
The following summary of facts, forwarded by the admiralty to the
foreign office on the 31st, is printed in the British Appendix:
November 21, 1861.—Nashville arrived at Southampton, and taken into dock for calking and other repairs.
December 15.—Tuscarora arrived, and anchored off entrance to river lichen.
December 23.—Captain Patey reported no repairs had been made in the Nashville,
beyond what were absolutely necessary, and that she had not been in any way equipped
more completely as a man of war.
, January 10; 1862.—Captain Patey reported that dock-master at Southampton'had on.
previous night found two officers (one with side-arms) and three men, belonging to Tuscarora, under Graving Dock fence on pier between docks. They stated that they were
stationed there by their captain's orders to watch Nashville, and to make a signal to
their own ship should Nashville attempt to get underway. Dock-master removed
these persons.
January 10.—Captain Patey also reported that Tuscarora had received one hundred
and fifty tons of coal, and had kept her steam up since her arrival, with a spring on
her" cable, apparently ready for sea.
January 11.—Captain Wilcox; of Her Majesty's ship Dauntless, stationed iu Southampton Water, in formed captains of Tuscarora and Nashville that he had observed pre-'
parations for their departure, and had instructions to prevent any hostilities in British
waters, and brought to their notice that the law of nations requires that twenty-four
hours should elapse before the departure of one belligerent ship from a neutral port in
pursuit of another. Captain Patey, as senior officer at Southampton, also informed
captains of Tuscarora and Nashville that he had received orders to detain one vessel
until the other had twenty-four hours' start. Captains of two vessels answered, they
would conform to law; and Captain Craven (of Tuscarora) claimed right of free access
to and egress from " waters of a nation believed to be in amity with the United States,"
trusting that strict impartiality would be observed between the two vessels. In reply,
Captain Patey referred to fact of Captain Craven having sent officers and men into
docks to watch Nashville, and also pointed out that a boat, apparently armed, from
the Tuscarora had been observed pulling in and out of the docks without landing
during the night.    Captain Craven gave assurance that this would not be repeated.
January 13.—Tuscarora left anchorage at 4 a. m., and proceeded to anchor one mile
west of Calshot Light-ship. Returned at 4 p. m. to former anchorage at entrance of
Itchen River.
January 15.—Tuscarora at 2 p. m. weighed, and passed Calshot.
January 16.—At 2 p. m. returned to original anchorage.
January 20.—At 8 p.m. proceeded down Southampton Water aud anchored outside
Calshot Castle.
January 22.—At 10 a. m. returned to- anchorage at .mouth of Itchen River.
January 25.—Captain Patey reported Nashville coaled and necessary repairs completed, and Tuscarora ready far sea; also, that, in conversation with him, Captain
Craven, of Tuscarora, had avowed that he would do his utmost to render rule as to
twenty-four hours' start null and Void, by constantly .keeping up steam, and having
slips on her cable, so that the moment Nashville might move Tuscarora would precede
her, and claim priority of sailing, returning again within twenty-four hours, and so
actually blockading Nashville in a neutral port.
January 26.—Under instructions, Captain Patey obtained written promises from captains of Tuscarora and NashviUe not to leave their then positions without giving
twenty-four nours' notice.
January 27.—In order to prevent any hostile proceedings between the two vessels in
British waters, a messenger was dispatched in the morning to Southampton with instructions to Captain Patey to require Nashville to depart by 12 o'clock at noon ou
Tuesday, the 28th January, and Tuscarora on following day at same hour; but at 1 p.
m., and before receiving these last-mentioned instructions, Captain Patey telegraphed
that captain of Tuscarora had notified him that that ship would put to sea on the fallowing day, namely, on 28th January, at 11 a. m. To this telegram an answer was at
once sent that Tuscarora was accordingly to be allowed to .proceed first; and, under
the circumstances, Captain Patey did not think it necessary to acquaint the captain of
British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 114.526
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
Tuscarora of the orders he (Captain Patey) received subsequenfty, (on the afternoon of
the 27th,) requiring the ship to quit Southampton.
January 28.—Captain of Tuscarora reported by letter to Captain Patey
January 28.—Captain Patey directed by telegraph not to take any steps, at present,
_l_ i.uiv.   ._ic_u  in.   _i_i__.    _._   _..a._u v ijm. _    u.^fa
really go to sea, in accordance with notice.
ADMBRALTy, January 30, 1862.1
This summary was forwarded by Earl Bussell to Mr. Adams, with
this observation:
I think you will see from this summary that Her Majesty's government have reason
to complain of the conduct of the commander of the Tuscarora, as an attempt to carry
on hostilities in the waters of a neutral.
I have the honor also to inclose a copy of the London Gazette,2 containing the rules
which I mentioned to you in a previous letter.
On the 1st of February, the Tuscarora, having left Lymington, to
which place she had previously shifted her berth, six miles to the west
of the Needles, is seen steaming to the westward. The Nashville is
accordingly informed that she can leave on the ensuing day. The next
day the Tuscarora is at Portland. On the 3d, she is at her former station in Cowes Boads. The Nashville having in the mean time given
notice to leave on the 3d, notice was given to the captain of the Tuscarora not to leave for twenty-four hours. But so suspicious did the movements of this vessel appear to the commanders of Her Majesty's ships,
that it was thought necessary for a ship of war to accompany the Nashville past the Tuscarora, and for a watch to be kept on the latter by the
Dauntless.
It thus appears that the captain of the Tuscarora systematically endeavored to elude the twenty-four hours' rule by keeping up his steam
and having slips on his cable, and by making a series of false starts.
Indeed, he preceded the Nashville only to return at the moment of the
latter's departure, and he was therefore not permitted to leave for
another space of twenty-four hours. Nevertheless this officer, who had
himself been treated with scrupulous impartiality and attention, but
had given to Her Majesty's government just cause of complaint, having
been baffled in his endeavors to elude the necessary regulations of neutrality, did not leave Southampton without complaining that "a just
and rigid impartiality did not appear to have been extended to him,"13
in connection with " the escape of the*pirate Nashville." -It is true
that Mr. Adams admits, in a dispatch of the 7th of February, 1862,
that I he (Captain Craven of the Tuscarora) will doubtless lay the
■ blame on the action of the people and government of this country; my
own opinion is, that if he had been a little more cool and quiet, he would
have fared better."4
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, pp. 120, 121
2 Ibid., p. 121.
3 Ibid., p. 125.
4 Executive Documents, 1861
62, Nc 104, p. 38.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN
OZ .
Again at Bermu
These proceedings of the commander of .the Tuscarora have been referred to by M. Calvo in his recent work as a clear violation of neutrality.-
The Nashville, on leaving Southampton, recrossed the Atlantic and
arrived at Bermuda on the 20th of February, 1862.1 The regulations issued by the British government on the 31st of J an-
uary previous, limiting the stay of the armed vessels of the belligerents
and the supplies to be obtained by them in British ports, did not arrive
in that colony until nearly a fortnight later, and were unknown to the
governor at the time of the Nashville's visit.2 There was no ground
therefore for placing any restriction on the coaling of the Nashville,
and she is stated by the United States consul to have taken in 150 tons.3
She left the following day, and apparently went straight to Charleston.
Measures were taken by the governor to insure the observance of neutrality during her visit, and as at the time of her departure several
merchant-vessels were in sight, some of which might have been United
States ships, the admiral in command desired the commander of Her
Majesty's ship Spiteful to proceed to sea and watch that the Nashville
did not interfere with any vessels of whatever nationality until beyond
the limit of British territorial jurisdiction.4
Here the career of the Nashville, as a vessel of war, seems to have
closed, and on her return to Charleston she was converted into a merchant-vessel under the name of the Thomas L. Wragg.5
It is idle to say that any responsibility can attach to Her Majesty's
government in respect of this vessel.
THE CHICKAMAUGA.
The claim put forward in respect of this vessel is founded on a single
act of coaling at Bermuda.   I must express my suprise that
the time 6f this tribunal should have been occupied with a
claim so groundless and frivolous as this.
This vessel was originally called the Edith. She was«a double-screw
steamer, and was employed in running the blockade. She was purchased by the confederate government, andbeing found to be fast, was
converted into a vessel of war, and named the Chickamauga.
The case of the United States i invites the attention of the tribunal
of arbitration " to tin? facile manner in which this and other vessels were
permitted to adapt themselves to circumstances.6 Why our attention
should be thus invited I am at a loss to imagine. Is it meant to be suggested that Great Britain could, or ought to have, prevented vessels,
originally built as trading-vessels, from being converted into ships of
war, or should have refused to recognize them as ships of war, when so
converted and commissioned, because their original destination had been
of an humbler character ?   Either supposition is obviously absurd.
Having run out from Wilmington on the night of the 28th of October,
1864, ami succeeded in evading the blockading ships, she destroyed
several trading-vessels belonging to the United States. On the 7th of
November she put into Bermuda.7 Her commander, Lieutenant Wilkinson, applied to the lieutenant-governor for leave to coal and repair
1 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 178.
2 British Counter Case, p. 108.
3 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 213.
4 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 178 ; vol. y, p. 2.
5 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 73.
6 Page 414.
7 British Appendix, vol. ii, p. 135.
The Chickama-ga.528
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
his machinery. The lieutenant-governor thereupon requested the admiral commanding on the station to cause a survey to be made to ascertain
the repairs required by the vessel, and the time necessary for their completion, as well as the quantity of coal now in her, and the additional
quantity, if any, that would be required to enable her to proceed to the
nearest confederate port.1 The officer appointed by Captain Glasse reported that certain repairs,(specified in detail) were necessary to render
the vessel fit for sea, and that these repairs would occupy from four to
five days; that they were informed that she had about 75 tons of coal on
board, while her daily consumption was 25 tons; they therefore considered that 25 tons more would' be sufficient to enable her to reach the
nearest confederate port.2 Orders were issued by the lieutenant-governor in conformity with this report.
Permission was given to Lieutenant Wilkinson to remain five days
from the 9th of November for the completion of*the necessary repairs,
and to take twenty-five tons of coal. But the permission to take in the
25 tons of coal was coupled with the condition that "a revenue officer
should be allowed to go on board and see the coal shipped," and the
chief officer of the customs was directed to " take measures for ascertaining that the vessel received no more than the quantity prescribed."3
Lieutenant Wilkinson, while making "no objection to the terms on
which the coal was to be permitted to come on board," | with respect to
the quantity, begs to inform his excellency that, in his opinion, there
will not be a sufficiency to take the Chickamauga to the nearest confederate port." 11 trust, therefore," he says, | that on further consideration, an additional day's supply (or say 25 tons) will be allowed." But
he is told in answer that the quantity had been fixed in conformity with
Admiral Glasse's report, and that if he was dissatisfied any further
communication must be addressed to the-admiral.4 There the matter
ended.
Upon these facts it might have .been -thought difficult to found any
possible complaint.   But it is alleged that having obtained
permission to stay five days, she actually staid seven; that
the permission was given to take the 25 tons of coal when she already
had 100 tons in her bunkers ; and that having had permission to take
25 tons, she in fact took 82.5
The only authority for this statement is the diary of a midshipman
who was serving on board the ship. The diary ismot ytnamusing, and
it is not without its value. It proves conclusively that any claim in
respect of this vessel is wholly out of the question. The part which
relates to Bermuda is in these terms:
November 7,1864.—At 7.25 took Bermuda pilot. At 8 a. m. let go the port anchor,
with 25 fathoms chain in Five Fathom Hole, off St. George. I went in ashore in charge
of captain's boat. Captain went to Hamilton to see .the governor to get permission to
bring the ship in.
November 8,1864.—Ship still anchored in the same place. We will go in this evening.
They have decided to let us come in for five days. , Hove up anchor at 4 p. m. and came
into St. George, and let go anchor'at about 4.30.
Receiving fresh water and provisions.   Ship
Met Midshipman Warren,
Went out into the country
November 9.—Ship in the stream,
is swarming with bumboat  women, washerwomen, &c.
Confederate States navy, who is waiting for the Florida,
and staid all night with him.
November 10.—Ship still in stream.   At 4 p. m. the bark Pleiades hauled alongside to
give us coal.   Coaling ship all night.   Got in about 72 tons.
1 British Appendix, vol.,ii, p; 135;
2 Ibid., p. 136.
s Ibid., p. 137.
4 Ibid., pp. 137,138.
s Case of the United States, p. 415.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
O
29
November 11.—Stopped coaling at-4 a. m.
November 15.—Returned on board at 2.30 p. m. Got under way and stood out of the
harbor.   Pilot left us at 3 p. m.
November 19 to December 20.—Reached Wilmington at about 11 a. m. Found the Tallahassee safe in port. She had destroyed six vessels, one of which was a brig that we
chased the second day our. * * * Until about the middle of December, nothing
occurred. The officers were granted leave. The Tallahassee was put out of commission about the 15th of December, and loaded with cotton. The command was given
to Captain Wilkinson, Captain Ward taking the Chickamauga. I expp-eted to go out in
the Chameleon, as she is now calledrbut I slipped upon my expectations.1
We thus find that leave having been given on the 9th of November
to stay till the 15th, the vessel left on the 15th, the day on which the
permission expired; and we further see that by another unlucky inaccuracy, the 72 tons in the midshipman's diary are magnified into 82 in the
case of the United States.
From the following -affidavit of William Gilbert Outerbridge, the
revenue-officer who superintended the lading of the coal, it would
appear that the writer of the diary must have been in error as to the
quantity shipped.
The affidavit is as follows:
I, William Gilbert Outerbridge, of Hamilton Parish, Bermuda, make oath and say:
I was employed as a revenue-officer at St. George's in 1864. I was ordered to see
that the confederate cruiser Chickamauga did not receive any more than twenty-five
tons of coal. I saw her receive twenty-five tons of coal, in the stream, and left her
between 3 and 4 in the morning, or, perhaps, between 4 and 5; I cannot be positive to
the hour, nor am I sure whether the date was the 10th November; I have a note-book
of 1865, but have not been able to find the one I kept in 1864. I swear that she did
not receive more than twenty-five tons in the night in which I was on board her.
She was coaled from a bark alongside, but I cannot recollect if she was called the
Pleiades. I made a report to Mr. Edwdn Jones, but kept no copy of it. The bark-
was still alongside wheu they ceased coaling, and I left the Chickamauga, and 1 am
positive that she was not alongside at daylight in the morniftg.
I went on board about b p. m. the previous evening, and did not leave my post all
the time she was coaling. I took an exact account of all the coal put on board, and
swear that she did not get seventy-two tons while I was on board. I do not believe
she got that quantity at all.
WM. GILBERT OUTERBRIDGE.2
lt is, however, possible that the opportunity may have been abused
and the vigilance of the officers eluded. It appears from the affidavit
of another revenue-officer that there were at that time frequently as
many as fifty vessels, in the harbor of Saint George's. Mr. Brown, a
merchant of.the port, says:
I, John Tory Bourne, of the town of Saint George, in the islands of Bermuda,
merchant, make oath and say that I well remember the arrival of the Confederate
States cruiser, the Chickamauga, in the port of Saint George, in the said islands, in
November, 1864, and that she obtained permission from the colonial authorities to take
on board twenty-five tons of coal, and no more. I cannot positively state that she
received on board no greater quantity, but I know that the officers and others connected with the ship expressed great dissatisfaction at the restrictions placed on her
and the very small quantity of coal allowed. The port of Saint George was so crowded
with shipping at that time that it would have been easy for the Chickamauga to evade
such restrictions, and no vigilance or activity on the part of the colonial government
could, in mv judgment and opinion, have prevented such evasions if the officers of the
vessel chose to practice them.
Sworn at the town of Hamilton, in the islands of Bermuda, this 15th day of February, A. D. 1872. JNO. T. BOURNE.*
Assuming, however, that the commander of the Chickamauga, forgetful of what a due sense of honorable conduct should have dictated,
United States Documents, vol. vi,
British Appendix, vol. vi, p. 139.
1 Ibid.
P-
'26.
34 b530
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
did get any coal in excess of the prescribed quantity, it would be most
unjust to impute this to the default of the Bermuda authorities.
But in the result the whole question becomes immaterial. We see
from Mr. Carey's diary, that the Chickamauga arrived at Wilmington,
where this young officer unfortunately "slipped up on his expectations"
on the 19th of November, without having fallen in with, taken, or destroyed a single United States vessel. The coaling at Bermuda therefore did not lead to any injifry to the United States, and cannot in any
point of view found a claim fo» damages.
The Tal
CASE  OP THE TALLAHASSEE.
This vessel, said to have been also known as the Olustee, was built
and originally employed as a blockade-runner under the
name of the Atlanta. In the correspondeuce of the United
States consulates during the first six months of the year 1864 she is
several times spoken of as a blockade-runner of superior power of
speed.1 No reference whatever is made to her having been built for, or
being adapted to, the purpose of war.
Iu the August of that year, some guns were put on board of her at
Wilmington, with a crew of one hundred and twenty'men, and having
contrived to escape from the blockading vessels, she commenced her
work of devastation, and destroyed several vessels.2 Having done so,
she arrived at Halifax on the 18th of August. What occurred there
will be best told in the narrative of her commander, John Taylor
Wood:
My reception by the admiral was very cold and uncivil; that of the governor less so.
I stated I was in want of coal, and that as soou as I could fill up I would go to sea—
that it would take from two to three days. No object_ijioffi||||_ made at the time. If
there had been, I was prepared to demand forty-eight hours for repairs. The governor
asked me to call next day and let him know how I was progressing and when I would
leave. I did so, and then was told that he was surprised that I was still in port; that
we must leave at once; that we could leave the harbor with only 100 tons of coal on
board. I protested against this as being utterly insufficient. He replied that the admiral had reported that quantity sufficient (and, iu such matters, he must be governed
by his statement, to run the ship to Wilmington. The admiral had obtained this iu-
forniation by sending on board three of his officers ostensibly to look at our machinery
and the twin screw, a new system, but really to ascertain the quantity of coal on board,
that burned daily, Sfc. * * * I am under many obligations to our went, Mr. Weir,
for transacting our business, and through his management about 120 tons of coal were
put aboard instead of half that quantity., * * * Had I procure, the coal needed, I
intended to have struck the coast at the Capes of the Delaware, and followed it down
to Cape Fear, but I had only coal enough to reach Wilmington on the night of the
25th.3
It is admitted, in the case of the United States, that, in respect of
what took place on this occasion, the United States have no cause of
complaint.   Indeed, it is said:
Had the British authorities at Nassau, Bermuda, Barbadoes, Cape Town, Melbourne,
and other colonial ports, pursued the same course that the lieutenant-governor at Halifax did, under the wise advice of the admiral, the grievances of the United States
would have been much less, and this case would have been shorter by many pages.
The first time that the rule of January 31, 1862Sjas to the supply of coal, was fairly
carried out, the operations of the insurgent cruiser, to which it was applied, were arrested on the spot, aiul the vessel was oblidiu to run for a home port.4
The Tallahassee remained at Wilmington some months, and she was
then sold by the confederate government and purchased by a private
1 United States Documents, vol. vi, pp. 727,
2 United states Documents, vol. vi, p. 729;
3United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 729.
* Page 411.
iritish Appendix, vol. v, p. 1-13.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
b6
°1
merchant, and became, and afterward remained, a merchant-vessel.
In that character, and under the name of the Chameleon, she visited'
Bermuda in January, 1865, with a cargo of cotton aud tobacco. The
vessel being identified as the former Tallahassee, inquiries were set on
foot by the authorities, when it was fully shown by Mr. Wilkinson, the
consignee of the cargo, that she had passed into private hands, and
had been duly registered as private property.1
Upon what possible grounds, then, can we be asked to award damages in respect ofphis vessel? Simply because, as it is said, "the Tallahassee was a British stffamer fitted out from London to play the part
of a privateer out ot Wilmington."2 .But upon what authority is this
statement made? Simply ou that of a passage to that effect in a
letter of Mr. Adams to Earl Bussell, written much later, namely, in
March, 1865, in which, complaiiSng of the system of blockade-running
carried on by British ships, he thus speaks of the former Tallahassee:
The Chameleon, not inaptly named, but before known as tne Tallahassee, and still
earlier as a British steamed fitted out from London to play the part of a privateer out
of Wilmington, v||s lying at that very time in Nassau, relieved, indeed, of her guns,
but still retaining all the attritffibes of her hostile occupation.3
Every one knows that Mr. Adams would not say anything that he did
not fully believe to be true; but he must forgive me for saying that in
this instance he must have been mismken, possibly confounding, the
vessel in question with some other. In the earlier correspondence of
the United States consulate respecting this vessel there is not, as I have,
already mentioned, any reference whatever to it as having been intended
for a privateer. She was, in fact, sold after a three weeks' cruise, because, as the consignee of her cargo at Bermuda tells us. she had been
" found ill-adapted to the purposes of war."i Besides, had she been
built as a privateer, it is very unlikely that she would afterward have
been bought by a merchant as a carrying vessel. Every one acquainted
with these things knows that a vessel intended for war purposes differs
essentially, in point of construction, from one intended for trade.
When a government is unable to build or to procure ships properly
constructed for war, it may be driven to the expedient of converting
merchant-vessels into vessels of war; but a merchant does not buy ships
of war to turn them to a purpose for which their construction makes
them wholly unfit.
But what if this vessel had been originally built as a privateer? Is
it meant to be asserted that this alone, without any suggestion, much
less proof, of default on the part of the British government, is enough
to fix the latter with liability for the acts of such a vessel ?
But it would be a waste of time to pursue this further. Here, again,
I must say I think this claim ought never to have been submitted to us.
CASE  OF  THE RETRIBUTION.
This vessel was a small steamer built in the State of New York, and
originally employed as a tug-steamer on Lake Erie. Just before   The Retribution.
the attack on Fort Sumter she was chartered by the Government of the United States and sent to the southern coast.
Haying been compelled by stress of weather to enter Cape Fear Biver,
she was there seized by the confederates.   Her machinery was removed,
1 British Appendix, vol. v, p. 150.
3 Case of the United States, p. 412.
3 United States Documents, vol. i, p. 709.
4 British Appendix, vol. i, p. 151.532
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
and she was converted into a sailing-schooner and armed; she then
started on a cruise under the name of the Betribution.
Ou the 28th of January,', 1863, she captured near San Domingo the
United States merchant-vessel Hanover, laden with a cargo of provisions. The master and crew of the vessel were put into the boat, in
which they rowed to San Domingo, and the chief officer of the Betribution, a man named Vernon Locke, or Parker, (for he was at different
times known under both these naMes,) took possession of the Hanover
with a prize crew.2.
The Hanover arrived on the*5th of February at Long Cay, a small
island of the Bahamas, about two hundred and forty miles from the seat
of government, in company with a wrecking-schooner nam@|i the
Broth%efeand owned bv Messrs. Farailieton, merchants, of that island.
V CD
Here Vernon Locke represented himself to be the master of the Hanover, and"stated that he was bound from Boston to a port of Cuba, where
he was to have sold his cargo, and to run the blockade with a cargo of
salt. On the plea that his vessel had run ashore on a neighboring
island, and was in a leaky condition, he obtained the permission of the
customs collector at Long Cay to transfer part of the cargo to the
Brothers, and to land the rest, and eveutually to sell the whole through
the agency of Messrs. Farrington. For this purpose he produced the
manifests of the cargo, and forged to them the signature of the true
master of the vessel, one Washington Case. The. magistrate of the district, who resided in another island, but who happened to arrive at Long
Cay at the time, questioned the pretended master, and appears to have
had his doubts as to the truth of some of the particulars of th^ptory.
In a report which he afterwards furnished to the governor, of the 20th
of April, 1863, he says:
■ I had my doubts as to the vessel having-been on shore at Inagua, and I mentioned
my doubts to Mr. Farrington. I told him that I was under the impression that in the
cargo there might be art icles contraband of war, and that the reported disaster was
but a ruse to prevent the Boston merchant being tracked in Nassau in his illicit trade
with the South. But I found out afterward, ou inquiry from the acting tide-waiter,
that the cargo was really one of provisions.
Mr. Farrington admitted that he also doubted whether the Hanover had been ou
shore, but inasmuch as the captain came to him properly documented, he did not see
any impropriety in his acting as the captain's agent, and that he was nut aware of any
illegality in the matter—and I must here add that I.am under the impression that, up
to that moment, Mr. Farrington was as ignorant of the real facts of the case as I was.
It must be remembered that the captain was a perfect^stranger; that the register and
articles of the Hanover were produced, I believe, at the collector's office, but I know
that he had the ship's clearance, the bills of lading, and even the certificate from the
custom-house in Boston that the captain had taken the oath of fidelity to the Union.
He represented himself as Captain Case, and signed all doen men t.s as Washington Case,
the name of the captaiu as appearing on the documents/'
The schooner Brothers, having taken on board part of the cargo of
the Hanover, left with it for Nassau, taking also the pretended master;
but it seems that he only went in her as far as Bum Cay, another island
of the Bahamas, from which he was taken off by the Betribution. The
Hanover remained at Long Cay for a day or two after the Brothers had
left, aud then seems to have sailed for some port in the Southern States.4
The manner in which the fraud which had been committed on the authorities was discovered, is thus related by Mr. Burnside, the magistrate
of the district, in the report which has been already referred to:
The Hanover remained a day or two after the Brothers had left, at Long Cay, under
1 United States Documents, vol. vi., p. 736.
2 Ibid., p. 740.
3 British Appendix, vol. v, p. 168.
••British Appendix, vol. v, pp. 165, 168, and 190.OPINIONS   OF   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
OOO
the charge of the former mate, taking in a cargo of salt, and it was only about half an
hour previous to her departure that I, and, I am under the impression, Mr. Farrington
also, had the slightest misgiving that the person who had represented himself as the
captain of the Hanover was not Washington Case. One of the sailors of the Hanover,
uuder the influence of liquor, referred to the supposed captaiu iu the collector's presence by some other name. I was with Mr. Farrington when the collector .mentioned
the circumstance; reference was immediately made to the documents, and the difference, in the signatures confirmed what the collector had heswl. The supposed Captain
Case had then left in the Brothers, and no action could have been taken even if I had
been armed with power; but even'then we were under the impression that the name
had been assumed in the custom-house, in Boston, by some other person to facilitate
Captain Case's leaving Boston, supposing him to have been a suspicious person ; and
it was only after I had left Long Cay, on my way to Inagua, that we met a vessel from
Inagua, and I received a letter from Mr. Sargent informing me that he was under the
impression that the Hanover was a prize to the Retribution.
On the 19th of February following, the Betribution captured another
American merchant-vessel, the Emily Fisher, in the neighborhood of
Castle Island, one of the Bahamas. The case of this vessel does not
seem to have formed the subject of any complaint either on the part of
the United States Government or of the parties interested until the
present time; and the collector of customs at Long Cay being now
dead, there is little evidence to be depended upon as regards the proceedings at that place.
The statement, produced by the United States, of a man named
Sampson who was at the time, according to his own account, employed
at Long Cay under the orders of the Uuited States Government as a
1 deputy marshal 1 or detective officer to look after wreckers and
blockade-runners, cannot be regarded as reliable. He states that all
the facts connected with the capture of the vessel and the subsequent
transactions were true, "irom his personal knowledge," and that he had
previously testified to them before a court in New Jersey.1 But it is
obvious that he can have had no personal knowledge of the facts connected with the capture of the vessel, which took place at a distance
from Long Cay; and on reference to the proceedings of the trial mentioned, the material portion of his evidence is found to be no more than
that he saw the Betribution in the spring of 1863 at Long Cay, where
she was lying outside the Emily Fisher; that he was introduced by an
acting magistrate of Long Cay to the first and second lieutenant of the
former vessel
and
had a general talk about the North and South." %
According to the statement on oath of Mr. Staples, the former master
of the Emily Fisher, which, however, was only made in September-last,
eight years after the event, he was induced by the assurances of a captain of a British wrecking-vessel to come within range of the Betribution,
by whom he was captured. The Emily Fisher was then run on shore
by the orders of the captega of the Betribution, and was taken possession
of by some wrecking boats. The vessels afterward proceeded to Long
Cay, where the master was eventually placed in possession of the vessel
by the collector, but not until he had bargained with the wreckers to
pay them 50 per cent, on the cargo and 33£ per cent, on the vessel for
salvage. Staples adds that "he was told by the authorities, that
though the law would not allow the privateer to touch the brig," yet,
" if he wished to do so, they had no means of preventing him ; that the
captain of the privateer told him, the deponent, that he had given the
cargo to the wreckers, as he wanted the brig; that he was going to put
his guns on board of her and destroy his schooner;" " that he further
told the- deporTent that the wreckers were to .pay him something handsome, and that the deponent believes that they did so; that depo-
1 United States Documents, vol. vi, p. 73fi.
2 British Appendix, vol. v, p. 196.534
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
nent was obliged to accept the wreck's' terms at the port of entry, because the brig lay under the guns of the privateer, and the authorities
declared their inability to protect him."1
Having recovered possession of his vessel and a portion of the cargo,
the master of the Emily Fisher proceeded on his voyage.
It is admitted, in a memorandum inclosed in a dispatch from the acting governor of the Bahamas of the 17th of February last,
Retribution. _ ■_       _      _■/ ,-> ... ,   .    ,       , -. _li       •     _______f____L_ j. _^ ,3
that "from inquiries which have been recently instituted,
there is very little doubt that the statements contained in the deposition of Captain Staples are substantially correct, so far as they relate to
what took place in Fortune Island."2 It seems not improbable, indeed,
that the, authorities may have really been unable to afford any protection
to the masterof the Emily Fisher, the place being a small port in a remote island. The magistrate, Mr. Burnside, who was at this time absent,
speaks^n his report quoted above, of his inability to take action against
the supposed Captain Case, "even if he had been armed with power."3
The authoritieSjin Mr. Burnside's absence, probably consisted only of
the customs collector, and perhaps the "assistantmagistrate," mentioned
in Sampson's affidavit. It does not, moreover, "appear how far Mr.
Staples made them acquainted with what had happened previously to
the arrival of this vessel at Long Cay.
The question of the capture of the Emily Fisher, as I have already
said, seems not to have formed the subject of any complaint up to the
time of the present arbitration, and all the information that appears to.
have reached the government at the time is "contained in the following
passage of Mr. Burnside's report, which shows uo trace of any improper
proceedings having been committed or tolerated at Long Cay:
I have heard from Long Cay that the Retribution, subsequent to the affair of the
Hanover, captured an American brig in the neighborhood of Castle Island—the Emily
Fisher, with a cargo of sugar—that the commander of the Retribution ordered her to
be run on shore near Long Cay, and that subsequently she was extricated from danger
by the wreckers, who carried her to Long Cay, where salvage was awarded to the
wreckers, and a portion of the cargo sold to pay the salvage and expense, and ■tb.Sf3
Emily Fisher then proceeded with the balance of her cargo to New York.
On this latter occasion the Retribution did call at Long Cay, and some of her officers
had communication with Mr. Richard Farrington, and at that time the supposed Washington Case was seen onboard the Retribution ; but I do not know in what capacity.4
There seems no ground whatever for saying that either in respect to
the Hanover, or to the Emily Fisher, any charge of want of due diligence
can be sustained against the British authorities.
The Betribution remained at Long Cay, according to the evidence afterward given by Mr. Farrington at the trial of Vernon Locke, not
more than a day.5 Shortly before the end of February she arrived at
Nassau, where, it must be remembered that none of her previous proceedings were at the time known to the authorities. It is stated in the
argument of the United States that—
The "special leave" called for by the British Government, under date of Hkhuary 31,
1862, seems never to have been asked for of granted. Her commander was not even
called upon for his commission. All that occurred upon her arrival is thus stat6dby the
pilot: "She had a small gun on deck. The captain told me he was fr^j^^tog Cay. I
asked the captain where he was from. He answered, 'Long Cay.' I saw from the look
of the vessel and the appearance of the crew, their clothing, that she. was likely to
be au armed vessel. I theu asked him if she was a vessel of -war. I begged him to
excuse my being so particular, as I was instructed to do so, to put such questions. He
told me she was an armed vessel." 6
1 Uuited States Documents, vol. vi, pp. 738, 739.
2 British Appendix, vol. vi, pp. 23, 24.
3 Ibid., p. 168.
4 Ibid., vol. v, pp. 168, 169.
4 Ibid., p. 190.
6 Page 303.OPINIONS   OF  SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
535
Here the quotation ends, but the deposition of the pilot, when referred
to, is found to coutinue as follows: " I then told him he could not go into
port. We rounded to immediately, and came to anchor;" and the pilot
goes on to say that the captain came on shore in his boat.1
And in the evidence of Mr. Taylor, at that time the acting receiver-
general at Nassau, given afterwards at the trial of the Etta, it is stated
that "the Betribution did not enter as a trader in the port of Nassau;
she was treated as a confederate vessel of war."2 It seems obvious, therefore, that her character was verified and the necessary permission obtained before she was allowed to enter the port. This view receives additional corroboration by the notice inserted in the Bahama Herald of
the 28th of February, to the following effect:
The southern gun-boat Retribution put iu here on Thursday last for the purpose of
undergoing repairs, if permitted to do s6 by his excellency the governor. She hassince
been condemned, and is to be sold at public auction on Monday.3
The vessel was, as is stated in this announcement, condemned as un-
seaworthy by a board of survey. Her hull was sold on the 3d of March,
18,63, for £250, to Messrs. Perpall & Co., merchants, of Nassau,4 there
being at the time no regulation to prevent the dismantling and sale of
belligerent armed vessels in British ports. By Messrs. Perpall she was
again sold for the same sum to a Mr. Thomas Stead, who was at the
time a clerk to some parties engaged in the blockade-running trade.5
By him she was registered on the 10th of Aprill 1863, as a British vessel,
under the name of the Etta,6 and it is said that an attempt was made to
run the blockade with her, but failed. In June, 1863, she was again sold
by public auction to the firm of Benouard & Co., of Nassau, who, having
bought her for £158 and repaired her at a cost of £200, sent her with a
cargo of fruit to New York, where she was seized.'libeled in the district
court of New Jersey, and ultimately adjudged as forfeited to the United
States.7
This terminates the history of the Betribution. Into the steps taken
by the authorities at Nassau for the punishment of the principal offender
it is scarcely necessary to enter in detail, as they do not affect the acts
previously committed by the vessel. They are briefly as follows: The
first information received by the governor as to the sale of the cargo of
the Hanover at Long Cay was given in a letter dated the 11th March,
1863, from a Mr. Jackson, agent at Nassau for the American underwriters.8 The Betribution Bad at this time been sold to private owners,
and although it was said by Mr. Jackson that the officers of that vessel
were residing In Nassau, the attorney-general was of opinion that the
facts as related were not sufficient to render the parties criminally liable.9
A further representation was made on the same subject in April, 1863,
by the United States Government through the British minister at Washington. Inquiries had in the mean while been made by the governor on
the advice of the attorney-general, which led to the report of the resident magistrate, Mr. Burnside, dated April 20, 1863, of which I have
quoted some passages. This report rendered it c^ar that the pretended
master of the Hanover had been guilty of forgery aud personation, and
British Appendix, vol. v, p
191.
3 Ibid., p. 22.
3 Ibid., p. 21.
7 Ibid., p. 22.
«Ibid., p. 166.
2 Ibid., p. 196.
4 Ibid., p. 193.
6 Ibid., p. 195.
8 Ibid., p. 165.536
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
the attorney-general received in the following month information pointing to Vernon Locke, then in the colony, as the guilty person. As the
witnesses were all at a considerable dijjince, the ordinary process of
obtaining sworn information on which to found a warrant would have
caused considerable delay; the attorney-general therefore availed himself
of the power given him by a local act, aud issued a precept to the police-
magistrate at Nassau requiring him to issue a warrant against Locke.1
The latter was accordingly arrested, and, after a long examination, was
committed for trial, but escaped, forfeiting his bail. He was, however,
re-arrested and brought to trial; but the evidence being'insufficient ou
some of the essential points, he was finally acquitted.2
I have now gone through the cases of all the different vessels in respect
-case, in whirl, of which claims have been preferred for losses sustained
bei_'he1i_itra..poS through the alleged want of due diligence on the part of the
British government. After all that has been said and
written, it is only in respect of two vessels, both equipped at the very
outset of the civil war, and before the contrivances resorted to had become known by experience, that this tribunal, which has not shown a
disposition to take too indulgent a view of the fulfillment of Mutral
obligations, has been able to find any default in British authorities at
home; while in respect of a third, the tribunal, by a majority of one
voice only, has fixed the government with liability for an alleged error
in judgment of the governor of a distant colony in respect of allowance
of coal, and for the want of vigilance of the police in not preventing
men from joining a confederate vessel at night. We have here the best
practical answer to the sweeping charges so persCveringly brought
against the British government and people.
The tribunal having thus settled the instances in which it is prepared
to hold Great Britain responsible, we have next to consider the important
question of damages.
The first question which presents itself on approaching the subject of
Award of a s..m m pecuniary compensation is, whether the tribunal ought to
sr_ss. award a sum in gross, or whether it would be advisable to
refer the amount of compensation to be settled by assessors under the
provisions ot the treaty of Washington. On the oue hand, as ifes admitted that these claims have never been audited, or even been bona fide
examined by the Government of the United States, it must necessarily
be extremely difficult to estimate the amount which should be awarded
in respect of them; more especially as it becomes apparent that a large
proportion of them are most extravagant in amount, while none of the
ordinary documents evidencing the value of shipping property or merchandise have been brought before the tribunal. On the other hand, it
is for many reasons desirable that the matters.in dispute should be disposed of and settled as soon as possible, so as to put an end to all
further disputes, as well as to avoid giving the opportunity, which would
be afforded by sending the settlement to assessors,'to invent fresh claims
and present them from day to day before the latter. On the whole, I
have come to the conclusion that, if the clearly inadmissible claims be
rejected, and the extravagant claims properly reduced, justice may.sub-
stantiallv be done by awarding a lump sum, and that theigdvantage of
such a course would counterbalance the disadvantages which it no doubt
involves.
The claims for individual losses, which were in April last-advanced in
' British Appendix, vol. v, p. 23.
2 Ibid., p. lt.7.OPINIONS   OP   SIR  ALEXANDER   COCKBURN.
537
the revised statement, amounted to $25,547.161; besides
which a claim for "costs of pursuit and capture," exceeding
$7,000,000, was preferred on the part of the United States Government.
To all which was superadded a claim for interest of 7 per cent, per
annum from the times of capture until payment. These claims have,
however, to be diminished by reason of Great Britain having been pronounced by the tribunal to be liable in respect only for the captures
made by the Alabama, Florida, and Shenandoah, and for those made by
the latter only after her departure from Melbourne. Ou the other hand,
the*||ainis in respect of the other vessels having been rejected, the representatives of the United States, on the 19th of August last, presented
new and increased claims to the extent of $2,150,000, so that the claims
then advanced by the United States in respect of those captures, for
which Great Britain has been held liable, amounted, after correcting
certain admitted errors of calculation, to $19,146,444, over and above a
claim of $6,735,062 for the cost of pursuit and capture in respect.of the
three vessels, and the claim of interest at the rate of 7 per cent.
I concur entirely with the rest of the tribunal, in holding that the
claim for cost of pursuit and capture must be rejected. This C)aims rnr cost of
item of expense formed part of the general expense of the p'"'-uit :uul caPture-
war. The cruisers employed on this service would, probably, have been
kept in commission had the three vessels in question never left the
British shores.
We have therefore only to deal with the claim for losses sustained by
individual citizens.
Now there can be no doubt that the only damages which the tribunal
is authorized to award under the treaty for the indemnifica- Q„__tion 1 dam.
tion of American citizens must be confined to loss actually "***
sustained by destruction of ships, cargoes, or personal effects. Where
damage to property arises, not directly from willful injury, but indirectly
only, from want of due care, an indemnity against actual loss is all that,
by the law of England or America, or by any principles of general jurisprudence, can possibly be awarded.
If, therefore, this tribunal, instead of sending the amount to be paid
by Great Britain to be ascertained by assessors, should think fit to
award a sum in gross, as it is empowered to do by the treaty, it must
still, in fixing the latter, proceed on the best estimate it may be enabled
to arrive at, on the data before it, of the losses actually sustained by
American citizens through the three ships for which Great Brii||in is to
be held liable. '
The claims for indivMual losses by reason of property destroyed by
the three ships in question amounts to the sum of $19,146,444; but this
amount includes items which involve important questions of principle,
and deserve special consideration.
These are:
(A.) The claims in respect of the whaling-vessels destroyed, for loss of prospective catch,famounting to  $4,009,301
(B.) The claim, for gross freights, amounting to     1, 007,153
(C.) The double claims, amounting to     1,682,243
(D.. The new claims, presented for the frrst'time on 19th August, amounting to  j 1     2,150,000
8,848,697
(A.) There can be little doubt that the amount claimed for the prospective catch of the whalers, which is, in fact, about double   _iaims for ,*._-
the value assigned to the vessels and their outfits, is so ex- pectiTe oatdl-
travagant as almost to justify at once the rejection of the whole claim.538
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
The true character of these claims will be seen by comparing the
amount of the demands now made for the prospective earnings of the
whalers, with the original list of claims forwarded by Mr. Seward to Mr.
Adams in 1866, and communicated by the latter to the British government. It thus appears that these claims have, without any assignable
reason, increased to such an extent that they are now sometimes double,
sometimes treble, and sometimes even more than five times what they
were in the original list. The following table exhibits some of the more
striking cases:
-ti  °
2 4^ _§«
w   —
■—"      ~     r   —
C o_ +_
00 ji_> 2
o, -£.£
%*&3b CS 331
. ...~~*
"__ TT "w
"""   an   ©
C   *T   QBjife'
_™ *"** 59 -+i
c3 ^ o
? ® S  fi8
"V
.—» "-• ^
5     ^     Wti—1
_§
OQ
Alert    	
$30,000
1,820
33,446
53,075 I
$144,869
Kate Cory . ..__.  . ... . .. .	
19,293
Lafayette . .. ■ ...	
50. 000
J. Howland  	
■196,158
Many other similar instances of extraordinary and arbitrary increase
might be cited, but the above will suffice to show (what, indeed, a mere
comparison of the claims themselves with the value and tonnage of the
vessels but too clearly proves) that these demands are of a most extortionate character. But, independently of the undeniably exaggerated
|||||bunt of the claims, a demand for gross prospective earnings as distinguished from net earnings is quite incapable of being maintained.
This is admitted in the argument of the United States, and is clearly
demonstrated in the British report. According to the decisions of the
Supreme Court of the United States, the only allowance which ought
to be made in respect of prospective catch is in the nature of interest
from the time of the destruction of the vessel.1
• I should myself be disposed to adopt a more liberal mode of compensation, and to award for prospective profits a reasonable percentage on
the values of the vessels and outfits; but I cannot but think that if a
year's wages is to be awarded, as proposed, for the officers and crews,
the amount of 25 >per cent, on those values as claimed in the American
tables presented on the 26th of August, in case of the claim for prospective catch being disallowed, far exceeds what is properly assignable.
The total amount claimed for the whaling-vessels and outfits, an amount,
which, as I shall presently show, bears every sign of great exaggeration, is $1,780,691. A claim of $659,021 is advanced for secured earnings. To award a further sum of $400,000, as claimed, in lieu of prospective profits, would make a total allowance of over $1,000,000 (or 60
per cent, of the original values of the vessels and outfits') for secured
and prospective outfits alone; in addition to a sum of $588,000, or more
than 30 per cent, more, for the wages of the officers and crew, (which
are supposed to come out of the gross earnings,) and this irrespective
of the fact of interest being claimed on the whole from the date of the
capture.
1 See Mr. Justice Story's judgment in the case of the Lively (1 Gallison, 315.)   British Appendix, vol. vii, pp. 13, 14.OPINIONS   OP   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
00
99
(B.) As to the claims for gross freights amounting to $1,007,153.
That these claims are also greatly exaggerated appears from the several
instances to be found commented on in the British reports,    i|$f for gro.s
but the same fact follows beyond a doubt from the follow- freisl,ts-
ing consideration:
In a report presented by a committee of the House of Representatives
of the United States in 1870, a table is to be found (Table XYI) giving
the valve of the gross yearly earnings of all American vessels engaged
in the foreign carrying trade from 1861 to 1870. The value of these
gross yearly earnings is there stated to amount to 33£ per cent, of the
value of the vessels. On looking at the British tables it will be found
that the amounts claimed for freight, although for individual voyages
CD 7 CD V CD
not exceeding on the average six months in duration, are more than 47
per cent, on the alleged values of the vessels, from which it would follow that these claims are exaggerated to the extent of nearly 60 per
cent.
Independently, however, of the exaggeration in amount, it is clear
that a claim for gross freight as distinguished from net freight cannot,
be supported by any sound reasoning. It is, moreover, inconsistent
with all the English and American authorities on the subject.1 The
United. States counsel seemed to have themselves thought such a claim
hopeless; for, on the 19th August last, they, for the first time, asserted that these were claims, not for gross, but for net frights. It is
sufficient on this point to say that, in the face of the well-known official estimate above referred to, according to which the gross average
yearly earnings of American merchant-vessels amounted only to 33J per
cent, of the values of the vessels, an assertion that claims amounting to
more than 47 per cent, of such-values were advanced for net and not
for gross freights on voyages not exceeding, on the average, half a year
in duration, is one which carries its own refutation on the face of it,
especially when it is remembered that these claims are generally presented in the revised statement as claims for charter-party or Sl-of-
lading freight.
Under these circumstances I cannot but think that the allowance of
50 per cent, on these claims, which the tribunal received with favor and
is prepared to adopt, is far iu excess of what would in justice satisfy
them,
(G.) As to the double claims.
They consist in the main of claims made by the owners for the value
of then; property, simultaneously with claims advanced by Double c)ai^s
insurance companies with whom the property was insured,
and who paid the owners the amount of their loss. To pay the owners
and the insurance companies these double claims would be clearly
equivalent to paying the losses twice over. One of these claims, therefore, must necessarily be rejected.
One cannot but regret that these claims should have been advanced,
and that the United States Government should not at once have expunged them as inadmissible, instead.of allowing them to be included,
without exception, in the total claims of the United States.
These double claims are of two descriptions: first, those which are
avowedly and intentionally made, or were, to,use their own words, " the
claimants protest against any diminution of their claims by reason of
their having been paid by insurance companies;" secondly, those which
are tacitly -made. 	
iSee report of committee appointed by board of trade; British Appendix, vol. vii,
pp. 9, 10.i40
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
As regards the second class of double claims, viz, those tacitly made,
it is enough to observe that they were pointed out niauy months ago in
the British reports as double claims, and the United States Government,
although it has had in its possesion all the evidentiary documents
bearing on the same, has never denied their character as double claims.
It is, therefore, clear that all these double claims, amounting to the large
sum of $1,682,243, must be struck out.
(D.) As to the new claims presented, for the first time, in August last.
As a majority of my colleagues have already intimated an opinion
that these claims ought to be excluded from consideration
in awarding a lump sum, it is only necessary for me to state
that I am decidedly of the same opinion, because the claims are entirely
unsupported by any evidence, and are merely based upon assumptions
as to the amount of wages the officers and crews might or should have
been receiving, and the amount of personal effects which they might or
should have had on board at the time of capture, and which they have
lost in consequence of it. I find, morever, in the revised statement presented with the United States Counter. Case) claims to considerable
amounts actually preferred by the officers of some of the vessels for loss
of wages and personal effects, and, as I shall show, those gentlemen
have been by no means disposed to undervalue their property. Finally,
it seems to me entirely inconsistent both with the letter Und the spirit
of the treaty of Washington that, at thelast moment, the request of the
tribunal for explanatory tables to assist it in the discussion of the various
items of claims should be taken advantage of to swell the amount
already presented, without giving the Bri|pi_h government an opportunity
to advance argument and evidence in opposition to such increase.
For all these reasons I am clearly of opinion that the claims for
prospective catch and for gross freights, the double claims and the new
claims presented in August last, altogether amounting to the sum of
$S,848,697, must be rejected.
I now proceed to consider the questions relating to the value of the
property actually desti'oyed. It is admitted in the argument
of the United States Government that these claims had never
been audited by that Government. I eannot help thinking it would have
been better if, before the United States called, upon this tftbunal to
estimate the value of claims to be assessed by it without an inspection of
the documents which are said to be filed at Washington, these claims had
been audited under the authority of the United States Government. Had
this been done I think it is only fair to assume that the very numerous
demands which are manifestly extravagant^would have been diminished
in-amount in the same manner as the claims in respect of the vessels
sunk in the Biver Seine (more than once referred to in the British
reports) were reduced after they had been thoroughly Ifpfted .by Her
Majesty's government. The tribunal is, in fact, called upon to estimate
the values of.vessels, the age and class of which are not giveu, and the
values of cargoes, of which neither the description nor quantity is stated.
Under these circumstances it is manifest, from the experience every day
gained in courts of justice, that a very considerable deductiqn ought to
be made from the estimates presented by the claimants in respect of the
losses for which they are claiming compensation. To hold Great Britain
simply liable for the amounts demanded by the claimants would not be
to award the latter fair compensation, but to graut them enormous
profits.
I now proceed to consider the values of the vessels—and, first, the
Property destroyed.OPINIONS   OP   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.
141
whalers. The fact of the extraordinary express double claims advanced
in respect of these vessels is of itself sufficient to make one v_i«e_ _. w„aii„_-
look with some suspicion on the other items of claim. I ves3,eU-
believe that the estimate of $100 per ton for ship and outfit, proposed in
the British reports, is such as would be accepted as adequate by persons
acquainted with the character and value of whaling-vessels. It is, moreover, borne out by the fact, that the claims for iijfurance in the revised
statement show that these vessels were not insured at so high a value.
But I am ready to refer to a standard given by the claimants themselves. I find that, in the case of the fourteen whalers destroyed by the
Alabama, with a total tonnage of 3,560 tons, a claim is advanced for
vessels and outfits of $409,233, which is equivalent to a valuation of less
than $115 per ton. In the case of the whalers destroyed by the Shenandoah, on the contrary, with a total tonnage of 8,560, the claim under the
same head amounts to $1,325,768, or very nearly $155 per ton. I cannot
see why the average value of the whalers destroyed by the Shenandoah
should so vastly exceed that of those destroyed by the Alabama, and I
certainly think the average in the latter case may be taken as likely to
be more near the mark.
As regards the merchant-vessels I see no reason to doubt that the
British average estimate of $40 per ton is adequate; but there .aMs^^al
is one mode of arriving at an average estimate which is open Te3sels-
to no objection. It appears from the same table,in the report presented
to the Congress of the United States already referred to, that the average value of American vessels engaged in the foreign trade was, in the
year 1861, $41 per ton, and that it has, since the year 1862, been $45
per ton. It will be found, on looking at the United States argument,
that it is there strongly urged that the depredations committed by the
confederate cruisers occasioned a very serious diminution in the value
of American shipping property. This assertion seems directly opposed
to the statistical information,given in the table I have just referred to;
but whether it be or be not. correct, it cannot be doubted that an estimate of the merchant-vessels at the rate of $45 per ton must be a very
liberal estimate. The adoption ot this valuation would cause the British
allowance to be increased by $200,000, but it would cause the claim of the
United States to be diminished by more than $500,000.
I now come to the claims for cargo. Those claims, it must be remembered, include claims for the value of goods, insurances,
commissions, and profits on the same cargoes; profits which
will be found to be claimed at the rate of sometimes 25, sometimes 50,
and sometimes as much as 100 per cent. Moreover, it-is important to
observe that, as merchants' generally considerably overvalue their property in policies of insurance, and always include in the amount insured
the premium of insurance itself, a considerable reduction ought to be
made from the amounts claimed by insurance companies. Again, for
reasons fully stated iu the first British report,1 it is generally impossible
to trace the double claims which are advanced for cargoes; and yet the
probability certainly is that they exist to at least as great an extent as
they have been proved to exist in the cases of vessels and freights.
Taking all these circumstances into consideration, I believe t&t most
persons who study these claims, and who are acquainted with the subjects to which they relate, will consider the reduction of 12 per cent,
which has been made in the British estimate from the total claim for
cargo, commission, profits, and insurances on the same, a very moderate
reduction.
Claims for'cnrgoe
'British Appendix, vol. vii, p. 13.542
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
The last item of claims to be considered is that relating to personal
ciaim. for per- effects. That some of these claims are exorbitant is proved
sonai en...*. jjy the various instances cited in the British reports. I will
direct attention to a few of them. \
Ebenezer Nye, the master of the Abigail, a whaling-vessel of 310 tons,
has claimed upwards of $16,000, or £3,200, for the loss of personal effects
on board that vessel. Again, the master of-the Bockingham, a vessel
of 976 tons, has claimed for personal effects $8,054, or £ 1,600. In the
"Wingel Racer, a passenger cl^ms.for loss of office as consul $10,000,
over and above $1,015 for loss of personal effects. Finally, in the Crown
Point, a vessel of 1,100 tons, the master and the mate each advance
claims for $10,000. Excepting in these and some other similar cases, in
which the demands are evidently grossly exaggerated, all the claims
for personal effects have been allowed in the British estimate, and I see
no reason whatever for adding to the amount which is proposed to be
allowed in that estimate under this head.
On the whole, therefore, I am of opinion that if half a million dollars
were to be added to the British estimate, more than adequate compensation will in all probability be granted for any direct losses which may
have been occasioned by the confederate cruisers, and that, therefore,
the tribunal ought to assess these claims at an amount not greater than
$8,000,000.
In the observations on M. Staempfli's calculations which I submitted
to the other members of the tribunal on the 2d of September, and which
will be/ound in tlie protocol of that date, I have shown that, even including the allowances of $988,000 for profits and wages of the whalers,
and the allowance of 50 per cent, on the claims for fiiBights, and striking
a mean between the British estimate and the gross claims for the other
items not absolutely disallowed by the tribunal, the amount should not
exceed $§0,000,000 in round numbers.
The tribunal having formed its estimate .of the actual loss sustained
in respect of ships and property at the time of their destruction, a most important question presents itself, whether, to
such actual value, interest from the time of loss should be superadded.
Upon this question, which is entirely iu the discretion of the tribunal,
according to what it may deem equitable and right under all the circumstances, we have had the advantage of very able arguments. Looking
to technical considerations alone, Sir Boundell Palmer's argument appears to me to be unanswerable. But I confess I should be disposed,
when able to deal with a case of indemnity, unfettered by technical considerations, as I think we may do in the present instance, to hold that
where a pecuniary indemnity against loss is to be given, such indemnity is not complete unless the party is compensated, not only for the
property actually destroyed, but for the profit—here to be represented
by interest—which that property would have brought him. If a man
loses property worth £1,000, which, but for the loss, he would have continued to turn to some profitable account, and after a given period the
actual value, namely, the £1,000, is given to him, and no more, it is
plain that he remains a loser of all the profit he would have realized in
the mean time; in other words, he remains to that extent unindemnified.
Under ordinary circumstances, therefore, I should have been willing to
award interest, when awarding compensation for property destroyed.
But there are in this case most peculiar circumstances which make me
incline to a different conclusion.
The first is, that neither the British government, nor British subjects,
were the authors of the damage done.   All that can be ascribed to theOPINIONS   OP   SIR  ALEXANDER  COCKBURN.

British government is want of diligence in not preventing these vessels
from leaving British waters on their work of mischief. Professor
Bluntschli has done justice to the British government in this respect:
II ne fautkd'aillenrs pas perdre de vue que tous ces effets d6sastreux sont en premier
lieu imputubles, non pas au gouvernement anglais, mais aux cro.se.w_-eux-m_-m.es. j Personne n'accusera le gouvernement anglais d'avoir donne" mission de de"truire les navires
de commerce americains, ou d'avoir, par ses agissements, entrave" ou endommage" la
marine ame'ricaine. Ce que l'on peut lui reprocher k hon droit, (en supposant que les
faits cites plus haut doivent etre considers comme avoues ou prouves,) ce n'est pas un
fait, mais une omission contre le droit. Sa faute ne consiste pas a avoir e"quipe~ et appa-
reille" les corsaires, mais a n'avoir pas empSche'leuT armement et leur sortie de son territoire neutre. Mais cette faute n'a qu'un rapport inaWsct, et nullement un rapport direct,
avec les depredations re"ellement commises pas les croiseurs. 1
American citizens have suffered by the acts of American citizens.
Great Britain is to make good the injury. Why ? Because, in order to
commit these acts, the wrong-doers began by violating her laws, and
her government was not quick enough in preventing them. But who
were the American citizens who did these things and brought these
injuries and losses on American citizens'? Private individuals'? No!
Eleven States, heretofore an integral portion, and now again an integral portion, of the North American Union—in other words, an integral
portion of the body who are the plaintiffs against Great Britain in this
memorable suit. And, to make the anomaly of the position more complete, but for concessions voluntarily made, Great Britain would have
been enabled to say, first, that she was not, and could not be, liable to
another nation for losses sustained through breaches not of international
but of her own municipal law; next, that if she, on the one hand, was
liable for injury done to American citizeus, because her government by
greater diligence might have prevented them, she, on the other hand,
might have claimed to be recouped by States, now forming an integral
part of the Union, as having been the'actual wrong-doers through violation of her law, whatever sum she was obliged to pay as compensation.
For, had the Confederate States possessed, or had they succeeded in
acquiring an independent nationality, Great Britain would have had a
perfect right to insist on being indemnified for a pecuniary loss incurred
through a violation by them of her .neutrality and of her law. The
nationality of those States is now again united with and merged in
that of the United States, now plaintiffs against Great Britain. And
though, the compensation being asked for losses suffered by individual
American citizens, and not by the Government of the United States,
Her Majesty's government were, in my humble opinion, right in not
taking their stand on such an objection, I cannot but think that, looking to all these circumstances, this tribunal, in the exercise of the
equitable and unfettered jurisdiction with which it is invested, might
well decline to add interest to the amount of the loss actually sustained.
Even if interest should be given, it seems to me that, as the United
States might have had, as far back as the year 1869, an arbitration for
the purpose of having ftiese identical claims adjudicated upon, an arbitration having been offered by Great Britain and accepted by the Executive of the United States, and having only failed because rejected by
the American Senate, all claim to interest, as from that date, should, as
matter of equity, be disallowed by the tribunal.
At all events, I can see no reason why, under all these circumstances,
anything more than the lowest rate of interest anywhere prevailing in
•the United States should be allowed, and I cannot concur in the rate of 6
per cent, adopted by the tribunal. 	
1 1 Revue de droit international, 1870," p. 473.544
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
I have now traveled through the wide range of this inquiry, par.tly
in order to place the facts, over which a cloud of prejudice
has been raised, in their true light; paxjfEy to explain the reasons which prevent my concupjjjing in the award which the majority of
the tribunal have thought it right to pronounce.
The result is that, whMe I differ from the grounds on which the decision of the tribunal in the case of the Alabama is founded, nevertheless, owing to the special circumstances to which I have hereinbefore
called attention, I concur iu holding Great Britain liable in respect of
that ship.
With respect to the Florida, on the best judgment I can form upon a
review 6f all the facts, the charge of want of due diligence is not made
out. I cannot concur in thinking that anything was left undone by the
government of Her Majesty wh||h could be reasonably expected of
them, or the omission of which can justly subject them to the charge of
want of due diligence and care. I cannot agree that the law of Great
Britain should have been changed because of the breaking out of the
civil war. First,' because the existing law was adexraate to all that could
reasonably be expected; secondly, because, at all events, there was at
the time no reason for believing it other than sufficient; lastly, because
even if the law might have been improved and the hands of the Executive
strengthened with advantage, the United States could have no possible
right to expect any amendment of the British law so long as their own
remained unaltered.
As to the Shenandoah, I cannot express too strongly my dissent from
the decision of the majori^. ._;
Not concurring in the decision as to the Florida and Shenandoah, I
cannot, of course, concur in awarding the sum whiea is to be paid on
account of the damage done by them..
Even if this were otherwise, I should stillrJiQld the amount awarded
greater than it should have been.
Lastly, under the very special circumstances out of which these claims
have arisen, it appears to me that the allowance of interest was uncalled
for and unjust.
But while the award of the tribunal appears to me to be open to these
exceptions, I trust that, by the British people, it will be accepted with
the submission and respect which is due to the decision of a tribunal
by whose award it has freely consented to abide.
The United States, on the other haad, having had the claims of their
citizens for losses sustained considerately weighed, and compensation
awarded in respect of them, will see, I trust, in the consent of Great
Britain to submit these daims to peaceful aipitration, an honest desire
on her part to atone for any past errors or omissions which an impartial
judgment might find to have existed—and will feel that all just cause of
grievance is now removed—so that, in the time to come, ho sense of past
wrong remaining unredressed will stand in the way of,the friendly and
harmonious relations which should subsist between two great and kindred nations.
A. E. COCKBURN.
Geneva, September 14, 1872.V.-REPLY OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE,
THE RECEIPT OF THE REPORT OF THE ACKNOWLEDGING
 AGENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, AND COMMENTING UPON THE OPINION
OF THE
MAJESTY
ARBITRATOR APPOINTED BY HER BRITANNIC
Department op State,
Washington, October 22, 1S72.
Sir : I have received your report of the date of September 21, with
the accompanying protocols and award and opinions of Acknowledging I
the arbitrators. I congratulate you most cordially upon receiptcf the report-
the termination of your arduous and ably-conducted labors and
upon the success which has attended the arbitration. The President directs me to convey to you and 'to the counsel who attended
the tribunal on the part of the United States, and to the other gentlemen who were engaged with you at Geneva, the expression of his thanks
and high appreciation of the great ability, learning, labor,   HHHH
CD J- JL CD \J   i o / <■ ne 1 1 CM Lieut 3 ap-
and devotion to the interests, the diguity, and honor of the provaI-
nation which each in his appropriate sphere has made so successfully
conducive to the very satisfactory result which has been reached. This
result may be summarily stated thus: The United States claimed that
Great Britain had, during the recent rebellion in this country, failed, by
act and by omission, to fulfill toward this Government the duties due from
one state to another, and that she was liable in damages to make good
the losses resulting directly from the acts of several vessels which had
been fitted out and had been allowed to depart from her ports in violation of such duties. The United States also deemed it important to
obtain from the tribunal an expression of opinion whether certain
claims for indirect or remote losses, which had been advanced at the
time of their occurrence, and had been the subject of much diplomatic correspondence, as well as of public discussion, and which had not
been eliminated in the previous negotiations from the matters of difference between the two governments, did or did npt constitute good
foundation for demand or award of damages between nations.
Great Britain denied that she had failed of any duty toward this Government, or that she was liable to make good any losses resulting, either
directly or indirectly, from any such acts.
The questions at issue between the two governments were by the
treaty referred to the decision of the High Tribunal which convened at
Geneva.
The arbitrators, having the case and the counter case of both governments and the argument of the counsel of the United States
before them, at their session on the 19th of June stated |utrata6ra0otW.^
that, I after the most careful perusal of all that has been
urged on the part of the Government of the United States in respect of
these claims, they have arrived, individually and'collectively, at the conclusion that these claims do not constitute, upon the principles of international law applicable to. such cases, good foundation for an award of
compensation or computation of damages between nations/1   At the
35* B546
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
next meeting of the arbitrators you stated that that "
by the tribunal, individually and collectively,"
Kff
ment
iclaration made,
was I accepted
by the President of the United States as determinative of their judgment
upon the important question of public law involved."
At the next meeting, the agent of Her Britannic Majesty read a stat$-
_W or judgment ment that Her Majesty's government, being informed of
^_^indircct claiIDS' the statement made by you at the previous meeting, assumed | that the arbitrators will, upon such statement, think fit now to
declare that the said several claims are, and from henceforth will be,
wholly excluded from their consideration, and will embody such declaration in their proctocol of this day's proceedings;" which declaration,
at this request of the agent of the British government, was made, thus
excluding, by the act of the tribunal, from future consideration claims
which, until then, had been the subject of controversy.
This conclusion may be regarded as decisive of the non-admissibility
of claims for such remote or consequential losses as the
foundation of a denfand for compensation in damage as
between nations, under the principles of international law.
These controverted claims being thus eliminated, the tribunal pro-
'-*__*w_rd_f u.e ceeded to the consideration of-the other claims, and of
tribunal. ^e casej counter case, and arguments on either side, and on
the 14th of September declared that Great Britain had, with respect to
three of the vessels and four of their tenders, of which complaint had
been made, failed to fulfill duties toward this Government, and awarded
the payment to the United States of the sum of $15,500,000 in gold, as
the indemnity to be paid by Great Britain to the United States for the
satisfaction, of all the claims referred to the consideration of the tribunal.
Your report bears testimony to the high character, the patient labor,
the learning, impartiality, and dignity of bearing of the
aiity.andE__K.i__Jor.h. eminent persons named as arbitrators by the friendly pow-
i!y 'ita^swiweXmi, ers which complied with the joint request of this Government and that of Her Britannic Majesty. §8|
Mr. Adams, on this as on all occasions of his public service, fulfilled
Mr. A__.m_ receive, the expectations to which his appointment gave rise.   It is
t^^M^eft^ando'f&^tifying to know that his course, and the ability displayed
the rresiJ^g     |jy jj^ have received the acknowledgment of Her Majesty's
government, to which the President has united his acknowledgment.
I find on reference to the protocol No. 32, accompanying your report,
and containing a record of the proceedings of the tribunal
on the 14th of September, that after the
signature of the decision and award of the tribunal by the
four assenting arbitrators, and after the same had been delivered to the
agents of the two governments, Sir Alexander Cockburn, the arbitrator
named on the part of Great Britain, having declined to assent to that
decision, made a statement of his own, which the tribunal ordered to
be recorded as an annex to the protoqol.
It does not appear by the protocol that the document which was thus
This opinion  not ordered to be annexed was read at the time.  Indeed, your
I,!" c_ii___-.e_:Ilownt0 report on the subject shows that that paper was presented
at the last moment of the final sitting of the tribunal, and that the contents thereof were not made known to the other members of the tribunal or to the agent or pounsel of the United States.
I cannot doubt that if you had had the opportunity to become ac-
u the  contents quaiuted with the contents of this extraordinary document
'imuid1,avenb0e.no-'you would have felt it your right and duty to object to the
jectedto. reception and filing of a paper which would probably not
The   "^assenting
opinions of sir Aiex- of arbitration
auder Cockburn.REPLY OF THE SECRETARY OP. STATE.
547
Re
si turns he. maintains
as the representative
of Great Britain.
have been officially received by the tribunal had an opportunity been
afforded to invite their attention to some of its reflections on this Government, its agent, and counsel.
It is not my intention to discuss or to comment upon the tone and
character of this very remarkable paper, professedly submitted to one of
the highest tribunals the world has witnessed, sitting to decide some of
the gravest and most important questions ever submitted to peaceful
decision.
But in this paper (which is officially published in a supplement of the
London Gazette, dated September 24,1872) Sir Alexander   SirA._o._bumPro-
Cockburn professedly and avowedly speaks of himself on re_pe.et_eTttt_v_hoei
two occasions as " sitting on this tribunal as in some sense GreatJBritain-
the representative of Great Britain."
The Government of the United States here has no occasion*to pass
judgment on this attitude, of the arbitrator named by Great Britain. I
take the fact as I find it. I perceive that Sir Alexander Cockburn,
while advancing as public law opinions which are " published by authority " of the British government, professes to be in some sense the
representative of that government. It is in this sense that he speaks
in the expression of his reasons for dissenting from the decision of the
other members of the tribunal, and, therefore, the Government of the
United States may rightfully take him at his word as speaking for Great
Britain.
The positions which he thus maintains in belmlf and as the representative of his government deserve to be noted for their   j^*™ ofthe
value in possible future questions.
He holds that whatever restrictions the neutral in the
exercise of his torritorial rights imposes on the one belligerent, he must
impose on the other also.
As the discussion grows out of the case in which one of the belligerents is a legitimate Government, in treaty-amity with the neutral, and
the other a rebel in arms against that legitimate Government, itis to be
assumed that the proposition applies with especial force to such a case.
He maintains as a rule that the government of a country can only be.
held responsible for the breaches of neutrality committed by its subjects when it may reasonably be expected to prevent them. Such a rule
seems to favor neutral right in the same degree that it diminishes neutral obligation, which it measures by the vague standard of what is reasonable.
He maintains the right of the subjects of a neutral to supply to the
belligerent any objects available for warlike purposes, including as
well ships of war (even armed ships) as arms and munitions, provided
the same be done animo commercandi and not animo adjuvandi.
A rule so unqualified, and subject only to the belligerent right of
blockade and of capture for contraband, is a very broad assertion of
neutral right.
In discussing the question of due diligence, and doing so with the
actual case in his mind, he reduces as far as he may the standard of
diligence in favor of the neutral.
He insists on the right of the neutral when called upon to restrain its
subjects to proceed iu conformity with the spirit of its legal institutions,
according to its established system of official routine, with such legal
advice as the government is accustomed to receive-
He maintains- that the neutral government is not to be held responsible for error in judgment, nor for declining to seize a vessel at the instance of the belligerent on merely suspicious circumstances, seemingly
___£_&-54g
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
inadequate to convict, nor for miscarriage of justice through some mistake of the courts, nor for error of judgment on the part of subordinate
officers of the government.
His views relative to the alleged unfriendliness of the British minister toward the United States and that of the British subjects and colonies, amounts to complete justification of any degree of sympathy on the
part of the authorities or subjects of a neutral government in favor of
the rebels of any other government, and tends to exonerate governments and subjects alike from any obligation of good-will toward a treaty
friend, the suffering legitimate Government.
His conclusions on the question of recognition of belligerency accorded to rebels in asms preclude any possible exception on the score
of prematureness or other circumstances.
His response to the allegation in the case of the United States, that
Great Britain, including her colonies, was the arsenal, the navy-yard,
and the treasury of the insurgents, assumes that on recognition of the
belligerency of rebels they became possessed of equal right with the
legitimate Government in the ports of the neutral.   And yet the con-
CD JL «'
cession of belligerency to insurgents does not, in his view, give to the
legitimate Government any cause of complaint against the neutral government.
He unequivocally justifies the use of the ports of the Bahamas and
of Bermuda as entrepots for blockade-running cargoes, and the transshipment of the latter into lighter craft, thus favoring neutral right and
protecting the exercise of that right in a manner most favorable to a
feeble belligerent, and especially to insurgents as against their government.'
He maintains the right of the neutral government to abstain from the
exercise of spontaneous activity for the repression of Jtttempts of its
subjects to violate neutrality, and to require the representative of a
belligerent power asking the aid of the government to make out a case
for the application of the law, just as it is lfeft to do to an ordinary-
individual who desires to put the laws iu motion in order to obtain
redress in his own behalf.
* There are other assertions of important neutral right, but these are
among the most important. They seem all to be available in a possible
future to the United States. They are announced by the i representative" of the British government in the tribunal at Geneva, and are
f| published by authority" of that government, without dissent or qualification.
It is not my present purpose to discuss these various positions. Some
Eflectof this con- of them are in evident conformity with the views of public
policy hitherto expressed or practiced by the United States,
but not always admitted by Great Britain, while some of
them. are in qualification, if not in substance, the result of modern
events, and especially of recent controvessy between the United
States and Great Britain. It needs but the most cursory glauce at
the mass of correspondence and of other documentary matter submitted
to the tribunal of arbitration to see how thoroughly the remonstrances
and protestations of the Government of the United States against the
conduct of Great Britain have quickened and stimulated the European,
and above all the British, mind into more careful examination and
more complete perception of the rights and obligations of neutral
powers, for the question of rights is inseparable from that of obligations. In every case of war we have to consider alike what are
the rights of the neutral as against both bellieerents, and what are its
troversy in defining
neutral rights and
obligations.REPLY OP THE SECRETARY OP STATE.
549
duties as respects either belligerent. In effect, the occurrence of war
between any two powers involves more or less modification of the freedom of action of the neutral, either by land or by sea. But freedom of
action is the general right of every sovereign power, although in time of
war such power yields a portion of its freedom, that is, of its general righty
to the just demand of one or the other of the belligerents. It should be
expected to yield the least possible of that general freedom that will
allow it to be neutral in fact, for this constitutes the obligation of the
neutral. On the other hand, each belligerent is entitled to demand of
the neutral in profession that it should be neutral in fact. The United
States have had occasion to look practically at both sides of the question, and therefore sometimes to assert neutral duties, while more generally asserting neutral rights and the policy of peace, to such extent
and under such circumstances as to h ave rendered the United States the
champion of neutral rights, and thus by moral influence to have acted
potentially on the course of events in Europe.
History repeats itself.
I cannot err, therefore, in thinking it important to note for future
m emory the positions in this respect maintained by the
"representative'' of the British government at Geneva, and
that representative the Lord Chief Justice of England.
I am, sir. vour obedient servant,
The importance o f
noting the views of
the representative of
the British government.
HAMILTON PISH.
Hon. J. C. Bancroft Davis,
&c, &c, &c.YI.-REPORT OF THE COUNSEL OF THE UNITED STATES.
Washington, November 25, 1872.   (Beceived November" 26.)
Sir: We have the honor to report that, in conformity with your instruction of the 8th of December, 1871, we repaired to Europe at as early
a day thereafter as possible, in the discharge of our duty as counsel of
the United States before the tribunal of arbitration established by the
treaty of Washington.
While occupied in the preparation of the Counter Case of the United
States and of the general argument, in their behalf, we found it advantageous to dwell in Paris for convenience of access to books of diplomacy
and jurisprudence, and also of ready communication with London and
with Washington.
In June we proceeded to Geneva, and continued there until the close
of the proceedings before the arbitrators, occupied in constant attendance on them, and in the preparation and presentation of various additional arguments in response to such arguments as had been specifically required of Great Britain by the tribunal. We refer the Department to the Counter Case and documents accompanying the same, to the
main argument in behalf of the United States, to the successive subsequent arguments, and to the correspondence of the agent of the United
States, for complete information regarding our acts as counsel for the
Government.
In now terminating our connection with this great international cause,
we beg to be allowed to express the hope that the President will see in
the final award of the tribunal proof that we have not been wanting to
the important trust which he confided to us.
Arid we remain, &c.
C. CUSHING.
WM. M. EVABTS.
M. JR. WAITE.VII.—APPENDIX.
OPINIONS"OP STATESMEN, MAGAZINES AND JOURNALS OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND THE CONTINENT ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE TREATY OF
WASHINGTON.
Extracts from speeches made in a debate in the Souse of Lords, 4/7. of June, 1872.
[From the Times of June 5, 1872.]   -
The E.u.l of Dehby rose and said :
"Everybody knows that we put one construction on the treaty and
that the American negotiators put another. The noble earl [Earl Granville] stated that
he conceived the indirect claims were excluded by the treaty as it stands. Now, that
matter has been abundantly discussed in both houses, in every newspaper, in every
private society, and I think the very utmost for which any one unconnected with the
government- has ever contended is this, that the language of the treaty was so vagne,
so ambiguous, so uncertain, that it may be construed either way, and, therefore, our
construction was as admissible as that put upon it by the other side. Now I do not
think that in a matter of such enormous importance, after the plain warning which
had been given us by the speech of Mr. Sumner, after the evidence we had had of the
immense consequence which the American Government and people attach to these
indirect claims, and the pertinacity with which they had urged them, I do not think
it is at all unreasonable to say that in a matter of that kind uncertainty and ambiguity
in the language of the document to which you must appeal as the supreme authority
upon the matter -are not likely to inspire confidence. I will not go into the controversy
raised ■ by my noble friend. He says the indirect claims, even if in the treaty,.
a.re waived in the protocol, and he referred to the question which has often been discussed as to the meaning of the words j amicable settlement.' Now, the obvious
answer to that has often been given. An arbitration is not an amicable settlement. It
is a means by-which an amicable settlement may be arrived at, but it is not itself a
settlement. I do not want to go into that question, for it is enough for my argument
to say that in a matter of this kind, with the full knowledge that we have had of
what was claimed by the other side, and considering the immense importance of the
matter at issue, there ought to have been no doubt or uncertainty."
Lokd Cairns said:
* * * * "We have had conflicting views as tt> the construction of the
treaty fully before us; and now I tell the noble earl that I accept his reference to
judicial claims as »o compliment, accompanied, as it is, with a sneer that I am capable of making a construction of a document in one place differ from that I should
give in another. [Loud cheers.] My lords, I will tell the noble earl something more.
He says he talked with a judge half an hour before he entered this house, and he said
that the indirect claims.were clearly inadmissible. The noble earl speaks of. what has
been said by very learned persons in this country and elsewhere, but he quite misunderstands what those learned persons spoke about. What I understand them to be
talking about—and I quite agree with them—I believe that no judge would say that
these indirect claims could be admitted for a moment; but that is not the question;
the question is, whether the hands of the tribunal at Geneva are sufficiently tied and
bound so that they would not be the judges to say whether these are good claims or
bad claims. [Hear, hear.] That is what we want to know-*-that is what my noble
and learned friend, who spoke last but one, put very fairly. He said, with regard to
the supplementary-article, that what the commissioners ought to have done, if they
had understood their business, was to have added a new article to exclude these claims.
I agree that the claims are preposterous, and that the country and the government
never meant to entertain them. But the question is, what ought to be our view as to
the construction of this treaty ? The noble marquis, the president of the council,
taunted the noble marquis behind me with having thought it consistent with his duty
to make observations which Avere highly in favor of the American view of the case.00'
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
"I dare say I shall be taunted, perhaps, in the same way. But I will tell the noble
marquis what I consider consistent'with my duty. I consider it consistent with my
duty to speak the truth—[cheers]—and I don't care whether it chimes in with the
views of the Government of the United States or tbe government of -this country.
[Hear, hear.] The noble earl opposite taunted me with having an opinion on this
subject which I am afraid to express. I go further, and say that in my belief the
strong argument with the United States is not to insist, as the government have insisted, that the construction of this treaty is free from all ambiguity. The govern-
.ment never made a greater mistake than when they Avent to the United States in the
first instance, and said to them, 'You are making claims not only against all principle,
but in flagrant opposition to the treaty.'
"I say, generous and high-spirited men could not have endured language of that
kind without making a contest and struggle against it. [Hear, hear.] Now, I teU
the noble earl my view about the construction of this treaty. The prime minister
says there is no ambiguity; that no sane person could have ever entered into a treaty
which had such a construction as America had put on it. The noble earl himself, I
believe, in his dispatches uses language peculiarly-strong in regard to the construction
of the treaty. The commissioners tell us they were responsible for having represented
to the government that they understood a promise to be given that these claims would
not be put forward by the United States, and to-night the noble earl said that on a
particular day the government received a communication from the commissioners saying that the claims were not to Ire-put forward.
"What is the meaning of this ? "Why were the commissioners to write to the government and say that a promise was given that these claims would not be put forward
if the treaty was free of ambigu.ty? The two things cannot stand together. Take
which you like—the treaty is unambiguous, or admit that it is not clear, and rest on
the promise given by the commissioners; but you cannot have both. I believe that if
you refer any breach of duty to the decision of a tribunal, that tribunal, unless yon tie -
up its hands, will have the right to say what are the extent aud the amount of the
damage done. * * * * *
"I admit that in Mr. Adams's time, theipdirect claims had not been distinctly stated;
but in 1868-'69we had distinct authority as to what had become known as the Alabama-
claims. That authority is the noble earl opposite, who, last year, before this controversy had arisen, described to the house what the Alabama claims had by official correspondence come to mean. Commenting on the terms of the Stanley-Johnson and.
Clarendon-Johnson conventions, the noble earl said the claims of the American Government had come to conclude everything, and, therefore, that under the reference
proposed in those conventions, almost unlimited damages might have been awarded to
the American Government. How then can it be said that the Alabama claims represented a bundle of strictly defined claims, and that the term could not possibly be extended beyond these ? The next argument is that the protocol of the 4th of May contains a waiver by the American Government of the indirect claims. I wish I could
find it to be so; but I do not find that the American Government waived anything.
[Hear, hear.] The American commissioners simply said they wanted us to give them
a lump sum; and in the hope of our doing so they would not estimate for the present
the amount of the indirect claims.
"After referring to the indirect injury accruing from the transfer to the British flag of
a large part of the American mercantile marine, enhanced rates of insurance, the prolongation of the war, and th^e large sum necessarily required for this and for the suppression of the rebellion, the protocol says: 'In the hope of an amicable settlement,
(meaning the payment of a lump sum;) no estimate was made of the indirect losses,
without prejudice, however, to the right of indemnification in the event of no such settlement being made.' In this I can see no waiver whatever. I have no fault to find
with the manner in which the noble earl conducts the argument on this point in his
correspondence. The whole of the case on this subject is stated by him with great
fairness and frankness, and it is surely better to be frank and fair than, ostrich-like, to
run our heads into the sand and fancy that this secures our safety. The noble earl's
argument is that the waiver of the indirect claims in the event of the amicable settlement proffered by the American commissioners was a waiver which applied to any
form of amicable settlement, and, therefore, applied to the form proposed by the British
commissioners, and accepted by the United States. That is the whole argument on
this part of the case. The American commissioners, in the hope of anamicable settlement by the payment of a gross sum, made no estimate of the indirect losses; the
British commissioners declined such a mode of settlement, and Her Majesty's government maintain that the Americans were bound not to put forward those claims, whatever the form of settlement,   n * * * * * * *
" I believe the first copy of the American Case was furnished to the foreign office on
the 17th of December, and that twelve additional copies were supplied on the 19th of
that month. We all know that the noble earl opposite was suffering from illness at
the time; and I am sure that there is no One among us who would impute to him thatAPPENDIX.
there was any unnecessary delay on his part, or who does not sympathize with him in
the position in which he was placed. That, ho svever, is not the question. I do not
know whether many of your lordships have looked at the case of the American Government. There is an old saying, which is applicable to it, to the effect'that he who runs
may-read. You could see from the very title-page of their case that they were making
these claims. And who were at the foreign office at the time ? There was Lord Tenterden, who, as the noble earl said, was one of the very few men in England who were
thoroughly acquainted with this question. There was also Mr. Hammond, at the foreign office, aud I confess I can hardly believe that when Lord Tenterden or Mr. Hammond opened the first copy of the American Case, cither could have failed to see in the
course of five minutes that the United States-Government were making those claims-
claims, the surrender of whicjh was proclaimed by the noble earl opposite to be the
price of the treaty. [Hear. J j A month after this, on the 18th of January, the cabinet
sat, and although I can imagine that the falling of a bomb-shell could scarcely have
created greater Surprise and consternation among them than the American Case, yet
some considerable time was allowed to elapse before anything was done, although the
matter lay oh the surface. The question was one not so much for the law-advisers of
the Crown as for the ministers who had negotiated the treaty, and who had informed
the country that its price was the surrender of the indirect claims."
II.
Extract from Eraser's Magazine, March, 1__T2.
* * * * vye cannot but deeply regret the whole course of procedure which
has. been pursued by us, both in official and non-official quarters, since the publication
of the American Case. Whatever " blundering " may have been evinced in the drawing up of the unfortunate treaty, there has been much more and more unseemly and
perilous blundering since, in the babel of clamor and denunciation with which the pretensions put forward in the American Case, founded upon it, have been received. In
this remark we refer not so much to the press, which is " nothing if not critical," and
which, having no recognized authority, incttrs none of that responsibility which
attaches to authority. We utterly reject and discountenance the unworthy suggestion put forth by some American journals, that the meaningless and ignoble cry of distress and remonstrance which broke out from "the usual organs of public opinion " on
this subject at the beginning of the year, was instigated by Her Majesty's ministers,
with a view of diverting attention from other disagreeable questions which they felt
to be impending over their heads, or»even of removing from their own shoulders the
weight of any odium which might attach to all "<ho had had any part in this unfortunate affair of Washington ; but we at the same time think it to be a circumstance
much to be deplored, that those ministers should have so far forgotten the dignity of
their station, and that of the sovereign whose servants they are, as to allow themselves
to follow, and to drag the Crown with them in the wake of such a miserable escapade.
The conduct of ministers, instead of being such as to re-assure public feeling, and to
support the character of the country before surrounding nations, has been undignified,
and full of inconsistencies, as well as being, as we believe, utterly without precedent
in the history of international relations. It was without precedent, without justification, and at the cost of infinite inconvenience and scandal, that the government introduced into the Queen's speech any reference at all to matters in dispute, which had
been formerly delegated to the discretion of a tribunal of arbitration.
It was a still greater violation of the rules of etiquette applicable in such cases, as
well as a derogation of the dignity of the nation, to add that " a friendly communication" had been made to the Goverment of the United States, with a view, as was
understood, of inducing them to withdraw from and recall part of the "Case" which
they had in due form, and. according to the provisions of the treaty, placed before the
tribunal. But,.in truth, whatever hope there might have been of extracting anything
from the generous humor of the Government on the other side of the Atlantic though
this humiliating appeal was, on the very evening when 'the fact was announced,
dashed to the ground by tho violent, dogmatic, and offensive language of the intractable premier, who, far from imitating the judicious reserve of the noble lord, his colleague, at the head of the foreign office, noisily challenged the whole wdrld to dispute
his own construction of the terms of the treaty as being " the meaning, the only meaning, the rational meaning, the direct grammatical meaning." Now, to any one with
more discriminating' perceptions than Mr. Gladstone, such a declaration as this could
only imply that the Government of the United States, supposing it to be gifted with
ordinary intelligence, must have been guilty of deliberate dishouesty and attempted
extortion, in putting forward demands which we're to be thus emphatically repudiated554
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
by the right honorable gentleman. Could it be wondered at if the latter Government
in the full consciousness of the additional strength which its opponent's fatuous display of weakness has afforded them, should, without betraying any show of irritated
feeling, simply reply to our " fiiendly communication" by announcing their determination to leave the whole matter, upon its merits, in the hands of the arbitrators ?
This we are inclined to believe that they actually did " by return of cable," though Mr.
Gladstone, in reply to an inquiry a few days ago, stated that the government had not
received any official reply, and did not expect to receive one till the 1st of March ;
which would thus enable them and the country to tide over the " Thanksgiving Day"
in peaceful-insouciance.
But, indeed, even had Mr. Gladstljne, doing violence to his nature, been ever so
courteous and conciliatory iu tone, and the Washington Government ever so generously disposed, how could the latter, with any regard to their responsibilities and the
dignity of statesmanship, make any other reply than we presume them to have done ?
Individuals acting on their own account, and rulers of states, having the interests of
their constituent members in their hands, are very differently situated, and must act
upon different principles in respect of enforcing claims, or demanding reparation for
injuries—a subject very clearly treated of by the highest juridical authorities. An individual, acting on his own account, may permit motives of kindness or weakness to
influence him in abstaining from pressing to the fullest extent his just claims, aud
even in pardoning an injury received. 'But the sovereign of a state, who is but the
trustee of the rights of his subjects, may not exercise a discretion of this sort, unless
justified by special considerations, rendering it, in his opinion, expedient in the gen-
erab interests of the state. There is always, in the case of states, in addition to the
consideration of the simple material advantages in dispute, the character of the nation
for honor and magnanimity, which must not be suffered to be brought in question.
And this brings us to the reflection that there are other parties beside the actual litigants Avho are entitled to honorable consideration in this matter, but who, unfortunately, have been by implication subjected to unexampled indignity throngh the irregular discussions which have been permitted to take "place, namely, the worthy members of the Geneva court of arbitration and the sovereign states, who, at the joint request of the contending parties, have nominated them.
It need scarcely be pointed out that in matters in litigation before an ordinary tribunal the discussion of a case out of court is justly visited and resented as an act of
"contempt." Sovereign states cannot commit one another to "durance vile" for
breach of discipline; and so long as the discussions of the points of disagreement in
the Washington treaty were confined to the columns of the newspapers, the members
of the Geneva arbitration court had, perhaps, nothing to complain of, or, at any rate,
no ground of complaint upon which they would deem it necessary to seek-redress.
But the case is different when the legislature of one of the states in disagreement takes
up the discussion, and when the prime minister of'that state insists upon laying down
the law in the case, and, by necessaWf logical interference, precluding the court of
arbitration from giving any decision o.heu than that which he has dictated. It is,
moreover, a flagrant breach of the good faith which should exist between states, to
even hint at retiring from an arbitration, or repudiating its award, in case it should
be in any way at variance with one's own notions. There is no department of its
functions in whioh a sovereign state takes more pride than in the exercise of its "good
Offices," whether in the way of mediation or arbitration, and any show of recusancy
against them, once they have been accepted, becomes a grave offence before the world,
susceptible of being visited by any form and any amount of resentment.
"As the case stands, the country is clearly in the hands of the arbitrating powers,
to abide their award, whatever it may be. And however stupid, howevever ' scandalous ' in ' blundering,' our representatives may have been in drawing up this dismal
treaty, let us hope, in Mr. Gladstone's despite, that there may be sufficient' ambiguity'
in it to enable the arbitrators, having regard to the rules which regulate the reasonable and equitable interpretation of treaties, having" regard also to the supreme interest of peace, of which they are guardians, to give an award favorable to, or at least not
so disastrously prejudicial to us as has been anticipated by alarmist speculators, who,
there is too much reason to apprehend, have not been altogether free from stock-jobbing influences.'
III.
Extract from Eraser's Magazine, June, 1872.
***** ^ji ^e Yiast social power which the governing classes of England
possess was thrown into the scale against whatsoever remained of the American
Republic, and in favor of those who were striving to bripg part of it at least into
accordance with the decrees of that Providence in which governing classes believe.APPENDIX.
000
There has always been a tendency to take the prattle of London society, and the
prating of tbe press which delights to repeat it, as the public opinion of the country.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the government of the day should have been
affected by this influence. But what is surprising is. that they 'should have shown
such utter recklessness and.want of caution in publishing to the world their appreciation of the merits of the struggle, and their opinion as to its issue. That Mr. Gladstone, who had adopted Mr. Jevon's opinion that coal was coming to an end in England, should have adopted society's opinion that the republic was coming to an end in
America, is not strange; but it is strange that he did not keep his opinion a little more
to himself. How positive he was in the matter may bo judged from these words,,
uttered by him, in October, 1862:
a There is no doubt that Jefferson Davis and other leaders of the South have made
an army.   They are making, it appears, a navy; and they have made what is more than
either—they have made a nation.   We may anticipate with certainty tbe success of the
Southern States so far as regards their separation from the North.   I cannot but believe that that event is as certain as any event yet future and contingent can be."
Mr. Gladstone was still of this opinion in June, 1863, when he said :
" I do not believe that the restoration of the American Union by force is attainable.
*    I do not believe that a more fatal error was ever committed
than when men—of high intelligence, I grant, and of the sincerity of whose philanthropy I for one will not venture to whisper the smallest doubt—came to the conclusion that the emancipation of the negro race was to be sought, although they could
only travel to it by a sea of blood."
There spoke the spirit of the Liverpool slave-trader and the confederate bondholder
rather than of the English statesman and chancellor of the exchequer. Lord Russell
had already said, in October, 1861: " We now see the two parties (in the United States)
contending not upon the question of slavery—though that I believe was probably the
original cause of the quarrel—but contending, as so many States in the Old World
have contended, the one side for empire, and the other for independence." These
speeches have, no doubt, since been repented of, but they are good evidence to show
the.views which existed at that time in the cabinet. Not that they existed alone
either. Sir George Cornewall Lewis, Mr. Charles Villiers, and Mr. Milner Gibson, had
from the first struggled against them, and had been regarded with the respectful pity
aocorded to clever men for once in the wrong. They were, however, in a hopeless
minority of three out of fifteen, and it is not too much to say that, as a body, the government looked, and was known to look with confidence and without displeasure to a
disruption of the American Union.    *    *    *    *
* * * * At the conference of March 8, the American commissioners formally
advanced their claim for losses both direct and indirect, stating, however, that " in the
hope of an amicable settlement no estimate was made of the indirect losses, without
prejudice, however, to indemnification on -their account, in the event of no such settlement being made." And they proposed that the joint commission should " agree
upon a sum which should be paid by Great Britain to the United States in satisfaction
of all the claims." This offer, if accepted, would have effectually and forever ended
the whole matter; it was, however, refused, and the English commissieners renewed
their proposal for arbitration. Now, it- has been said that, in proposing arbitration,
they did, in effect, assent to an " amicable settlement," and that the treaty is in fact
that, and nothing more. To which the reply is obvious, that the payment which the
Americans proposed was an absolute settlement, whereas the treaty settles nothing
absolutely, providing only machinery for an amicable wrangle,Hn order to a settlement.
The difference is obvious. In making an " amicable settlement." as proposed, Ave must,
have admitted our faults and paid for them ; in agreeing to the treaty Ave admitted no
fault, and merely exposed ourselves to the risk of payment in case the arbitrators decided against us. In the first case the United States would have gained everything;
in the second they run the. risk of losing everything. The Americans agreed, however,
to arbitration on condition that the principles to govern the arbitrators should be laid
down. Thereupon were elaborated the famous three rules as to which the British government is made in the treaty to assert that they were first invented for this occasion,
and are not a correct " statement of the principles of international law." The most
careful examination of the rules fails, however, to shoAV in what thay differ from those
principles as universally enunciated, and as admitted by England at the time. The
second rule indeed, apparently, extends the obligations of ijjie neutral power to the
extent of requiring it absolutely " not to permit or suffer" the use of its ports or Avaters
as a base of naval operations, or for the renewal or augmentation of military supplies or
arms; but this must be read by the light of the third, which prescribes " due diligence
as the measure of fulfillment of the obligations in question. The fact is that these
rules are so hopelessly vague that they would cover almost any view of international
law ever propounded, and the danger of them is that they may easily be so interpreted556
ARBITRATION   AT   GENEVA.
as to iucreaso to an unendurable extent the obligations of neutral powers.   This, however, iffl. small matter compared with what follows.
Having committed their country to judgment by principles declared to be false, the
commissioners probably asked themselves to Avhat subject those principles were to be
applied. This brings us to the question of the national or indirect claims. Those claims
were well known to the commissioners to exist. They had been made not once or
twice bat repeatecfm They had been advanced by Mr. Adams as early as 1862, by
Mr. Seward in 1863, and more distinctly by Mr. Reverdy Johnson, by Mr. Motley and
by Mr. Pish, iu 1869. They had been commented updh by Lord Clarendon. The ab-
•sence of any-provision for them had bj_en made the ground of rejection of the Johnson-Clarendon convention.
They had been presented to the commissioners themselves as a distinct special point.
They could not be disregarded; nay, they alone were worth regarding at all, for they
were then the sole and only point in dispute. The course of action upon everything else
was already deified. England had already agreed to refer the direct claims to arbitration, and. had signed a convention for that purpose. America had already agreed to
leave out of consideration the question of recognition of southern belligerency. There
remained absolutely nothing but These national claims on which any agreement was
necessary. The whole question was here; the one> point on which it Avas absolutely
indispensable to be precise and clear Avas this; for failing precision and clearness here,
the whole mati||p would be left no further advanced than it already was. If national'
claims were to be excluded, it was necessary that they should be excluded by the treaty;
if not excluded by the treaty, it avus mauifest that they Avould have to be met
under it.
The English commissioners, however, kneAv that they A\'ere expected to return with
a treaty in their pockets, and either they did not understand what they were about, or
they determined to retd^^lmh a treaty leaving the one material point doubtful rather
than with none at _HS$l||hey did not, howeA'er, even succeed in leaving the point only
doubtful, for they agreed to a definition which, if there is any sense in words, does
cover the indirect claims. It is declared in the first article that "in order to remove
and adjust all complai^p'and claims on the part of the United States" *****
" the high contractgig parties .agree that all the said claims, growing out of acts committed by the aforesaid vessels " shall be referred. How it can be said that " in all the
'claims" those called indirect are not included, is a mystery. NeA~ertheless, the English
commissioners, it Avould appear, say it and believe it still; for, as late as the 23d of
April last, we have Sir Edward Thornton telling the Americans at a public dinner that
" he believed no one supposed that the British joint high commissioners had any idea—
the slightest idea—that the^Sdirect claims were included in the treaty." After this
confession it is superfluous to ask what title those gentlemen have to be considered
men of ordinary intelligence aud judgment. It has, indeed, been whispered that they
had at the last moment doubts as to this point, and that, in answer to their questions
upon it, the English government telegraphed " Sign at once." If so, Sir Edward Thornton's declaration does some injustice to himself and his colleagues.
IV.
Extract from the Pall Mall Gazette, February 2, 1872.
"Now if we look at all this fairly, and iu due order, we shall see that it establishes
the following points:"
1. That the American commissioners did formally set forth a demand for indirect
damages, aud that they preferred it in the Arery language of the case subsequently
drawn up for the court of arbitration.
2. That at the same time and in the same breath they offered to present no estimate
of damage for indirect loss, in. hope that an amicable settlement would be made for
certain direct losses: this amicable settlement being explained (or explainable) as
meaning the concession of ah expression of regret, and that the joint commission
should proceed to agree upon a -lump sum to be paid in satisfaction of all the claims
(meaning direct claims) with interest. Further that in this suggestion the withdrawal
of claims for indirect loss was stated to be " without prejudice " to their revival.
3. That the British commissioners made no protest against the demand on account
of indirect loss, nor in any way attempted to separate that class of claims from the
other class, nor in any way manifested hostility to the presentation of those claims;
-but refusing to admit responsibility on account of all the claims without distinction,
they offered, for the sake of maintaining friendly relations ay it h the United States, to
adopt the principle of arbitration in disposing of the claims.
4. That the American Commissioners then " eJwessed their regret at this decision ;"w
APPENDIX.
f)0 .
thereby showing or seeming to show that in their minds a distinct proposal had been
considered and rejected. Having thus expressed regret, they consented to submit the
question of our "liability" to arbitration, on condition that certain rules were drawn
up and agreed to for the guidance of the arbitrators. That after demur aud reference
to the British government this condition was accepted. That accordingly rules were
drawn up by the American commissioners, (apparently,) and that after sOme points
had been referred by the British commissioners to their government, these rules were
agreed to as binding on the court of arbitration.
Next, (though that does not appear in that we have quoted above,) the joint high
commissioners " proceeded to consider the form of submission," and the formation of a
tribunal.
" Subsequently, the apology, or expression of regret, was asked for and conceded.
And. then at various sittings those articles of the treaty Avere agreed to which refer to
the settlement by arbitration of " all the said claims growing out of acts committed by
the aforesaid (i. e., several) vessels,"and genericaliy kuoAvn as the Alabama claims."
It is of the utmost importance that in dealing with so critical a matter as this Ave
allow no prejudice nor any sense of wrong to operate in our mjnds unfairly; and that
Ave make no attempt to misread Tacts and statements upon wliich the other side can
even plausibly rely. Therefore it is that we print this recital. It should be added,
perhaps, that the statement aboAre quoted Avas drawn up conjointly, and is signed by
both parties."
V.
Extracts from the continental press.
Neither in the course of the debates on the joint high comm*siou, which sat for two
months, nor in any of the clauses of the treaty intended to define the mode of the
proceedings and the functions of the tribunal of arbitration, as well as the principles,
to guide it in its decision, has England'raised the least-objection against any of the
clauses of reclamations presented by the United States. She has rejected all, in the
same way,.without making any distinction, and has declared herself ready to refer.to
the decision of a tribunal.—Memorial Diplomatique.
The fact is that the pretensions of America were ^perfectly Avell known. Mr? Gladstone, with his habitual Avant of foresight, counted upon luck to relieve him from the
embarrassments in AA'hich the future might entangle him.—Gazette de France.
We can say, Avithout separating ourselves from the truth, that there is no inconvenience in submitting the American claims for indirect damages to the tribunal of arbitration at Geneva. 'No one doubts that*they are exaggerated in the American case;
but their introduction into pleadings is not contrary to the text of the convention at
Washington.—Moniteur.
It is not, we hasten to say, thatfthe calculations of the American authorities are not
marked Avith a certain exaggeration; but the essential point to discover is whether the
arrangements preparatory to the assembling of the tribunal of arbitration at Geneva
exclude the question of indirect damages. We think that they do not exclude them.—
Soir.
The text of the treaty is formal, and the protocols
_ leave still less doubt than the
treatv, as to the understanding of the claims and the principle by the United States.
The tribunal will decide Avhat claims are presentable, and what are the questions to be
discussed. The American Government demands neither more nor less. It has stated
its claims before the court, and awaits the decision. -England had better do the same.
Her irritation is that of a bad pleader who doubts his own right and the impartiality
of the court.—Journal de Paris.558
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
It is evident that the actual state of the question does not so much concern the
nature of the pretensions of the United States, as the refusal of England to submit to
the arbitrators all the.complaints and all the claims, as the terms of the-treaty of Washington seem to require.—Liberte.
It is our 'Opinion, given with the utmost impartiality, that there are wrohgs on
both sides. The Government of the United States attempts to introduce into international law an unacceptable doctrine, that of making the costs of war obligatory upon
the powers which are not responsible for it, and which are even the first victims of it
in their interests. We understand veuy well'that it is not necessary to take in earnest,
the pecuniary claims presented by the "Americans for the prolongation of the war, for
the increased rates of insurance, and other pretexts equally elastic and equally impossible to calculate^claims which exceed the amount we owe to a victorious foe. The
Americans understand perfectly the value of these claims, and have not the slightest
idea of pressing them. But, at the_same time, they insist, and with a show of reason,
upon their right to interpret the treaty, and it must b^acknowledged that the English
government has entered upon this affair Avith a degree of imprudence and levity which
may soon re-act upon it, and produce a change of ministry.—Journal des Debats.
Does this treaty authorize the American Government to submit to the tribunal at
Geneva the claim for indemnity for indirect losses ? The Americans say yes; the English say no. Impartial persons say that the clause in the treaty does not exclude the
American interpretation, and, therefore, they are of the opinion that the difference
ought to be brought before the tribunal. ■ * * * .The refusal of England to accept
arbitration on all the American demands, implies a doubt in the justice of her cause,
or in. the impartiality of the arbitrators.—Constitutionnel.
The wisest course to adopt is to abide by the decision of the Geneva arbitration.
It is disinterested in the matter, and it can thus re-establish harmony and peace between the parties better than the parties themselves.—Independance Beige.
The stipulations pf the treaty leaATeno one to doubt that the American commissioners
expressly reserve the right to present such claims, although nothing Avas said about
the amount of the claims, the decision in that respect being left to the tribunal of
arbitration.—Allggmeine Zeitung.
If this tribanal is incompetent to decide without the advice of the newspapers
whether of not the American demands are preposterous and ab'snrd, then its appointment was a mistake. It is, howeArer, not to be supposed that such one-sided and ill-
timed arguments would exert any influence upon it.—Bailer Nachrichten.
The general opinion that the American demands Avere absurd has changed, and
people are commencing to see that they are justified in the treaty, and the storm is
,now turning against the British commissioners.—Easier Nachrichten.
The treaty justifies in a formal manner the tribunal at Geneva, in which, as Ave
know, Switzerland is represented by Mr. Staempfli, in considering all the claims, of
whatever kind, growing out of the acts of the cruisers. The question is only to know
to what point the tribunal Avill admit these claims, and if England will abide by its de-
r>_<a__"_T_     /?_:>_■__/._'    /-//J/'l'/f/j/.
The British cabinet, led by national pride and governed by popular opinion, haAre
changed their eutire opinion of the question, aud put matters in such a light, that allAPPENDIX.
59
that remains for the tribu
nal to do is to return home.   Th
ne Washington treaty expressly
states in regard tp the tribunal that they settle all claims, and supports the American
position. Why England acts thus we do not see. Probably she thinks the tribunal is
about to give judgment against her.— Vienna Neue Freie Presse.
England knew that demands were made not only for the acts of the vessels, but also
for indirect loss. One treaty, as she knew, had been rejected because it had no provision as to this. If the joint commissioners had meant to exclude these claims they
might have uSed language clearly stating it, but on the contrary, the language is such
as to include them.—Deutsch-Amerikanischer JEconomisi.
The general European tone is* one of warning to England not to break the treaty
What if America has let the affair slumber until Russia declared itself ready. Cannot
"the people on the Thames see how strong the bonds between America and Russia must
be when the insult to the Russian Minister not only has not broken but has not even
loosened these ties. If this is behind the Alabama question, the government at the
Foreign Office must bestir itself.—Neue Badische Lands-Ztitung.
The .moment Euglaud admits the discussion before the tribunal of arbitration of
the claims growing out of the acts of the Alabama and other corsairs, she recognizes
the right of the United States to make, by reason of the acts of these corsairs, all possible demands of damages, direct or indirect. She authorizes, in.one word, the list of
injuries, and the formidable, account upon Avhich the arbitrators Avill pronounce, but
which it is difficult to avoid by the preliminary question.—Le Soir.
This declaration of Mr. Gladstone, although contained in a letter of an entirely
private character, addressed to the correspondent of the New York World in London,
deserves attention. It proves that the English government has not formed the design
of cutting short all discussion, and that they consider the subject as still open for debate.
It is important that these intentions should be understood' and thoroughly appreciated, and that, on both sides, men with moderate views may strive to effect a reconciliation so much desired. It appears that an effort in that direction has already been
made in England. Thus a part of the press of that country, the Pall Mall Gazette for
example, suggests the idea of referring to a new arbitration the disputed question of
the interpretation of the treaty. The M6morial Diplomatique recalls, in relation to
this proposition, a precedent which it will be possible to invoke. It is that of a treaty
which has been executed, of June 15,1846, growing out of the dispute between England
and the United States, in regard to the frontiers of their respective possessions in the
northwestern part of the New World. Now this treaty contained, as does the Washington treaty, a real mistake, and it is for that reason that, at this very moment, it is
submitted to the arbitration of the Emperor of Germany. Could not as much be done
for the convention of May 8,1871, to determine what interpretation it ought to receive
by means of a distinct arbitration ?—Journal des De'bals.
Can any one to-day go ask the tribunal to suspend its work until the extent of its
juriscfiction shall be determined by a third party? Would it not find itself greatly;
prejudiced by such a decision intervening at so late a period? Finally, is it not fair
to believe that the tribunal is itself the best judge of the extent of its powers ?
These are considerations of a delicate nature, which the English government ought
carefully to weigh before making a decision which might perhaps alienate the arbitrators, andAyhich would, after all, only defer the solution of the matter without lessening
its gravity.
We persist in believing that the wisest policy, and that most in conformity with the
true interests of England, and of Europe, would be to let the affair take its course, to
leave it entirely to the enlightened'and impartial decision which the five'eminent
statesmen, who have been intrusted with the high mission of solving the dispute, will
surely render.—Memorial Diplomatique.o
60
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Since it became known that the North American cabinet had brought forward claims
for indirect damages for the consideration of the Geneva tribunal, a»panic has arisen
in England, and now they wish to have nothing further to do with this tribunal. It
cannot be shown that the United States have broken the treaty. The wording of the
treaty does not prevent her in any manner from bringing forward claims for indirect
as w#ll as direct damages. Therefore the English statesmen have been able to find no
escape except that of an appeal to their personal interpretation of the tfeaty.—Frankfurter Zeitung.
The demands of America were known to England from the first, and her representatives did not object. They-contented themselves by indicating that England could not
be held liable for damage doue the United States by cruisers of the Confederate States,
as proper diligence had been exercised to prevent their being armed and fitted out in
English ports, and these representatives simply referred all the claims of North America, having the action of these cruisers for a basis, to a tribunal of arbitration. Article I of the treaty of Washiugton distinctly declares : "Now, in order to remove and
adjust all complaints and claims on the part of the United States, and to provide for,
the speedy settlement of such claims which are not admitted by Her Britannic Majesty's government, tbe high contracting parties agree that all the said claims growing
out of acts committed by the aforesaid vessels, and generically known as the 'Alabama
claims,' shall be-referred to a tribunal of arbitration."—Der Bund.
" One sees," continues the Avriter, "that the whole thing is aimed at the tribunal
more than at the other party, for the latter is willing to leave to the tribunal of arbitration the question of its own jurisdiction, while England denies its right to decide
upon its own poAvers a question which every court of justice maintains as a preliminary. In England the right is assumed to withdraw from a treaty as soon as it appears that there is a difference of opinion with regard to its construction. According
to this, the treaty must fall through, for to insureits fulfillment, or the fulfillment of an
eventual sentence of the arbitrators, there is but the compulsion of national honor, or
of war."—Neue Ziiriche Times.
The Washington treaty plainly i ml ica.es that all the loss.s growing out of the acts
committed by the aforesaid vessels are to be submitted to the tribunal of Geneva,
Avhich will be called upon to prove whether England violated the rules prescribed by
the treaty for the government of neutrals, and, if so, what sum she must pay to the
United States in compensation for the injuries inflicted. He demonstrates that the
British case admits the submission of direct as well as indirect claims, and that it denies all liability, claiming that England fulfilled all its duties as a neutral, and that
the idea of calling in question the submission of indirect claims to the Geneva tribunal,
only arose when '' on the eye of the opening of Parliament the tories assumed a threatening position, and the nonconformists began to hold indignation meeting's."—Vienna
Neue Fremden Blatt.
Gladstone may assert a hundred times that the grammar as well as the spirit of
the treaty admits but one meaning, and that of the English; he Avill not entice the
Americans from their position. His countrymen, and the papers most devoted to him,
must confess that the wording of the treaty allows of the American as well as of the
English interpretation, that the construction is vague and loose. On the other side is
the intention of the framers of the treaty. Both must be considered. And appeal to
the preamble and protocol is not sufficient to clear up the mistakes. A refreshing result may be obtained from* this war of words. Long .and* tedious interchanges of dispatches must be expected; perhaps, after all, the annulling of the treaty with all the
fair hopes attached to it. We shall hope that no war will grow out of it, however, in
consequence of the still pending San Juan boundary and fishing questions.— Vienna
Neue Freic Presse.
Our London correspondent writes us: " The Atlantic cable works merrily to bring
us the utterances of the New York Herald, as td the Alabama quarrel, which has arisen
with new poAver.   The New York Herald sounds the war trumpet, some small followersAPPENDIX.
561
second it; the more intelligent portion of the press, however, which preserves a moderate attitude, maintains not less the view that the American Government cannot
withdraw her claims already presented, because it belongs to the Geneva tribunal
alone, and not to England, to decide upon their submission. The view of the press is,
after all, as was weU known, that of the American Government, and thereby the fatal
point of the situation is well indicated. Gladstone's expressed hope that his dfernqn-
stration would convert the Americans to the English view, would hardly mislead any
one. One may discuss the right or wrong on either side as one pleases, the one fact
cannot be denied, that in the wording of the Washington treaty the indirect claims of
the American Government, if not expressly agreed upon, are not expressly excluded.
The Americans do not offend against the wording of the treaty, therefore, whereas they
submit them to the tribunal of arbitration. Whoever denies this assumes an untenable position, and in beginning this monstrous piece of awkwardness Gladstone has prepared not only for himself, but for England, many sad hours. He must hear to-day
from his old admirers in Parliament and in the press the bitter truth, repeated on all
sides, that the means he has selected for his own defense are the most unfortunate, the
most untenable, and the most wanting, in tact of all others. For through his assertion
of the absolute clearness of the treaty in every respect, he shuts the door against further friendly explanations; he 'tacitly accuses the American Government of having intentionally given a wrong meaning to something that was perfectly unequivocal, and
thereby makes, in the highest degree, difficult any friendly yielding on the part of that'
Government. After he had ventured so far there remained for the Washington Government, which has also its own position to defend, only this answer: Will you, if
every interpretation but yours is absolutely impossible, leave the decision in security
with the tribunal ? Since you are so firmly convinced, you have nothing to risk by so
doing.
"And how could Gladstone reply ? Either by a categorical No, which would expose
him to ridicule, and must lead to the breaking off of all further negotiations; or by a
Yes, in which case he would confess, the truth of that which until uoav England has
always deolared to be untrue."—Kolnischer Zeitung.
From whatever point of view the subject be considered, there exists no justification
for England to withdraw from the treaty concluded at Washington. Be the demands
of America ever so extravagant, there is yet nothing in the treaty itself, and nothing
in the general principles of international law, to justify the withdrawal of the decision
on those demands from the tribunal of arbitration. It would, in fact, be deeply
to be regretted if the Geneva court of arbitration, the establishment of which is undoubtedly to be regarded as an essential progress in the life of international law,
should not reach the normal development of its actiAity. We rather on this occasion
give expression to the most earnest wish.that this procedure may lead to a further
development of international law.—Neue Preussische Zeitung.
It must be acknowledged, on an impartial review of the dispute, that these demands, however extravagant they may be, are by no means new; and when Gladstone
and Granville maintain that the protocols of the commission show that only those
losses directly derived from the capture of American ships were spoken of, every one
can convince himself from the protocols of the contrary. America had made these indirect claims not only in dispatches and occasional declarations; the treaty of January
19, 1869, was, on Sumner's report, rejected, because it offered no assurance of indemnification for the indirect injury suffered by America through the cruisers. With these
antecedents, the greatest caution was in any case prescribed to the English negotiations, but their instruction referred them, in regard to the Alabama claims, almost
solely to the diplomatic correspondence about them. *
But not a word in the instruction says that only direct claims shall be admitted to
discussion, and just as little does the cited treaty of 1869 contain anything about them;
that treaty speaks of " all claims, including the so-called Alabama claims." If we look
at the protocols of the joint high commission, we find on the first page that the
Americans enumerate in their fullest extent the claims now raised in the complaint,
and then declare that in the hope of an amicable settlement, no estimate was made of
indirect losses, without prejudice, however, to tbe right to indemnification on their
account, in the event of no such settlement being made. As such a settlement they
then propose to agree upon a sum in gross, which England shall pay with interest to
America in satisfaction of all claims.
The English commissioners fieclined this proposal, because they could not admit
that England had failed to discharge toward the United States the duties imposed on
30 B562
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
her by the rules of international law, and proposed the principle of arbitration. With
this refusal of the American proposal of an agreement on a sum in gross for all claims,
the liberty was given back to the Americans, which they had expressly reserved. The
Americans then on their side accepted the court of arbitration, on the condition that
certain rules be given to it for the consideration of the facts to be brought forward.
England yielded and the articles of the treaty were adopted. In the first article, it is
stated that " the differences growing out of the acts committed by the several vessels
which have given rise to the claims genericaJly known as the 'Alabama claims,' shall
be referred to a tribunal of arbitration."—Hamburgisher Correspondent.
The safest as well as the most dignified course is, therefore, to stand upon what
we conceive to be sound, legal principles, and to demur to any such claims for indirect damage.—London Times, January 2,1872.
What that fuU extent may be we are not expressly told; in fact, the computations of
the United States Government itself have not.yet reached the mighty sum. It is easy
to see, however, that upon the principles put forward by the United States Government, the total might easily be carried to an amount as startling as that of the French
indemnity. The American Government ask that a gross sum may be awarded it, and
that to the amount thus given may be added interest at the rate of 7 per cent, from
the 1st day of July, 1863. Happily claims such as these are no longer matter of controversy between England and the United States. Confident in our own rectitude, and
in the substantial justice of our cause, we have consented to refer it to a tribunal so
constituted as to secure the confidence of the world.—The London Daily Neios, January
3,1872.
It may be that an agency is for the first time tried in Geneva which will do much
to arrest that class of wars, by no means co-extensive with all wars, which arrise from
definite grievances, rather than from dynastic or national passions. It may also be,
that litigant nations, when they are unsucessful, will refuse to submit to an authority
which has no power to coerce them, and that an arbitration is no more than a useless
postponement of recourse to older and more familiar methods of decision. The issue
may well be awaited with the keenest interest and even anxiety; but there is no solid
ground for the anticipations of disaster which have been abroad for the last day or
two.—London Pall Mall Gazette, January 4.
It is scarcely necessary to say that our liability would only extend to the direct
consequences of our own acts. If, for example, it were held that it was through our
fault that the Alabama went to sea, we would be justly held responsible for the depredations which she committed. But there, in accordance with every principle, not only
of international but of municipal law, our liability should end. That the agent of the
Government of the United States should contend, in the case he has presented, that we
should also be responsible for the expenditure occasioned in the pursuit of the cruisers,
for the loss by the transfer of the American commercial marine to the British flag, the
increased rates of insurance, and even for the prolongation of the war, is not surprising, since he speaks as an advocate. But no judges could for an instant entertain such
claims.—London Morning Post, January 4,1872.
If they did so couch their demands we should not think of re-echoing the absurd alarms of some writers here at the exorbitant character of the new Alabama
claim. It must be borne in mind that President Grant seeks re-election, and that it
would be very unfortunate for him if his Sumnerite or other foes could say, with any
appearance of truth, " He has injured our case against the Britishers by not asking
enough." Therefore he has resolved to work the statesmanlike treaty in a popular way,
and to cover the act of submitting the affair to arbitration by Yankee flourishes of the
most extravagant kind. If it amuses his countrymen it may serve him; it certainly
does not hurt us.—London Telegraph, January 6.APPENDIX.
563
" What shall we do
.. _„_.__. ., .,.     Our first duty, both to the United States and to ourselves, is
to demur to the consideration of the claim for indirect damages put forward in the case
submitted by them, and to crave a decision upon our protest by the tribunal of arbitration before consenting to carry the reference to subsequent stages. We gave great
confidence that our view would be approved, but, however painful it might be, we
ought not to hesitate to retire altogether from the case if the tribunal did not hold itself free to reject the consideration of indirect claims."—London TimesfJanuary 29.
VI.
Extract fvom the Journal des D6bats, Paris, June 6,1872.
Les reclamations pour "dommages indirects" que les Etats-Unis voulaient soumettre au tribunal arbitral de Geneve seront probablement ecart^es. Les Etats-Unis
semblent avoir enfin cede sur ce point important, et cependant, a considerer l'affaire au
point de vue des principes du droit et en laissant de c6te" les grosses exag6rations de
leur memoire, ils soutenaient nne these juste, ils etaient dans le vrai sous le rapport
juridique. De quoi s'agit-il en effet ? Quelle accusation elevent-ils contre l'Angleterre?
Ils l'accusent, en premier lieu, de n'avoir pas enipeche ses armateurs de fournir aux
confiSderes des navires. de guerre; en second lieu, d'avoir par malice ou negligence
permis aux corsaires cohfecL6r6s de se servir de ses ports et de ses eaux comme d'une
base d'operations ou de ravitaillement. Par le fait de ce manquement anx obligations de
hi neutralite", ajoutent-ils, qu'est-il arrive ? C'est d'abord que les conf_d6res ont arme
un pins grand nombre de corsaires qu'ils n'auraient pu le faire si l'Angleterre avait
strictement observe" ses obligations de puissance neutre; c'est ensnite que les corsaires
confSderes, trouvant des refuges et des points de ravitadBement dans les ports et les
eaux britanniques, ont pu multiplier leurs depredations en raison de ce concours qui
leur etait indhment accorde. Or n'est-il pas juste que l'Angleterre soit rendue respon-
sable des dommages causes aux intei-ets americains par ces deux sortes de manquement a ses devoirs de neutre en admettant, bien entendu que les grie_B formulas contre
sa connivence ou sa negligence soient fbndes ?
Cette argumentation est irr^prochable, et l'Angleterre l'a reconnu, tout en se defendant d'avoir failli k ses obligations dans les differents cas qui font l'objet des reclamations americaines ; eUe est tombee d'accord avec les iStats-Unis qu'elle pourrait leur
devoir des dommages-interets, et elle 6'est resignee k accepter sur ce point la decision
d'un tribunal d'arbitres dont la mission consis .era 1° a constater si l'Angleterre a,manque,
dans la guerre de la secession, a ses obligations de puissance neutre, et dans queUe
mesure; 2° a reconnaitre et a 6valuer les dommages causes par le fait de ce manquement et a- fixer le chiffre du dedommagement. Seulement apres s'en etre remise
entierement au tribunal pour resoudre la premiere question, l'Angleterre semble avoir
craint de se mettre k sa discretion ponr la seconde; elle a impose des limites a sa competence, en etablissant une distinction entre les " dommages directs," qn'eUe reconnalt,
et les "dommages indirects" qu'oUene reconnalt pas. Cette distinction est-eUefondee
en droit ou en raison ?
Consultons, a cet egard, les faits, et voyons ce qui ressort de l'examen et de l'analyse
du cas en litige. Les corsaires confederes ont donne la chasse aux navires de commerce americains; ils en ont capture un certain nombre, confisquant ou detruisant
vaisseaux et cargaisons. Voila une premiere categoric de dommages directs. H y en
a une seconde: " Les etats du Nord ont 6t€ obliges de surveiller et de poursuivre les
corsaires du Sud; ils ont employe a cette destination une partie de leur flotte de
guerre, d'ou un double dommage consistant: 1° dans les frais occasionnes par la poursuite des corsaires; 2° dans la privation subie par les Etats-Unis d'une partie de leur
flotte qui aurait pu leur rendre d'autres services. Est-ce tout ? Non. La seule annonce .
de l'apparition des corsaires du Sud a suffi pour creer un "risque de guerre" qui est
venu immediatement s'ajouter aux risques maritimes ordinaires. Ce risque extraordinaire n'a pu etre couvert que par une prime corresppndante et dont le taux s'est
eieve avec lui. On a done vu s'etablir une difference entre les primes d'assurance des
navires et cargaisons americains et ceUe des neutres. Les armateurs et les negociants
qui ont pay6 cette difference ou ce supplement de prime n'ont-ils pas subi un dommage aussi reel que .ceux dont les navires et les marchandises ont ete captures ? La
perte a et6 sans doute, infiniment moindre pour chacun; en revanche, cette perte ne
s'est-eUe pas multipliee par le nombre des navires composant la marine marchande
americaine ? Puis qu'est-il arrive ? C'est que l'existence de ce risque particulier et
l'obligation de le couvrir par une prime suppiementaire ont fait abandonner les navires
am6ncains pour les neutres, anglais, hollandais, danois, etc. Nouveau dommage
auquel les armateurs americains n'ont pu se soustraire qu'enfaisant passer d'une manii_re
reelle ou Active, mais en tous cas non sans frais, leurs navires sous pavilion etranger564
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
D'un autre c6te, n'est-il pas vraisemblable que les armements en course des etats du Sud
ont cohtribue, dans une certaine mesure, a la prolongation de lalutte, soit en affaiblissant
les ressources des etats du Nord, soit en soutenant le moral des confederes; et n'en est-il
pas resulte une augmentation des frais de la guerre ? Voila bien toute une serie de
dommages qui ont ete engendres par le fait de l'existence des corsaires du Sud.
On peut les analyser et les grouper, appeler ceux-ci directs, ceux-R. indirects, quoique ces
deux caracteres soient loin d'etre toujours clairement marques ; mais on ne peut les
separer, on ne peut m.me les concevoir les uns sans les autres. Ds fbrment un ensemble
naturel, et c'est par un triage tout k fait arbitraire que l'Angleterre a reconnu les
I dommages directs," et repousse les | dommages indirects."
Dira-t-on que les dommages indirects, par leur etendue meme comme aussi par leur
caract&re vague et incertain, echappent a une evaluation rigoureuse ?   Qu'il est im-
■possible, par exemple, d'apprecier dans quelle mesure les armements en course des confederes out pu contribuer k la prolongation de la guerre ? Cette objection est assure-
ment des mieux fondees; mais quoi! appartient-il bien aux parties en cause de tran-
cher la difficulte qu'eUe souleve ? N'est-ce point l'affaire du tribunal de decider non-
seulement ce qui lui semble legitime ou iliegitime dans les reclamations portees
devant lui, mais encore ce qui lui paralt echapper a la possibilite d'une evaluation ?
N'est-ce pas empieter sur sa competence et ses attributions que de limiter d'avance son
verdict? Sied-il bien surtout a la partie inculpee de lui dire: "Voici un dommage
que l'on m'aceuse d'avoir cause et pour lequel j'invoqne votre arbitrage, mais je
n'entends point vous accorder le droit de le reconnaltre et de l'appr6cier dans toute son
etendue reeUe, car je n'ai qu'une foi limitee dans la rectitude de votre jugement: je
crains que vous ne sachiez pas discerner ce qu'il y a de faux ou d'exag6r6 dans les
reclamations qui sont portees devant A7ous, et je ne veux pas m'exposer sans reserves
aux consequences d'un verdict qui me condamnerait, ou si vous l'aimez mieux, je ne me
sou cie pas de reparer tout le dommage que j'ai cause."
Tel est pourtant l'attitude que l'Angleterre a prise dans cette affaire. D'accord avec
les Etats-Unis, eUe convoque un tribunal d'arbitres, puis aussitdt voici qn'apres avoir
pris connaissance du memoire dela partie adverse, la tete lui tourne, elle prend peur,
elle etablit des.distinctions entre les grosses reclamations et les petites, admettant la
competence des arbitres pour celles-ci, la rejetant pour ceUes-la, comme si elle se defiait
du tribunal, comnie si elle craignait qu'il ne se laissat influencer par les arguments
americains, au point de la. condamner a quelque dedommagement formidable, ou sim-
-plement comme s'il elle craignait qu'il ne 1'oblige.lt a payer tout ce qu'elle pourrait
devoir pour avoir manque k ses obligations de puissance neutre. Cette defiance est
assurement peu flatteuse pour le tribunal, et on peut douter qu'elle le dispose favo-
rablement k l'6gard de l'Angleterre, en admettant m.me qu'il consente a rendre un
jugement dans les limites etroites et arbitraires qui lui sont assignees.
VII.
Extract from "La Question de l'Alabama etle Droit des Gens,'
Paris, 1872.
by M. Pradier-Fo0re,
Le texte du traite n'a point distingue entre les reclamations; il les. a toutes soumises
au tribunal arbitral, pour etre reglees. Ni dans le cours des debats de la Haute Commission mixte, qui siegea pendant deux mois, ni dans aucune des clauses du traite,"
destine a fixer la procedure et les attributions du tribunal arbitral, ainsi que les principes qui- doivent le guider dans son jugement, F Angleterre n'a pas eieve" la moindre
objection sur l'une quelconque des oategorieade reclamations presentees par les Efcats-
' Unis; elle les a toutes repoussees au mime titre, sans faire.de distinction, et ce n'est
que plus tard, en presence des pretentions desEtats-U__isyqu?eBe a fait ses reserves sur
la nature de certaines reclamations detenmnees, en ne contestant pas la competence des
arbitres pour les autres.
Or, les negociateurs anglais du tr_ii>_&dej Washington devaient s'attendre a ce que la
pretention relative aux dommages indirects pot-Trait se.prodnire. Us savaient qu'un
premier traite avait dej_t ete prep__ree et contelu, il y a quelques annees, entre les deux
gouyernements, pour le reglement des reclamations, et que le S6nat de l'Union avait
rejete ce taaite, precisement parce qu'on ne pouvait y faire entrer les,reclamations pour
dommages indirects.
Ils etaient- done avertis. Comment expliquer leur silence k cet egard pendant lane-
goci.ation du second traite ? Ponrquoi cette mention si generale, si ekistique, de " toutes
les plaintes," de " toutes les reclamations," lorsqu'jls pouvaient inserer dans le traite
une clause spe"ciale excluant formellement les dommages indirects ? Uniquement pre-
occupes de faire valoir l'idee que l'Angleterre n'avait point vioie les devoirs de la neutralite, ils ont neglige de specifier les reclamations sur lesqueUes les arbitres auront kAPPENDIX.
565
se prononcer.   lis les ont roit.es comprises dans la competence du tribunal arbitral, et
maintenant qu'il est possible de pressentir l'eventualite d'une condamnation a une
reparation pecuniaire, le gouvernement de la Reine et la nation anglaise viennent dire:
' Nous n'avons entendu deferer aux' arbitres que la question des dommages directs!"
* * * * * # *
. A nos yeux, l'affaire internationale qui preoccupe si vivement aujourd'hui les. deux
mondes n'est nullement compliqnee, pourvu qu'on l'isole de la politique et qu'on la
maintienne dans son domaine naturel: le droit des gens.
II n'y a pas de contestation sur les dommages causes aux Etats-Unis par les corsaires
susdits, dont la fuite hors des ports anglais a ete regrettee par sa Majeste britannique.
II n'y a guere plus de controverse sur la responsabilite que cette fuite et ces depredations ont fait peser sur la Grande-Bretagne. Les Anglais, du reste, sont disposes a
regler le differeud des dommages directs.
Que reste-t-il done ?
Un tribunal d'arbitrage institue par un traite conclu dans un esprit amical, et dont
la conclusion a ete saluee, dans le principe, par les applaudissemeuts de la nation'
anglaise;
" Un expose des Etats-Unis demandeurs, qui est essentiellement une piece de procedure ;
"Un debat ouvert, dans'lequel l'Angleterre pourra faire valoir ses moyens de
defense, et repousser des conclusions qui seraient manifestement contraires au droit, a
la justice et k la raison.
" Les arbitres,.enfin, dont on ne pourrait suspecter l'impartialite sans commettre une
grave offense contre leur personne et les gouvernements qui les out choisis.
"II reste quelque chose de plus encore ; l'obligation pour les etats qui veulent tracer
un sillon profond dans le champ de la civilisation, de respecter les traites.
" A propos du conflit anglo-arnericain, on a parie de la force primant le droit; mais
il y a une iniquite internationale non moins funeste; c'est i'infideiite se jouant de la
foi juree. Pour les 6tats, comme pour les particuliers, tout se tient en fait de moralite.
L'oubli de la parole engag6e conduit k la violence. Les peuples commencent par
eiuder leurs engagements et finissent par opprimer les faibles."
VIII.
Quelques mots sur la phase nouvelle dudifferend anglo-ame'ricain," by G. Rolin-Jacque-
myns, Brussels, 1872.
Le traite rend la commission competente pour statuer sur les Alabama claims. Toute
la question est done de savoir si ces conclusions sont, en tout ou en partie, etrangeres
aux Alabama claims. Or nos lecteurs auront deja fait le rapprochement entre les conclusions et la declaration faite par les commissaires americains au debut de la conference du 8 mars. Non-seulement l'esprit, mais le texte en est identique. Dans
l'une, comme dans l'autre, les einq points sont formul6s et dans le meme ordre!
La declaration de retrait conditionnel des demandes pour dommages indirects n'est faite
que pour le cas ou. l'Angleterre aurait accepte le paiement d'emblee de la somme de-
mandee pour dommages directs. M. Gladstone a, nous l'avons vu, pretendu le contraire, mais nous croyons que c'est a tort.   En effet: »
A. II resulte" de la lecture du proces-verbal que les termes amicable settlement1
ne s'appliquent qu'au reglement immediatsans arbitrage. Partout ailleurs il ne s'agit
que de settlement, et le traite lui-meme ne parie que de speedy settlement, (prompt reglement.)
B. Le regret exprime par les commissaires americains du rejet de leur premiere
proposition confirme cette maniere de voir:
C. Lors que dans une negociation une des parties abandonne ses pretentions, c'est
generalement contre la reconnaissance formelle de celle qu'elle n'abandonne pas. Sous
ce rapport il etait naturel que les commissaires americains fussent prets k renoncer
anx dommages indirectSv comme prix d'un engagement certain de payer les dommages
directs. Mais il ne l'est plus qu'ils fassent cette renonciation lorsque tout est reinis en
question par la nomination d'arbitres. II y aurait la une concession sans reciprocite,
un effet sans cause, qui, en l'absence m.me de toute reserve, ne peut se presumer.
Nous devons admettre, d'apres ce qui precede, que, a eu juger par les documents
officiels et publics, le memoire americain ne soumet aux arbitres aucune pretention
1,1 That in the hcipe of an amicable settlement, no estimate was made of the indirect losses, without
prejudice, however, to the right of indemnification on their account in the event of no such settlement
being made."566
ARBITRATION  AT  GENEVA.
qui ne soit de leur competence—c'est-a-dire, qui ne soit dans les termes du compromis.
Encore une fois, quelques-unes de ces pretentions peuvent depasser la mesure com-
mandee par la justice et le bon sens, elles peuvent etre en elles-memee des actes deso-
bligeants pour l'Angleterre, et constituer une deception pour les negociateurs que cette
puissance a envoyes. Mais les arbitres n'ont k consnlter que les termes du traite,
eelaires, en cas d'obscurite", par les actes qui y sont relatifs. Or le traite ne stipule,
qu'une chose en matiere de competence, c'est qu'il s'agira A'Alabama claims, et il ne
stipule pas, ce qui eut ete absur.de, que ces claims seront raisonnabies. Car c'est pr6-
cisement la question de savoir s'ils sont raisonnabies qui est deferee aux arbitres.
IX.
Extract from "gli arbitrari intemazionali, ed il trattato di Washington," by Auguste Pieran-
ioni, Naples, 1872.
11 trattato contempla il caso, che tutti i reclami possano essere ammessi, poiche con
l'articolo VII, stabilisce che il tribunale potra, se lo trovera conveniente, decretare una
somma da pagarsi daJl' Inghilterra per tutti i reclami indirizzati.
II trattato considera il caso, in cui alcuni reclami potrebbero per la loro dubbiezza
impedire questo modo sommario di decisione, poiche Part. X, stabilisce che, se il rti-
|||lple non decreter_t una somma, una volta tanto, si nomini un ufficio di assessori per
•verificare quali sono i reclami valevoli.
I contraenti percib stipnlarono reciprocity ed egnagiianza di diritti; all' America
il diritto di presentare tutti i reclami, all' Inghilterra la latitudine di respingerli tutti
e subordinatamente di restringere la misura dei danni.
Infine le dne potenze convennero, mediante l'articolo XI, di considerare le decisioni
del tribunale " come un regolamento completo finale, assoluto di tutti i reclami sopra
menzionati.
Uprincipio di ermeneutica legale che tutte le clausole deUe couvenzioni s'interpre-
tano le une con le altre, dando a ciascuna il senso che risulta dall' altra, riconferma la
pienezza della volonta delle parti a deferire ai giudici ogni specie di reclamo, indipen-
dentemente dalla loro relativa giustizia, la quale e quistione di merito, che spetta agli
arbitri di decidere.
Ma se i termini del trattato fossero oscuri, sarebbe opportuno di risalire ai motivi
della convenzione.
E volentieri procederb, benanche a tale novella indagihe, poiche la e tanto valorosa
da dileguare ogni altra possibile obbiezione. II protocollo riferito nella prima parte del
mio scritto awerte che i commissari americani esposero in termini esattissimi tutti i
capi dei loro reclami. Essi parlarono di nnmerose perdite dirette (extensive direct
losses) e danni indiretti (indirect .wp§|y) risultanti dalpassaggio sotto bandiera britan-
nica di una grande parte della marina mercantile americana, dell' aumento dei prezzi
d'assienrazipne, del prolongamento della gnerra e dell' aggiunta di una somma consi-
derevole alle spese occorse per la gnerra e per la. soppressione della ribellione.
E questi medesimi capi invariabilmente furono ripetuti nella memoria presentata
al tribunale.
L'In&ilPterra pero per la A*oce di alcuni nomini di Stato e per i clamori della sua
reputatissima stampa crede di poter sostenere che una espluita rinunzia dei danni
derivati dalla protratta guerra sia stata fatta nella discussione del trattato. Che vi ha
di essatto in questa aUegazione?
Reca il processo verbale che i commissarii proposero pure che l'altre commissione
s'intendesse interno una somma da pagarsi dalla Gran Bretagna agli Stati Uniti in una
volta per tutti i reclami principali ed interessi. Mediante questo regolamento avreb-
bero rinunziato ai loro reclami per danni indiretti; e dichiararono non esservi pre-
giudizio tuttavia pel dritto di reclamare pei danni indiretti, sealcun regolamento dital
genere non fosse conchiuso.
E certo che se l'Inghilterra avesse aUora accettato un regolamento immediate ed il
pagamento di una somma fissa, non soltanto sarebbe mancato l'oggetto a' reclami, ma
l'istesso oggetto del trattato. Invece i commissarii inglesi contestarono in genere tutte
le pretese degli Stati Uniti, si riensarono al regolamento proposto ed offrirono soltanto
di sottomettersi ad un arbitrate, purche si trovasse un arbitro conveniente e che si con-
venissero i punti, ai quali l'arbitrato si applicherebbe.
E gli agenti americani risposero, esponendo il loro dolore che fosse andate a monte
la proposta di una somma, l'arbitrato non essendo il regolamento amicheA'ole (the
amicable settlement) in considerazione del quale avrebbero rinunziato alle loro do-
mande di danni interessi.APPENDIX.
56
Risulta inoltre dalla lettura del processo verbale che le espressioni amicable settle,
ment furono adoperate per la richiesta di una liquidazione immediata senza arbitrato,
e che negli aJtri luoghi in cui si parld di accommodamento sotto altre forme si usb la
semplice parola settlement o speedy settlement, (pronta liquidazione.) Espressioni, che
hanno diverso valore, e che non permettono di dire, come vorrebbe sostenere 1' Inghilterra, che l'arbitro presente sia lo stesso settlement, di cui fu prima discorso  dall'
America.
* * * * # * *
I commissarii inglesi non dovettero essere sorpresi dagli Americani, ,poiche eglino
■sapevano che si potesse elevar pretesa dei danni indiretti.
L'alta commissione si riunl k Washington, soltanto perche non era stato ratificata
dal Senato dell' Unione la precedente convenzione. E tra le ragioni del rigetto della
medesima non ultima fu. quella che non vi erano compresS. reclami indiretti. Se
•dunque i negoziatori inglesi erano avvertiti, perche tacquero ? Perche a fronte delle
esplicite riserve e condizioni degii agenti degli Stati Uniti non nsarono alcuna espres-
sione, che significar potesse variet-t di pensiero, di mente ?
L'Inghilterra percib non pub trarre alcun argomento in favore dal fatto che i commissarii americani proposero di esser disposti a rinunziare ai danni indiretti, se amiche-
volmente e con somma fissa, immediatamente allora si fosse date fine alia controversia.
Se pure i commissarii americani non ne avessero fatto speciale riserva, il loro diritto di presentare la istanza al tribunale arbitrale di Ginevra per i danni indiretti non
sarebbe pregiudicato. Spettapoi al Tribunal di esaminare la ginstizia ed il fondamen-
to, cosl di questi, come degli altri danni ; ma niun limite alia proposta di domande
scaturisce dalla lettera e dalla ragione del trattato.
sam_
INDEX
A.
Page.
Adams, Mr.:
his impartiality  10
his opinions _  141-230
receives the thanks of the President and the Queen _. 546
"Adjournment:
British move, June 15, for eight months  6,16
Motion withdrawn 1  22
from December 15 to June 15 ,  16
Alabama, the  30,37
award as to _  51
Count Sclopis's opinion as to  75
Viscount d'ltajuba's opinion as to  99
Mr. Staempfli's opinion as to  -  116
Mr. Adams's opinion as to _  171
Sir Alexander Cockburn's opinion as to „.  446
Arbitrators:
independence and ability of neutral  8
Archer, the:
decision as to _ _.  38,52
Argument:
British, filed at Geneva  30
United States, regarded as masterly .  6
United States, filed at Geneva »•     6,17
supplemental, ordered and made ,.  7,30,31,32
supplemental, ordered, motion for, by Great Britain  21,25,27,29,30
Award of the tribunal:
transmitted by the agent  1,49
when made  8
signature of.. - -..'   48
fifteen and one-half millions of dollars   53
B.
Beaman, C. C, jr.,:
assisted in arranging evidence     2
Blockade:
Sir A. Cockburn's opinions as to  237
Boston, the  33,53,101
C.
Case of the United States.   (See Great Britain, Commission, Due diligence,
Supplies of coal.)
how prepared  2
theories of - - - -  *.
part of, submitted to publicists, &c  3
chapter on indirect claims not submitted 1  4
delivered at Geneva December 15  3,15
comments of the British press upon  4
comments of-the continental press upon  5
Chickamauga, the 30,37,52
Viscount d'ltajub'a's opinion as to  101
Mr. Adams's opinion as to  214
Sir A. Cockburn's opinion as to  o27
Clarence, the..,  38>52
tm
_S_3SS_S
_____f_R-_____-i_H
^ffi_570
ARBITRATION  AT   GENEVA.
Page.
Coal, supplies of:
. position of the United States  11
views of Mr. Adams as to  11,148
views of Count Sclopis as to —. 11,74
views of Mr. Staempfli as to —   11
views of Viscount d'ltujabaas to  ._>. — 12,47
award respecting  50
views of Mr. Adams as to  11,148
views of Sir Alexander Cockburn as to  422
Cockburn, Sir Alexander, (see table of contents, Fish, Mr.)
his dissenting opinion commented on     12,546
his claims to represent Great Britain   12,286,547
his charges against the- counsel of the United States  12,284
his charges against the case of the United States  13
.admits the justice of the argument in the case of the United States  13
his opinions JsL  ..  230-544
thinks the treaty would have been better without the rules §  230
his views as to British unfriendliness   313
.as to acknowledgment of belligerency   313
as to regulations of January, 1862   339
as to partiality in supplies of coal    344
as to supplies of arms -  344
as to ships obtained from Great Britain  346
as to proceedings of other governments  356
as to blockade-running  359
as- to partiality of colonial authorities  365
as to course of British government  366
this opinion not read or made known before dissolution of tribunal-.  546
if known, would have been objected to  546
C omraission, effect of  33
position of the United States    10
British position  10
American rejoinder  ,    10
views of Viscount d'l taj uba  10
decision of the tribunal  10,50
views of Count Sclopis regarding   69
views of Viscount d'ltaj uba regarding  96
views of Mr. Adams regarding  146
views of Sir Alexander Cockburn regarding  409
Continental press:
opinions of, in appendix  551
Contraband of war:
Sir A. Cockburn's views as to  237
Counsel of the United States :
advise the agent at every stage of the proceedings  8
Sir Alexander Cockburn's attacks upon them   12
their report to the Secretary of State  550
Counter cases: *
Exchanged at GeneAra, April 15  5
Cushing. General:
argument of  32
D.
Delay:
government not responsible for, (Cockburn)  267
Due diligence:
what was claimed by United States to be  8
position of Great Britain as to ,  8
views of Count Sclopis as to  •    9,57
decision of tribunal as to  9
award as to _  50
views of Mr. Staempfli asto  105
views of Mr. Adams as to Wi  141
views of Sir Alexander Coakburn as to   260
E.
Errors of judgment:
government not responsible for, (Cockburn)   267
Evarts, Mr.:
oral argument of  31,32INDEX.
571
F.
Pace
Florida, the: °'
action of the tribunal upon  7,28,29 38,51
arguments upon entry of, into Mobile I 35
Count Sclopis's opinion asto  90
Viscount d'ltajuba's opinion as to  98
Mr. Staempfli's opinion as to  108
Mr. Adams's opinion as to..    150
Sir Alexander Cockburn's opinion as to  367
Fish, Mr.:
his comments upon Sir Alexander Cockburn's opinion  546
his remarks upon the Italian, Swiss, and Brazilian arbitrators  546
his risume of the positions maintained by Sir Alexander Coc kburn  547
his opinion upon the effect of the controversy defining neutral rights and
obligations  548
he thinks it important to note the views of Sir A. Co ckburn  549
G.
Georgia, case of .'.   34,37,52
Viscount d'ltajuba's opinion as to  101
Mr. Adams's opinion as to '.  187
Sir A. Cockburn's opinion as to  477
Government, neutral:
when responsible for acts of subordinates  234
should possess adequate powers to maintain neutrality, (Cockburn)  256
Great Britain, (see Municipal laws:)
unfriendly course of, how treated in the case   2
government of had in consideration to ask Avithdrawal of case of United
States  5
unfriendliness of, Count Sclopis's views as to  9,62
Viscount d'ltajuba's views as to  9
Mr. Adams's views as to  10
submits new evidence  33
comparison of its laws with United States laws   255
Sir Alexander Cockburn's opinion of the result of such comparison  307
requests to amend neutrality laws ^  278
Gross freights:
claims for rejected    53
I.
Indirect claims, (see Treaty of Washington,) (case of the United States:)
action of joint high commission on  1
such action in harmony with all previous  1
no exception taken to it by British commissioners  1
such action binding on agent of the United States  1
their definition included some private claims  1
continental press'unanimous in support of right to present :  5
action of the tribunal upon .- 6,19,20,21
Insurgent bureaus:
maintenance of, on British soil, how treated in the case  3
Interest:
argument respecting claim for  43
Itajuba, Viscount d':
declaration respecting supplies of coal  47
his opinions     96,103
J.
Jeff. Davis, the -  33>53
Joint high commission, (see Indirect Claims,) (Treaty of Washington):
Joy, V. H.,the  33,53,101
Judicial miscarriage: -
government not responsible for, (Cockburn) I  "^oo
M.'
Municipal laws (of England):
cannot be setup in justification *  i*
eompared with those of the United States • *<>■
Music, the  33,53,101PWP
572
ARBITRATION AT  GENEVA.
N.
Page.
Nashville, the -'   12,30,37,52
Viscount d'ltajuba's opinion as to  101
Mr. Adams's opinion as to .  212
Sir A. Cockburn's opinion as to .itS — - - 519
Neutrals, (see Government:)
rights and duties of, (Cockburn)  *     234
P.
Prospective profits:
not aBowed  43,53
Protocols of conferences:
transmitted by agent  1
'  text of.  15
Pursuit of cruisers:
expense of, disaUowed  43,53
R.
Retribution, the  31,32,37,52
Viscount d'ltajuba's opinion as to  ...  101
Mr. Staermbfll's opinion as to  138
Mr. Adams's opinion as to  217
Sir A. Cockburn's opinion as to   531
S.
Sallie, the 1   33,53,101
Sclopis, Count:
his opinions  55-96
Secretaries of the agent and counsel:
their zeal and industry commended  6
. Seizure of vessels:
duty as to, (Cockburn)  267
Shenandoah, the § 35.37,52
Great Britain liable for acts of, after leaving Melbourne -  52
Count Sclopis's opinion as to  81
Viscount d'ltajuba's opinion as to.   101
Mr. Staempfli's opinion as to    125
Mr. Adams's opinion as to i  196
Sir A. Cockburn's opinion as to . -  484
Staempfli, Mr.:
his opinions .  103-141
Sum in gross    44
determination of tribunal to award  46
amount of, awarded  53
Sumter, the S .:.  12,30,37,52
Viscount d'ltajuba's opinion as to  101
Mr. Staempfli's'Opinion as to      134
Mr. Adams's opinion as to  208
Sir A. Cockburn's opinion as to  506
T.
Tables, wim statements of claims:
new, presented by agents    35,37
Lord Tenterden's comments on American  36
Tacony, the:
decision as to  38,52
Tallahassee, the 31,37,52
Viscouu t d'ltajuba's opinion as to i   101
Mr. Adams's opinion as to..............._s|i....  215
Bir A. Cockburn's opinion as to  530
Tenterden, Lord, (see tables):
desirous of saving the treaty     6
his friendly conduct in June.  .§$  . 7
Treaty of Washington, (see Indirect claims.)INDEX.
c to
bio
Tribunal of arbitration, (see Award, Indirect claims) :
regarded as a judicial body	
its conduct shows that national differences may be settled by arbitration.
organization of. -■	
judgment upon indirect claims	
award and dissolution of..  —
Tuscaloosa, the :
decision as to.  -. 	
Mr. Adams's opinion as to. 	
Sir A. Cockburn's opinion as to	
W.
Waite, Mr.:
argument of •
o
Page.
2
14
15
21
49
181
32