The Hinton Electric Company,
electric
Koists,M-
BLOWERS,
FANS,     J|
MOTORS,
DYNAMOS,
ELECTRIC
MINING
APPARATUS.
Construction and
Supplies,
VICTORIA, B. C.
ThelDominion Wire Rope Co.,
WONTREAIls  CHNHDH.
MANUFACTURERS   OF
.All Classes and Kinds  of   Wire R&ges for all Purposes.
iff Lang's'' Patent Wire Ropes for Colliery and General Miffing Purposes.
Branches :—-Halifax,  N, S.; St. John,  N.B.;   Ottawa,   Toronto, -Rat  Portage,   Ont.;    Winnipeg, Man.i ^Vancouver,  B.C.,   Nelson and
Rossland,  B. C. ■■ -    -     " . /;''  ■" '• ' -     "^\
PRICE,  20  CENTS.
:.'  -'''"'-■),   ''[.:'■■ ; . ,,'' —
Mmsmsk
yatMmmmmammm^SSlfSSMPW^
•L» .,7   TT^T^,
SfIS      ^!W^5f^^l^^^IF1   vT'TT71   fii?PIP^lPPi
m
&mm ARE BUILDING A HOUSeI*
\*> ■ = to
$8lj&.*      'V'W1?. Carry in Stock the Largest Assortment T^MK;
ljiV in Canada of \1V
MANTELS
In oak, Maple, Cherry, Birch,
WHITE AND'TlLE.
FIRE PLACE GRATES
i
m
m
I
I
i
1
'?'  Brass Fenders, Fire Sets, Fire Dogs, Brass
W Coal Scuttles, &c.
IN ANY FINISH OR STYLE
TILING
For Floors, Hearths
bathrooms, 4,c.,.ac.
House, Hardware in Late
nr\
m
I
I
w
I
1
IP
H
H
|§^NCouypi B. c
PARQUETT FLOORING.
Tis
and Best Designs.
1111
1
:«. LIMITED, :".j{fflj
WHOLESALE HARDWARE,
DAWSON, y|$|
'T^.'^Bf fib* Cftfc- <2i-»" ■Cl'o"- <*d»- 4C%f <3l»- ^C_»  -Jhw -^3* ^T > ***»-^■k-**>• J<Bjjifc-- -^^
i
to
to
i
to
to
\li
to
I
1
i
i
I
m
m
I:
ll
ES
AND APPLIANCES FOR ALL PURPOSES.
ie
you
<Y^ Cutrefc improved designs and a w-id<5.range
of sizes and styles t&
make your selection
from. Special Engines
and Machinery also built
to specification. Send
tjs your prints or out-
'Q^V-requirements, and we will be^pleased to suboafisi^
an estimate or proposal.
%j*£t A   GOOD   LINE  OF	
SlaMari Hoisting Engines, Cars, Butt, ete
Carried in Stock at Rossland Warehouse,
for qujcfc" delivery.
AJso, Wire tyope, Sheaves and Ceneral Mining Supplies.
THE JENCkpS |flACHINE|DO.
32-40 Lansdowne St., SHERBROOKE($HJE.
Branches : GREENWOOD, NELSON and ROSSLAND, B. C.
m
FRIED KRUPPfQRUSONWERK
Madgeburg-Buckau (Germany.)
MINING MACHINERY
SHgajf
ORE   CRUSHING:
Stone Breakers of especially strong
construction. Roller Mills, Chilian
Mills, Ball Mills, for dry and wet
crushing—more than 1,800 at work.
Stamp Batteries—Shoes and Dies of
Krupp's Sptecial Steel.
AMALGAMATION:
Amalgamation Ta&l$s and Pans, Las-
rlo's Gold Amalgamators, Settlers, &c.
SEPAijJATION j^ CONCENTRATION:
Separators, >,£xhaustors, Hydraulic
ClasSffiers,  Percussion  Tables,   Jig-
iyg^rs, Rotating Round Tables.
LEACHING p£ANT.
COMPLETE GOLD ORE DRESSING PLANT.
(a) For Treating by the.Wet Method with Stamp Batteries, Amalgamation and Concentration.
.   (b) For Dry Testing by Ball Mills, Dust'Extraction and Leaching.
COAL WASHING PLANT—Large Tasting Station for Crushing and Dressing Ores at the Works.
HCENTS
For CANADA—Jas. W. Puke & Go., 35 St. Francois Xauier Street, Montreal.   .
For ihS\-UNITED STATES—Thos. Prosser £$pn, 15 Got^Street,. New'York.
For MEXICO—Pablo Bergner, Apartado 549, Mexico.
For SOUTH APflJCA—United Engineering Company, Ltd., P. 0. Box 3S9.^Johannesburg, S.A.R.
mC. M. PINCKARD, President
Manufacturers of
VULCAN
DOUBLE-ROPE
TRAMWAY.
VULCAN
ROPEWAY,
(Single Rope System.)
Office, 505 Mission St. Works, cor. Kearny & Francisco Sts.  S_A_U2Q~ ZFIR-A-IDTOISOO    CA.ID
Linl^-Belt Elevators
For Handling Ores, Matte, Slag, Crushed Stone, Gravel,
Cement, Sand, Water, etc.
I PICKING TABLES, SHAKING I
I AND REVOLVING  SCREENS, |
I COALWASHING MACHINERY, I
1 SHAFTING, ROPE SHEAVES, S
I PULLEYS, CLUTCHES, GEAR- 1
g INC, ETC. I
Send for Catalogue.
'Link-Belt" Coal and Coke Breaker
LINK-BELT MACHINERY CO., Chicago, U. S. A. engineers, founders, machinists
""^jfettTBgrtrfB?*^ 'iiiiiTliii1iiaB£fT^fmraitiiiiriii n immh
JJUSJ3H  ^PBpa^^^^^^^^sg^^p^^^.r^^^^^^^^^^p
gRaga»g^a^^a53iggfe^ga^»-5«B= XSVXS&mSaV;
snacsssas^sssmssti&sssassa
m
^f^^^^^^^m^^^Mi^M^^HWH APPLICATION^11.
THE MINING BECORD.
ASSAYERS' SUPPLIES AND ENGINEERING INSTRUMENTS.
no. 048 Chemical Balance.
Sensibility i-io milligramme or 1-650 grain. §111111
Six-inch beam, Agate bearings and improved fall-away pan-rests operated by a single thumbpieca.
Many of the largest corporations in the world use our Balances, among whom are the following :
Mt. Lyell Mining & Railway Co., Tasmania ; British America Corporation, British Columbia; Sheffield
Smelting Co., England ; Great Boulder Perseverance Gold Mining Co., West Australia; America Smelting &
Refining Co., U. S. and Mexico. 3
Send for catalogue A-4 to
WM.   AINSWORTH   &   SONS,
Denver, Col. U.S.A.
For  Sale  by: B. C. Assay & Chemical Supply Co., Vancouver, B.C.; W. F. Teetzel & Co., Nelson, B.C.;
C.  M.  Fassett, Spokane, Wash.; John Taylor & Co., San Franciso, Cal.; F. W. Braun & Co., Los Angeles, Cal.
The B. G. Assay & Chemical Supply Co.,
-DIRECT IMPORTERS OP— »■ LIMITED,
flSSflYERS' ™ HILL 5UFFLIEJ.
Headquarters for Laboratory Apparatus of all kinds, Bohemian Chemical Glassware, C. P. Acids, Potassium Cyanide and Quicksilver.
Sole Agents in British Columbia for Morgan Crucible Co., Battersea, England;
F. W. Braun & Co's Patent Cary Furnaces, Burners, &c.; W. Ainsworth &
Sons' Fine Balances.
Write for our Prices.
Address: 733 Pender Street, VANCOUVER, B. C.
Theodore Lexow,
Nos. 12 to 16 John Street,
Near Broadway, New York.
Importer   of Carbons. („BtAcfe Diamonds..)
For Diamond Drills and all Mechanical Purposes.
3fc HENRY DEMMERT.
THE DENVER FIRE CLAY COMPANY
cu
o
z
<
<
CO
r
u
o
Z
o
o
M    3
r>     Co
«      SB      3
>  5.
1742 to 1746 CHAMPA STREET,  DENVER, COLORADO.
Established i8s
Incorporated 1895.
ASSAYERS' MATERIALS, fline and flail Supplies, Chemists' Supplies, Chemicals,
Chemical Glassware. Prospectors' Outfits. Special Agents for Morgan Crucible Co.,
Battersea, England. Largest Stock of Balances, Scales, Furnaces, Etc. Baker M
Adamsons' Acids. Platinum=ware, Etc. Borax, Boneash, Cyanide Potassium, Mang=
anese and other heavy Chemicals at Manufacturers' Prices.
JOHN TAYLOR '§ CO.,
63 First St., SAN FRANCISCO, Cal.
Headquarters or Mining and Scientific Books.
Pacific Coast Agents for Wm. Ainsworth ct Sods' Assay and Analytical Balances
Illustrated Catalogue on Application.THE MINING RECORD.
CABLES,     ETC.
See those wires—how they interlock ?   Note the smooth surface also?
TECE3   IP-A-TIEINrT
No displacement of wires in any event.    Gives much greater service than other cables, and adds <
life of the rolling: stock.
respondingly to the lil
Locl^ed-Wire
Track Gable.
Is used only on the patent
BLEICHERT   WIRE-ROPE TRAMWAY,
and others manufactured by
The Trenton Iron Company, Trenton, N. J.
Engineers and Contractors and sole licensees in North America for the Bleichert System.     Also, Wire-Rope Equipments for Surface and Underground Haulage, Transmission of Power, etc.    Illustrated book upon application.
New York Office—Cooper, Hewitt & Co.,  17 Burling: Slip. Chicago Office—1 1 14* Monadnock   Building-.
ELEVATING MAGHI NIflY
FOR iyi!Li^|ACT0Rl|S^P^i8?Pt^iS^
Designed.fof Handjing_Mafe4raJ:;Wya^;l4iAds« J
SEND TOR GATA LOG UE.
Tf^M^PH^^Mnil
Bullock Diamond Drills
Received the ONLY award to Diamond Drills made at the
Paris Exposition - A Gold Medal.
M. C.  BULLOCK MFG. CO., CHICAGO.IV.
THE MINING RECORD.
HYDRAULIC PLANTS, ETC.
HEATERS   AND    RUMRS.
If you want any of the following Heaters or Pumps we can fill your order immediately
2—30 h. p  Laurie  Heaters.   .
2—40 h. p. Lauiie Heaters.
2—50 h. p. Laurie Healers.
2—60 h. p. Laurie Heaters
1—80 h. p. Laurie'Heater.
I—100 h. p. Laurie Heater.
I1—125 h   p. Laurie Heater.
14—3 x 2 x 3 Northey Duplex, Brass Fitted.
10—45^ x 2}( x 4 Northey Duplex, Brass Fitted.
12—5^ x y/2. x 6 Northey Duplex, Brass Fitted.
12—b x 4 x 7 Northey Duplex, Brass Fitted.
1—5^ x ^X x 7 Outside Packed Pump.
1—4'/2 x 2% x 6.
1—4 x 2fg x 5.
1—7 x 3'A x I2 Sinking Pump.
1—Centrifugal No. 3.
2—No. 8  8-in  Suction Cen rifugal.
2—\l/z h. p. Gasoline engines.
The Vancouver Engineering Works.
Successors to ARMSTRONG & MORRISON,
Office and Works :
Iron Founders, Boiler IV|akers and IV|achinists. VANCOUVER, B. C.
The Hallidie Ropeway| lmP^ic8R5p!LLEY
l^pps
yfegm
1 -it^Pli Ms*?^
|pl|.   * \
y    te^^^j5x..
1
\   . a lf%1 i
SaS^^
MLh
FOR TRANSPORTING ORF, FUEL, EARTH, SUCAR CANF, ETC , BY WIRE ROPE.
-t®
Simple, Economical, Practical,
Durable.
Loads Mechanically, Dumps
Automatically.
WIRE TRAMWAYS (Single and Double Rope Systems)
CABLEWAYS.
INCLINE  PLANES.
LOGGING BY CABLES.
TRANSMISSION BY WIRE ROPE.
CABLE GRIPS.
AUTOMATIC LOADERS.
Plowing, Scraping and Transporting by Wire Ropes, Designed, Supplied
and Erected.        M9@F~ Estimates furnished.
Effectiue, Simple, Automatic.
SAVES WEAR on WIRE ROPE and CABLE.
Send for Illustrated Pamphlet.
Correspondence Solicited.
FERGUSSON & CROFTS, Agents, 603 Hastings St., Vancouver, B. C
CALIFORNIA WIRE WORKS,  17-19 Fremont St., San Francisco, Cal.
STEEL
For hard-rock mining.
CANTON   BRANDS will be found unequalled for toughness and rock-cutting quailties.
Ask your dealer for
CANTON   STEEL
Works : CANTON, OHIO. «K
Branch   Warehouse :    DENVER,
Colorado,
Equal to
Jessop or Firth's Ste
in Rock Work.
£27303
OP
ING, LIMITED.
THE PAGING COAST SMELTING & REFINING WORKS,
Purchasers,   Samplers and Smelters of Gold,  Silver and  Copper  Ores,
and  Furnace  Products.
WORKS:   Seal Bluff Landing, Cal. MINES:   Fresno County, Cal.
OFFICES: Crocker Building, San Francisco, California;     Basildon tjouse, 7to 11 Moorgate Street, London, E.C.Northern Spherical Motor, Inclosed  Type
Northern
Are compact and  symmetrical in design and can  be belted, geared or direct connected to the  driven
machine.    They are   suited  for  work  in   many places  where it  would  be
difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to operate  other  motors.
SEND   FOR   ILLUSTRATED   CATALOGUE   No.   426.
Northern Electrical  Manufacturing Company,
Madison, Wis, U. S. A.
Hendrie & Bolthoff W|fg. & Supply Go.
District Sales Managers, DENVER,   COL.VI.
THE MINING RECORD.
MISCELLANEOUS MACHINERY, ETC.
The SMITH-VAILE STEAM  PUMPS
Are built with special reference to perform the service for which they are intended with a minimum use of steam.
We Build Steam,, Power arid Electrical PU M PS for Every   Possible Duty.
Victor   Turbine   Water-wheels,   Air  Compressors   and   Filter  Presses.
If interested, address
The  STILWELL - BIERCE   &   SMITH-VAILE CO, Lehman at, dayton, ohio, u.s.a.
PLATINUM REFINERS    New York■■ street
BAKER St CO.
w. E are always in the market for    :    :    :
CRUDE OR NATIVE PLATINUM.
NEWARK,  N.  J.
Joshua Hendy Machine Works
Jtos. 38 to 44 Fremont Street, S/\N FRANCISCO, CAL.
-MANUFACTURERS OF AND DEALERS IN-
Hydraulic and Quartz IVjining and Kjilling Machinery,
-COMPRIS1NG-
HYDRAULIC GIANTS,
WATER GATES,
SHEET IRON and
STEEL PIPE,
STAMP MILLS,
ORE CRUSHERS,
ORE FEEDERS,
CONCENTRATORS,
SMELTERS,
HOISTING and
PUMPING PLANTS,
SAW MILLS,
MINE and MILL
SUPPLIES, &C, &C.
HOISTING ENGINE.
Catalogues and Prices Furnished
upon application.
IMPACT WATER WHEEL.
TOw^mv^Wffl^Wjj
(INCOEPOEATED   1861,)
©>
Manufacturers of High Explosives, Blasting, Mining and Sporting Powder,
Dealers in Electric Blasting Apparatus, Safety Fuse, Detonators, Etc. *.*• 1 •:•
BRANCH OFFICE :
yiCTORIA.
HEAD OFFICE:   MONTREAL.
LOCAL OFFICES :
VANCOUVER, NELSON, ROSSLAND and GREENWOOD.
WORKS :
NHNHIMG,
GOODYEAR RUBBER CO
R. H. PEASE, President and Manager.
Rubber Belting, Packing and Hose.
CRACK PROOF" AND "SNAG PROOF.
PURE RUBBER MINING BOOTS, RUBBER CLOTHING, MACKINTOSHES, OIL CLOTHING	
573, 575, 577 & 579 Market St.,
SAN FRANCISCO, CAL.
w
m—e/j||i<s—-©
73 & 75 First Street,
PORTLAND, OREGON.THE MINING RECORD.
Vll.
ELECTRICAL MACHINERY.
«tVtVtit»f*»Vtff»«tttii
uora
(?8xJ
5)ow
S)on
0)0(0
WO(Q
GanaMan (Seneral
Electric Co.,
Ximiteb*
Head Offices: Toronto, Ont.
CAPITAL $1,500,000
Factories: Peterboro and Toronto, Ont., Montreal, Que.
BRANCH OFFICES:
Halifax, N. S., Montreal, Que., Winnipeg, Man.,
Rossland,     Vancouver, B. C.
MANUFACTURERS  OF
ELECTRIC HININQ APPARATUS
Hoists, Pumps, Blowers, Tans,
Blasting Apparatus, Dynamos for
Lighting and Power and Motors
for All Purposes.
Electrical Transmission of Power Successfully Operated up to
Miles
-BY OUR-
C. G. E.
=arut
S. K. G.
Three Phase,
Two Phase,
Only Authorized Manufacturers and Dealers
in Canada for Them.     Write Us.
Transmission Systems.
BRANCH OFFICES I
BRITISH  COLUMBIA:
I ROSSLAND and VANCOUVER.
l^cWWWVWW^^Vlll.
THE MINING RECORD.
■"^ey*,
Manufacturers
*   *   of *   •:•
The JAMES COOPER MANUFACTURING COMPANY, Limited.
MONTREAL, P. Q.
INGERSOLL-SERGEANT MACHINERY,
Rock Drills, Straight Line, Duplex, and Corliss Air Compressors.
Complete fline Equipment of All Kinds.
Agent for BULLOCK DIAMOND DRILLS. j    R. A. C. McNALLY, Rossland, British Columbia.
Catalogue and Details on Application to J        FRANK DARLING, flolson's Bank Building, Vancouver, B.C.
|\|11lf«
Sand for Catalogues
and Specifications.
Gnnlifie & McMillan,
Agents at Rossland.
Vancouver Engineering Works,
Vancouver, B. G.
The Northey
Gas and Gasolene
Engine; cheap,
safe and handy.
Send for booklet.
962 ting at. smfrway
The Brackman & Ker Milling Co., ltd.
VICTORIA, BRITISH COLUMBIA,       Manufacturers of the Celebrated
Facilities Unequalled for Supplying the West with
the Best Quality of
- Grain, Hay or Mill Feed. -
B.*K.
Victoria. Nelson.
Vancouver. Rossland.
New Westminster.      Strathcona.
- A A A A»
ROLLED
OATS.
(Registered.)   P
Unequalled in the World. ►
BANK OF BRITISH NORTH AMERICA.
ESTABLISHED 1836. INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER 1840.
PAID UP CAPITAL, £1,000,000 STERLING. RESERVE FUND,       ■       £350,000 STERLING.
© LONDON, ENG..  OFFICES,     5   GRACECHURCH    STREET, E.C. f|
BRANCHES   IN   BRITISH   COLUMBIA :
VICTORIA,   VANCOUVER,    ROSSLAND,   KASLO,   ASHCROFT,   GREENWOOD.
Also  at the  Gold   Fields —ATLIN  and   DAWSON   CITY
A Savings Bank Department has been established in connection with the Victoria branch.
Highest Prices Paid for Gold Dust and Amalgam. W.  T.  OLIVER,   Mgf.,  VICTORIA     B.  C.The Mining Record.
VOL. VIIL
NOVEMBER, *90J.
NO. U.
BRITISH COLUMBIA
MINING RECORD
Devoted to the Mining: Interests of The Pa cific Northwest.
PUBLISHED  BY
THE BRITISH COLUMBIA RECORD, LIMITED
Advertising Rates on Application.
H. riORTIHER LAHB, flanaging Editor.
Victoria, B. C, Office: Batik of Montreal Chambers.
London Office: 24 Coleman Street, E.C.
Montreal: Gray's Agency.
Denver, Col.: National Advertising Co.
San Francisco: Dake's Agency.
SUBSCRIPTION TERHS:
Canada and the United States, one year
Great Britain and Foreign, one year
- $2.00
- 2.50
All communications relating to the editorial department
of the British Columbia Mining Record to be addressed to
The Editor, B. C. Record, Ltd.,
P. O. Drawer 645, Victoria, B. C.
All communications relating to the business department
of the British Columbia Mining Record to be addressed to
the Business Manager, B. C. Record., Ltd.,
P. O. Drawer 645, Victoria, B. C.
THE MONTH.
THERE are certain metals whose consumption forms
an index of the condition of industry.    The chief
of those are iron and copper.      The great extension in
the uses of copper,   as applied in modern industrial development, have made it a factor almost as determinative   of the condition of industry  as
the iron itself.     One of the most immedi-
copper ate effects of the industrial activity of
market . the last two or three years was a large
increased demand for this metal, an
increased demand which was not met by a commensur-
ately increased supply of the metal, but by a very marked increase in its price and in the difficulty of procuring
it in sufficient quantities for industrial purposes.
Although copper is one of the most widely distributed
of all metals, and one which exists in masses which can
be profitably worked under suitable conditions in many
portions of the world where it is not being worked to
any large extent, it is still quite impossible to bring
about suitable conditions for the opening of new copper
mines in response to any sudden emergency.     The de
velopment of a new copper mine requires not only
immense capital but also a considerable period of time,
and will not be undertaken unless there is good ground
for supposing that the increase in price is not due to
any sudden industrial boom, but may be looked on as a
permanent condition. It is probably for this reason
that the unique conditions prevailing in the copper market during the last year or two have led to less development of new sources of production than might otherwise
have been expected.
If so, prudence has been justified in the outcome.
There is not, by any means, the same demand for copper as there was, and in spite of many contrary opinions
the demand is likely to become less instead of greater,
and to be rather below than above the normal for some
time to come.
As usual, the first symptoms of industrial distress appeared in Germany. There is no country, except possibly the United States, where industry is artificially '
stimulated more highly than in Germany, and it does
not possess the enormous resources which enable the
United States to carry this burden of artificial stimulation with comparative ease. Consequently the first
symptoms of industrial depression, or reaction from an
industrial boom, generally become visible in Germany,
and they have been distinctly noticeable there for some
time past. This fact has had considerable influence
upon the copper situation in the United States, as Germany is the largest buyer of American copper, Great
Britain controlling sources of supply in Spain, Australia
and elsewhere. During igoo the United States exported 160,082 long tons of copper. During the first six
months of the present year the exports were 50,027 tons
and a shortage of 70,000 tons is expected over the year.
As production has not diminished there is naturally a
process of accumulation going on. The excess of supply over demand is being carried by the Amalgamated
Copper company, which for that reason passed its last
dividend and the shares of which have taken a heavy
drop on the Exchange. Through this action of the
Amalgamated the price of copper has been maintained
in New York at the same level as before. The New
York price has been held so much in excess of the price
in Europe that it has actually been profitable to export
copper from Europe to the United States.
This is an entirely unnatural condition of affairs, to
have an exporting country maintaining the price so high
that it is obliged not merely to retain its own surplus
but also to absorb the surplus of other countries. The.
end of it is absolutely certain unless one of two things346
THE MINING RECORD.
happens. Either the European demand must increase
or the American demand increase so much as to use up
the surplus. We confess not to be able to accept the
most roseate views about the European demand. To
say that it would go back to the conditions of 1900
would be to maintain the proposition that the late industrial activity was of a normal character. On the
contrary, the reaction now in progress is likely to carry
industrial activity below the normal for a while. Nor
is the American demand likely to show any marked immediate expansion. It is much more likely to be affected by the same causes of contraction, though to a lesser
degree perhaps, which are now influencing the European
demand.
The Engineering and Mining Journal appears to defend the supposed intention of the Amalgamated company to maintain the price of copper on the ground that
even if it did allow prices to fall consumption would not
be materially increased.    That is not exactly the point,
production would be materially diminished. There is no
trust in the world strong enough to control or limit the
production of copper except by permitting the demand
■to regulate the price.      If, in the face of a supply in
excess of the demand, the Amalgamated Copper company endeavours to maintain the price of copper at from
16 to 17 cents a pound, its success will only last as long
as its money does and that will not be very long.    The
success of a trust in maintaining an artificial price of
any commodity in a particular country is purely and
simply a question of controlling the sources of supply
in that country, and of being protected against outside
competition by means of an import duty.     It is true
that the Amalgamated company controls  between  50
and 60 per cent, of the copper produced in the United
States.    Suppose it limited production in the mines it
was able to control, and at the same time maintained
the price at its present level,  it would only be placing
a bonus upon the production of mines it was unable to
control, and fostering the development of new countries
and new mines to enter into competition with it.      Because then the American price would be looked on as a
permanent institution   until   the Amalgamated Copper
company was  bankrupted,  and a stimulus would be
given to the development of mines which have been left
alone during the boom conditions  of the last year or
two.
No conceivable condition of affairs would be more advantageous, temporarily at least, to British Columbia
than this. The copper production of the Province is at
present only a very small factor in the situation. This
year it is only some three per cent, of the American production. But developed with a permanent market for
copper at its present price provided at the expense of
the Amalgamated Copper company, it would become in
a few years time a very appreciable factor indeed.
It is, however, extremely unlikely that the Amalgamated Copper company will embark on any such Quixotic enterprise. Its immense resources may indeed
be used,  and wisely used,   to steady the market, and
prevent undue fluctuations from purely temporary
causes, but we do not credit that company with any
wild intention of tilting up against the law of supply
and demand in reference to such a commodity as copper. Therefore, the only outlook at present seems to
be a lower range of prices, and we rather think that so
so far as the producer is concerned, that lower range of
prices is already becoming apparent in the contracts for
matte being entered into now.
With our cheap coal, abundance of ore, water-power
and timber, it should be possible to produce copper as
cheaply in British Columbia as anywhere else in the
world, not to mention the fact that most of our ores
contain gold in sufficient quantities to be of material
assistance. Undoubtedly some of our low-grade ores
possess advantages from a smelting point of view which
place them on a level with ores of a higher grade but
more refractory character in other parts. So long as
we are able to produce copper, and lead, and gold, and
silver, as cheaply or more cheaply than other mining
countries, there is no need to be alarmed about the future of the mining industry.
the
noble five
FIASCO.
Mr. James   Dunsmuir's experiences   in   connection
with metal mining in the Province have been singularly
unfortunate.       He has identified himself in  particular
with three enterprises,   the Alberni Consolidated,  the
Fontenoy gold  mine (Camp McKinney) and the Noble
Five silver-lead mine.      The first he abandoned after
spending a large sum   of money in exploitation work,
which was not scientifically conducted ; the second, he
also lost interest in,   although still a
large shareholder : and so far as the
third is concerned foreclosure proceeding have   been   commenced by Mr.
Dunsmuir's instructions with the object of recovering  the money advanced  by him to the
company some  two  or  three years ago  on mortgage.
While doubtless Mr. Dunsmuir's losses in these several
ventures have been heavy, the public also have suffered
severely.    When, in 1899, the Fontenoy company was
floated in Victoria, a number of people were induced to
purchase shares at an unduly high price upon the understanding that Mr. Dunsmuir was backing the undertaking,  and also on the  assumption  that as  he was in a
position to secure the very best professional advice the
property must necessarily be a valuable one.      After a
period during  which the shares had   been persistently
I boomed " little more was heard about the Fontenoy,
until one day shareholders were suddenly apprised that
three judgments had been secured against the company
and a meeting  of shareholders was called to consider
the position.    At this meeting one director represented
the board, but he informed the meeting that he was unaware whether or not he was still qualified to hold such
a position and th'at he preferred, at any rate, to be present   on   that   occasion   in   the capacity of an "irateTHE MINING RECORD.
3-47
shareholder."      Meanwhile,  as was to be expected, no
action was taken to satisfy the creditors or to arrange
for the resumption of operations.     The directors, however, bought up one judgment for a small amount, and
the others have since been liquidated by private individuals.  The company is still presumably in existence, but
it has no office, no secretary, and to all intents and purposes, no directors.   No returns have, to this day, been
officially made, nor has the Company law, in one respect,
been complied with.      The shares, of course, are absolutely worthless. It is common to criticise and condemn
the methods of British management of mines, but could
there possibly be a worse  or  more flagrant instance of
disregard of the interests of shareholders  than here afforded?    The case of the Noble Five is  somewhat different.      Three or four years ago the Noble Five company being in financial difficulties  and hard pressed by
one of the Sandon banks, which went so far as to have
a  liquidator   appointed,   Mr.   Dunsmuir  was induced,
having just previously purchased a large block of shares,
to come to the rescue, and advanced a sum of one hundred and fifty thousand dollars which  not only relieved
the company of its embarassment but afforded funds for
future working.       Since that time the stock has been
more or less cleverly manipulated on several occasions.
Two years ago   in   particular  a report of sensational
character in regard to the development of the property
was unblushingly circulated, which had the effect of advancing the price of the stock to 36c.    This report subsequently   proved to be   entirely   misleading   and   the
shares as rapidly dropped, until in the early months of
this year they were quoted as low as 2c.      The annual
meeting of shareholders was held in March, and a statement submitted showing the position of the company.
At this meeting Mr. Dunsmuir was not present, but one
of the directors,   Mr.   B. J. Perry,   who has acted as a
sort of confidential agent of Mr. Dunsmuir's in connection with all that gentleman's mining  investments and
undertakings,   quite voluntarily gave the shareholders
attending to understand that although  interest on the
mortgage  was considerably in arrears,   Mr. Dunsmuir
had no   intention whatever of foreclosing,  but on the
contrary he had agreed to advance a further sum in order that   the proposed scheme  of development at  the
mine might be carried   out  in  its entirety.     Naturally
this intelligence was most enthusiastically received, and
when later it was officially stated that the outlook at the
property   had materially  improved,   the   shares   were
again freely dealt in, advancing to 10c.      The most recent reports from  the  manager were to the effect that
at no time in the mine's   history was the mine in a better condition and the hope was also held out that, with
the rich ore in sight, not only were the prospects of paying off the indebtedness   good, but that   shareholders
might, evn at no distant date, expect dividend distributions.     It is true that it was at the same time given out
that some little difficulty had   been   experienced with
the owners of the neighbouring mine, the Last Chance,
who claimed one of the ore bodies recently encountered
on the Noble Five, and also that work might be suspended during the winter months on the property in
consequence of inability to cope with the inrush of water in the lower workings, but these reports had little, if
any, influence on the market. Suddenly, however,
without any warning, shares having been sold but the
day before on the Toronto market at the relatively high
price ruling in the early part of October, it became
known that Mr. Dunsmuir had decided to foreclose, and
a writ was issued the following week. The consequent
loss to investors is very considerable and naturally a
great deal of indignation is expressed at Mr. Dunsmuir's precipitate action. Before passing judgment,
however, it is well to consider the facts. Referring
again to the Fontenoy, except that Mr. Dunsmuir is
fortunate or unfortunate enough occupy an exceptionally prominent position in the community, both politically and on account of his great wealth, in consequence
of which the association of his name with an enterprise
of this nature was sufficient to guarantee its solidity
with the investing public, he must be absolved from all
responsibility attaching to the miserable failure of that
worthless concern, and was probably as badly deceived
in the matter as any of his fellow shareholders. But
the course of action followed by Mr. Dunsmuir in his
seemingly disregardful treatment of Noble Five shareholders is certainly worthy of examination. The whole
case hinges on this, whether or not or how far Mr.
Dunsmuir is cognisant of, or responsible for, the actions
of his reputed agent, Mr. B. J. Perry. It is through
Mr. Perry's efforts largely that speculation in this stock
has been encouraged and maintained, and it was Mr.
Perry who allowed shareholders to believe at the meeting last March, that no step such as has occurred in the
way of mortgage foreclosure was contemplated or to be
feared. It is true Mr. Dunsmuir has never personally
confirmed this assurance, but on the other hand he has
not denied it ; and in allbwing the public to believe in
the truth of the assurance made in his name, without
attempting to undeceive them, he was morally bound to
abide by it. If foreclosure proceedings had been instituted last spring before the annual meeting, Mr.
Dunsmuir would have been well within his rights, and
he would have acted as any business man in his place
would have acted in trying to realise upon an unprofitable investment. The interest due was far in arrears
and shareholders had made up their minds to lose the
property and accept their losses with the best grace
possible. Instead of taking the obvious course Mr.
Dunsmuir displayed a quite uncalled-for generosity, and
offered at his own private cost to defray the expenses
of proving definitely the value of the property which,
provided the result was satisfactory, would enable the
public to share with him in the profits of an undertaking where the risk was all his. This arrangement was
either planned in a most philanthropic spirit or it was a
generous impulse ; in the same manner, it would appear,
that the decision to foreclose was either the product of
malevolent instinct, or from  a mean impulse.      In his348
THE MINING RECORD.
proposal to "carry" the Noble Five shareholders Mr.
Dunsmuir assumed a certain self-imposed responsibility,
and it is not creditable to him that he should have failed
to recognise that responsibility. His action in the matter has added to the losses of those who previously invested in the property, for former shareholders having
been led to suppose that so great an improvement has
lately been made in the mine have, in many cases,
bought again heavily in the hope of averaging. The
worst feature, however, is the possible effect of the
Noble Five fiasco on Eastern investors, for as may be
supposed, Mr. Dunsmuir's action is not likely to assist
in restoring confidence among this class in the desirability of mining investment in British Columbia.
The most extraordinary and erratic fluctuations are
taking place at the present time in the local mining
stock market. There is obviously no support being
given to the market by legitimate investors. It appears
to be left entirely at the mercy of more or less professional operators. As soon as a stock shows any buoyant tendency, a rush of selling orders
lack of swamps the market — a striking evi-
official inform- dence of the entire lack of confidence
ation and the existing. For the usual course of the
stock investor is here reversed. When con-
market. ditions are healthy the investor buys
on a rising market, and the higher the
stock goes the less does he feel inclined to lose his interest in it. Suppose an investor purchases a thousand
shares in a mine what he considers a low and attractive
price, say 30. The stock moves upwards to 35 or 40,
and he considers it no worse an investment at 40 than
it was at 30, which is very likely the case. Therefore, he
does not sell. But at present so many people do sell,
that quite independently of the value of the shares or
the improved appearance of the mine, the stock rapidly
falls to the price at which he bought, or even lower.
The consequence is that when the stock again reacts
favourably he also is found among the sellers. Through
this process, which depends directly upon the discredit
which has been attached to many of the mines represented by shares dealt in upon the open market, there
occurs a continual depression in the general level of
prices unwarranted, in some cases, by the position or
outlook of the mines as mines. Such a condition of affairs is injurious to the mining industry as a whole. It
is quite true that mining is extendiug and improving in
the Province, and it may not be an unhealthy sign that
the industry is becoming divorced from joint-stock enterprise of the peculiar kind of which we have had so
many examples in the recent past. But after all joint-
stock enterprise, not merely in mining but in all forms
of industry, is the most powerful known machinery for
the application of capital where capital is needed.
The development of joint-stock enterprise has had incidentally connected with it,   not in British  Columbia
alone, nor more here than anywhere else, a large number of very gross abuses. In Great Britain one law
after another has been passed for the purposes of restricting the abuses connected with company promoting. These stringent measures have not been highly
successful. They have certainly made it harder to promote companies at all, but it is very questionable
whether they have made it harderfor unscrupulous men
to fleece the public once the initial difficulties of promotion were overcome. Legislation of that character
seems merely to restrict joint-stock enterprise without
purifying it. It has certainly developed a large class of
company lawyers whose main business appears to be to
tearch promoters how to defeat the purpose of the law
without contravening the sections of the Companies'
Act. In spite, however, of the abuses connected with
the development of joint-stock enterprise the fact remains the same, that without it the wonderful industrial development which has characterised the latter half
of the 19th century could never have taken place, and
that without it the procuring of the capital to develop a
new country like British Columbia would be infinitely
slower than is necessary. Joint-stock enterprise decentralises the risk of loss and spreads it over a number
of individuals according to the means of each. It is,
therefore, peculiarly adaptable to the development of
mines where the average success is, or ought to be,
high but where the risk of loss in individual cases is
considerable.
It is most important that the operation of mines by
joint-stock companies should not be restricted but encouraged, and in order to accomplish that, it is essential
that the individual shareholder should be protected as
far as it is humanly possible to do so. Theoretically,
the director of a company is the trustee of the shareholders. Practically, he is too often merely an agent
of the promoter, or a tool in the hands of a clique operating on the market, who take advantage of the peculiar knowledge possessed by the board of the affairs of
the company.
When a director gives a private hint to buy or sell the
shares of his company he commits a breach of trust.
He induces an outsider to purchase shares from the person whose trustee he is, on the strength of information
he has acquired through his position as trustee. But
so long as human nature remains unchanged this kind
of breach of trust is likely  to   occur pretty frequently.
From the foregoing it is reasonably clear that the one
protection for the shareholder does not lie in restrictive
law but in enforced publicity. Because the root of the
whole trouble lies in knowledge withheld from, or at
least not procurable by, the ordinary shareholder. The
matter is of vital interest to British Columbia at the
present time, because our mining shares are largely discredited both on the London and on the Eastern markets, and they will remain discredited until the investing
public are supplied with regular authentic and official
information about the output and progress of the mines.
What the investor requires is a periodical return of oremarketed and its gross value. From the annual reports he can form a fairly adequate idea of the amount
of profit in a certain amount of ore of a certain grade.
Given this information, which is always supplied voluntarily by reputable companies, but which should be made
compulsory for all, he has some ground to go on for his
confidence, or want of it, in his investments and is no
longer subject to the panic influences of the moment.
Legislation has been passed for the purpose of acquiring and circulating this information but it remains a
dead letter. Unfortunately there does not exist at the
present time a too cordial understanding between the
mine owners and the Government of the country, and
the former take every opportunity to display their resentment. The reasons for this it is unnecessary to
enter into, nor need we discuss their validity. Whether
that attitude of the mine owners is justifiable or not is
not the question. The feeling exists, and as a consequence continual friction and irritation are engendered,
where harmonious and sympathetic action would greatly conduce to the prosperity of the Province.
The White Pass and Yukon Railway company has
earned profits amounting to ^340,000 during the past
year, which permits of a distribution to the shareholders of 30 per cent, on their invested capital. We should
think this is the most highly profitable railway line in
the world. Naturally a railway company operating into
a placer-mining country must be expected to return
hierher dividends than most railways, because of the risk
of the exhaustion of the deposits taking away its raison
d'etre altogether in the course of a few years. But the
Yukon Territory served by this railway seems assured
of being the scene of active operations for a very long
time to come. In fact it is hard for us to realise that
a time might come when this part of our country would
again be given over to barren solitude. It seems more
likely that without the assured life of the known placer
deposits'being taken into account other, and as yet unknown, districts will be opened up, as well as more
permanent sources of wealth in the shape of quartz and
copper deposits discovered, and that this railway will
continue to serve a country in which the tide of enterprise is always rising and not falling. If that is the
case the White Pass and Yukon Railway company has
more to gain by acting as a colonization railway and
stimulating the development of its territory in the matter of rates, than by grasping at every dollar which
the industry of placer mining can afford to pay. And,
indeed, while it is notorious that much complaint is current in Dawson over the freight rates of the White Pass
and Yukon railway, directors of individual enterprises
dependent on the railway service have generally admitted that they have been met reasonably and fairly by
the officials of the railway company. At the same time
the proposal to construct a second line of railway into
the   Yukon   is   interesting for a   number of reasons,
chiefly, however, as marking the^ confidence felt in the
Yukon Territory as a permanent and abiding centre of
industry. Such a railway would involve a considerable
economic waste. There is no reason why two lines of
railway should be built where one suffices for the traffic. It would be economically simpler to double the
rolling stock on the road-bed already in existence.
This second railway, if built, will be an interesting experiment in the benefits of railway competition. Though
the traffic is sufficiently lucrative to pay 30 per cent, per
annum on one line of railway, it would not be sufficiently
lucrative to pay 15 per cent, on two lines of railway
with the same amount of capital invested. And, if
through their competition their respective dividends are
reduced to 10 per cent, it would not by any means follow that the country would get the benefit of the 10
per cent, of profit eliminated. That would probably be
absorbed in increased working expenses. But. even if
some benefit did accrue to the public, it seems rather
strange that to accomplish this very salutary object an
unnecessary expenditure of some millions of dollars
should require to be made, and the Yukon Territory
burdened with the support of two railways when, so
far as the tonnage of freight is concerned, one is ample.
Referring to the effect of new company law in England, a correspondent writes : "It will no longer be
easy, if possible, to float companies on the old lines.
The new idea is to pay vendors by results and not in
cash. For example, I am informed of a big flotation
where the vendors are receiving their consideration in
what is described as ' Royalty shares.' The vendors take
jQi royalty per ounce, and the promoters ten shillings—
in all £1.10 per oz. In spite of the bad times it is expected that the issue will be a success and that the public will come in and subscribe the whole working capital
asked. They will naturally argue that this sort of flotation can be no ' wild cat,' and as no promoting money
is paid and the vendors take their profits in royalties,
both vendors and promoters must have confidence in
the value of the property. As a matter of fact this new
scheme is by no means a bad one for the vendors and
promoters. They form this royalty into Royalty shares
of one shilling each and get a quotation on the Stock
Exchange and there will be dealings in them long before the property is on a producing basis." The same
correspondent remarking on the prospects of interesting British capital in Western Canadian mining continues : "The idea (above outlined) is a new one, at
least to the British public, and will, I think, prove popular and to the advantage both of shareholders, promoters and vendors. The difficulty, of course, is to get
vendors to accept the terms. In B. C, I understand,
everyone wants cash, and if I mistake not this is what
they will find very difficult to get out of the British public in the future. But as I pointed out, under the system
(or trick if you like to call it so) of Royalty shares quot-350
THE MINING RECORD
ed and dealt with on. the market, they can realise their
holdings long before the mine is paying a cent. The
sale or dealing in the Royalty shares only affect speculators and will not affect the shareholders one way or
another."
While doubtless the new Royalty system so interestingly described by our correspondent is, in several respects, a vast improvement over old promoting methods,
it is clear that it is just as open to abuse, but the truth
of the well-worn saying that you cannot make men
moral by Act of Parliament has been long ere this sufficiently demonstrated. Again, particularly in the case
of low-grade mines, any such fixed charge as thirty
shillings per ounce of gold recovered would be an
almost impossible burden, but of course, our correspondent does not intend to imply that this proportion
is to form an arbitrary standard. A reasonable percentage of net profit earnings set aside to represent
royalty to promoters and vendors would be obviously
the only equitable basis upon which such an arrangement could be effected if the interests of shareholders
are to be at all considered.
The statement made by Mr. Miner, president of the
Granby Mining Smelting and Power Co., the other day
that the improvements at the Granby smelter, now under construction, are being paid for entirely out of the
profits of the last and this year's operations is extremely
satisfactory. This company has not been very forward
in bringing out a balance sheet and report, but, on the
contrary, the main subscribers to the shares are the original subscribers, when the various companies now
consolidated were promoted, and if they are satisfied
the public has not any very serious reason of complaint.
This company's operations have for some reason or another always been subjected to more than the ordinary
amount of criticism, but in looking back over its history
it is difficult to see where greater economy of organization or efficiency of working could have been attained.
The ore in the Knob Hill and Ironsides is exceedingly
low grade. It has always been felt that its successful
treatment was in the nature of an experiment. But,
certainly, if it had not been successful there would have
been something very far out in the original calculations
of its nature and value. It has, apparently on the contrary, proved fully as amenable to treatment as was expected, and the various economics originated in connection with the mine and smelter have proved most
efficient and valuable. According to Mr. Miner the cost
of smelting has already been reduced to $1.90 a ton and
the increase in the plant, now being paid for out of profits, is expected not merely to double the tonnage but
to still further decrease the cost of treatment per ton.
Under these circumstances there is fairly good authority for the assertion that the enterprise is a proved
success. This of course does not touch the question of
the capitalisation of the company which, if it were con
sidered as anything but a mere conventional figure, is
excessively high. It must be years yet, at the best, before the company can hope to pay such dividends on a
capital of $15,000,000, not to mention $20,000,000, as
would justify the buying and selling of the shares at
par. In the meantime a report and balance sheet giving the average value per ton of the ore treated, (for
this is a fact that has never been disclosed by the management), will be awaited with great interest and, if
satisfactory, will set finally at rest the fears of the most
sceptical.
Reports which have the hall mark of authenticity, so
far as they go, give intelligence of the discovery of virgin placer ground in the Cariboo district at the head
waters of the Horsefly river. It is, of course, impossible to hazard a guess at the present time whether the
creeks discovered will prove at all important or extensive, and it is unlikely that any competent opinion can
be risked before the middle of next summer. But at the
same time it is permissible to hope that placer ground
of real importance has been found. There never was a
territory, except the land of Ophir, in which there has
been a longer and more painful hiatus between the
glories of its placer days and the more settled and permanent prosperity brought about by modern methods
of gold mining, than the Cariboo district. It is only
now beginning to be realised what immense opportunities lie in its beds of gravel when hydraulic power has
been brought to bear on them. Even now the progress
made is slow and halting. An important discovery of
virgin soil would change all that. It would bring population in, and the miner with his pan and rocker would
be followed by the capitalist with his flume and monitor.
Cariboo would again become a busy centre of industry,
and the conditions of development are so changed from
the early days that that industry would not be confined
to one particular locality but would spread and ramify
over all the gold-producing.area. The effect also upon
the general business interests of the Province would be
most satisfactory. This is, perhaps, quite a superstructure to build upon the reports we have now to go
upon. But it is better to have our eyes fixed upon the
smallest apparent opening in our great unexplored territory, and to estimate its possibilities, carefully remembering that they are only possibilities which may never
be realised, than to awake too late to what was possible
to take full advantage of what has become actual.
Platinum is now a more valuable metal than gold, being quoted at $21 an ounce. In 1899 it was quoted at
about $15, in 1900 in April it rose to $18.20, and has
again advanced this year. An agitation has been inaugurated in Germany to have platinum restricted by
agreement to those uses only for which it is an absolute
necessity, as at present the demand is greater than theTHE MINING RECORD.
351
supply. We have always been of opinion that this was
the effect produced by a rise in price, and not only so,
but that a rise in price was the most effectual, in fact
the only effectual, method of so restricting the use of
any article. The rise in price is likely not merely to
restrict the use but also to bring out a larger supply, so
adjusting the balance. Whereas, an attempt by agreement to limit the demand, if it did have any effect, which
is most improbable, without increasing the price, would
occasion no stimulus to the search for an increased supply of the metal. In the various articles on the subject
we have seen lately what we should consider one of the
chief dangers of an excessive rise in price has not been
hinted at. It is, that platinum, having become the
most valuable metal, except one or two so rare as to
almost be unknown, except to science, may be rushed
upon as a means of personal adornment. It is certain
that the dearer it became, the more it would be prized
for this purpose. It is fortunately an ugly metal. But
then, aesthetically, gold is not so beautiful as copper in
its various alloys particularly. Yet on account of its
rarity and value large quantities are consumed every
year in all kinds of jewelry. A similar sentiment inspired
by its rarity towards platinum would have a serious
effect upon its price and availability for industrial
purposes.
A very remarkable testimony to the Canadian administration of the Yukon Territory is published in the
columns of the Spokesman Review of Spokane, Wash.,
U. S. A. We make no apology for publishing it
in  full :
" For several years after the discovery of gold in the Klondike, there
were bitter complaints by the Americans in that country over the injustice dealt out by Canadian officials, and it was commonly asserted by
those having grievances that the administration of affairs would have
been quite different had the rich placers been discovered on the American side.
" Since that early period of discontent in the Klondike, rich placers
have been discovered on the American side and their uncovering was
followed by a rush that in numbers and excitement nearly equalled the
stampede to Dawson. The Americans have had an opportunity to show
what they could do in properly administering a remote mining camp,
and it must be confessed that a comparison of the methods of regulating
mining, maintaining the law and providing the security to life and property is decidedly to the advantage of the British.
""In two years there has been as much crime and lawlessness at
Nome as there has been at Dawson since its founding, five years ago.
In the American camp there has been unprecedented disrespect shown
the rights of property. It is two years' story of claim jumping, dispossession by force and interminable disputes over boundary lints. A
camp, which, under British jurisdiction, would probably have been comparatively free from crime and disorder, with claim owners working
peacefully and recording a large output of treasure, has, under American jurisdiction, been plunged into endless litigation that has paralyzed
the energies of the district, tied up its properties, and made it a community of idlers, brawlers and discontents.
" Justice, according to all accounts, has been administered in a fashion most lame. Mining rights have been abridged or destroyed through
the agency of unnecessaryTeceiverships, projected work has been abandoned through fear that a disclosure of riches might result in a transfer
of the property from the owners to the Court. Judicial scandals have
furnished the principal topic of conversation for a year, and the President of the United States is now petitioned by members of the Nome
bar to remove the Federal judge on the ground that he is weak and
vacillating and dilatory, weak and partial, negligent, careless and absolutely incompetent.
" This is a most unhappy record for a camp that is indisputably rich
and which at one time was thought to be so full of promise. Its development has been hampered by unfortunate circumstances, the most
striking of which appears to have been that lack of orderly and prompt
administration of affairs which obtained at Dawson during the early
years of its history.
" The difficulties at Nome may be overcome and the camp will
thrive, but in the meantime it may be fitting to abstain from criticisms
of methods in mining camps across the line."
The appointment of Dr. Haanel by the Dominion
Government as head of a mining bureau at Ottawa, is
part of measures being taken to erect the mines branch
of the Department of the Interior into a practical and
useful part of the public service. For several years Dr.
Haanel was professor of geology and mineralogy at Victoria college, Cobourg, and for the last eleven years has
occupied the same position at Syracuse university. He
was commissioned by Mr. Sifton to open the Assay
office at Vancouver, and succeeded by incredible exertions in having it installed and in operation within three
weeks time.
As quoted in the Toronto Globe, Dr. Haanel may be
presumed to recognise the peculiarity of the present arrangement by which Yukon gold is assayed and paid
for in Vancouver and Victoria and then shipped to Seattle just the same as before:—" My idea " he said
"would be for the Government to purchase all the
Yukon gold. Let them open an office, properly equipped, where the gold could be received and weighed and
then exchanged for currency. It is better to keep the
gold in the country than let it go to the other side. We
shall need it for the Canadian mint."
Mr. A.. B. W. Hodges, superintendent of the Granby
smelter writes to the Mining Record as follows :
" I regret to say that on account of the machinists strike
in the East our arrangements for adding to the capacity of our works have been seriously interfered with, and
from present indications it will be impossible to complete the proposed improvements before the New Year.
Of course, you will understand that we are adding two
more copper-matting furnaces which, when completed,
will make four and will give us a smelting capacity of
1,300 tons per day. We have also increased our sampling and crushing capacity so that the combined output
will be 2,000 tons per day if required. We are also putting in a converter plant to treat from 100 to 150 tons
of matte per day and with our water-power we feel that
we can treat matte cheaper than anyone in this country
and we contemplate making contracts and treating here
most of the output of copper matte made in B. C. and
from other outside sources."
The abstract of the report  of the Alaska-Treadwell
Gold Mining  company which  we  publish  in  another352
THE MINING RECORD.
column, is a remarkable testimony to the results which
may be achieved by the economical mining and treatment of low-grade ore. But it should not be forgotten
that the continued success of this company depends entirely on the fact that it has practically no exploratory
work to do to develop the enormous tonnage which it
handles annually. In any ordinary lode mine the dead
work necessary to produce such a tonnage would more
than eat up the profit secured from a grade of ore so
low as that profitably mined at the Treadwell. It is
therefore as well not to apply to the figures of the
Treadwell balance sheet to mines where the same or
similar conditions of ore supply do not prevail.
THE MINING OUTLOOK IN LONDON.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
BUSINESS in the London mining market has for a
long time past been very unsatisfactory, being
chiefly limited to West Africans, where the excitement has at times been intense. Before West Africans
came on the scene there were two principal markets.
Kaffirs and West Australians, and it was at one time
hoped that British Columbia would make a good third.
But this was not to be, and West Africans took that
position instead, British Columbians being quite out of
favour now-a-days, and likely to remain so apparently.
The public have had such a bitter lesson in connection
with the Province that they are likely to remain shy for
a long time to come. The collapse of the Globe and the
B. A. C., and the scandals which have marked the course
of the West Australian market from its inauguration,
shocked the public, and Westralians are only slowly recovering from the effect of those disgraceful episodes.
Unfortunately there is a prospect of one of the worst of
them being reopened, for at the end of this month a
creditors' petition (backed by all the strength of the
Stock Exchange) is down for hearing for taking the
London & Globe Finance Corporation out of the hands
of the voluntary liquidator, and having the winding-up
completed by the Court itself. Then there is the big
fight in prospect in which the much discussed " Lake
View Syndicate "— whose defection, Whitaker Wright
alleges, was the sole cause of the collapse of the Globe
and B. A. C. — is being pursued for damages, and in
connection with which lively times are expected. In
fact there is prospect of a whole series of big fights
ahead ; and it is perhaps not surprising in the circumstances that neither the West Australian market nor
shareholders in West Australian companies feel very
anxious to increase their investments and interests in
the colony until some of the squabbles have been settled
and the position is somewhat clearer. In South Africa
the war drags on and Lord Kitchener's proclamation
which expired on September 15, was not only ineffective, but was followed by a series of fresh reverses to
the British troops. Of course we all know that there
can but be one end to it all, but to achieve it is taxing
all the patience and resources of the Empire, and there
has been growing up a feeling of dissatisfaction with
the government, which has even been expressed somewhat in such leading supporters of the present Executive as the Times, Standard, Globe, Pall Mall Gazette,
etc. Rumour has it that Lord Kitchener had come to
logger-heads with the Minister of War, and was about
to resign ; and although this was contradicted, there
seems to be little doubt that there is something wrong
in the conduct of the war. It is felt that more drastic
measures should be taken, and it is possible that before
these lines are in type the cabinet will have been compelled by the growing force of an adverse public opinion
in this country to adopt those harsher measures which
it is felt would be kinder in the long run. But, of course,
such a state of affairs is not conducive to increased
business in the mining market, as all the while the conflict lasts dividends are absent, and the burden which
the industry will have in large part to be responsible for
is growing at an alarming pace. So much so, indeed,
that this prospective taxation has, for some time, exercised the minds of investors to a painful extent. The
West African market has had one bad time at least already, but at the moment there is no immediate prospect of a crisis in this direction despite the enormous
amount of capital which has been raised to carry on
mining operations in the Gold Coast colony, and a very
large proportion of which will certainly have to be written off as a dead loss to the investor. As a matter of
fact many of these West African companies are pure
gambling counters, and their promoters have but a shred
of belief in their ultimate success. But West Africa
came at a time when there was no other opening for the
worst class of promoter, and it did as well as West
Australia, or British Columbia. The consequence is
that a mass of rubbish has been forced on to the public
—whether any but a small proportion of this paper has
yet been digested remains to be seen. A small proportion of these West African companies may pay, but recent bore-hole tests have caused some disappointment,
and there is not the slightest doubt that the section is
simply an inverted pyramid and will, sooner or later,
cause trouble to the whole market. And then this
month we have had an awful smash in copper and copper shares. The developments in connection with the
Amalgamated Copper Co., of the United States, caused
a very sensational fall in the price of G. M. Bs., and
the reductions in the dividends of the Amalgamated,
the Anaconda, and now the Rio Tinto has been punctuated by a corresponding depression in the prices ofall
copper shares.   Rio Tintos were, at one time this week,
as low as 45^,
and although the Tinto dividend was
rather better than the market had hoped for, the whole
section has been weak in the extreme, Paris having
been realising its holding of copper shares in a state of
semi-panic. In the British Columbian section Le Rois
have been better, and it was stated that the Globe liquidators had disposed of the whole of their holding of Le
Roi No. 2, to strong city groups, but there can be little
relief in this section until the legal questions at present
in abeyance have been fought out, and these may take
months to resolve. Meetings have been held during
the month of the New Goldfields and the Snowshoe
companies, while another new director has been added
to the Le Roi board to make up for the absence in B. C.
of Mr. Frecheville, who should by this time be in
Rossland.
It will be seen that the mining outlook is not by any
means a cheerful one, and although, no doubt, should
the war be brought to an early conclusion—and at present the Boers seem as determined as ever to prolong
the struggle — there would be an improvement which
would benefit all sections, pending this much-desired
event the market will probably drag along in much the
same fashion as it has done during the past two years.
There is at present, certainly, little to go for from the
investors point of view, and the outlook in the mining
market at this particular time is the very reverse of
cheerful.THE MINING RECORD.
353
THE MINERAL RESOURCES
ISLAND.*
OF VANCOUVER
c
By W. M. Brewer, M. I. M. E.
ONSIDERED geologically in a general way, Vancouver Island is made up as follows : The coal
measures through the northern and northeastern
portions, with occasional masses of igneous rocks as
intrusives, as for instance around Nanaimo, Cameron
and Horn lakes ; igneous rocks and a belt of semi-crystalline graphitic slate through the southern, southeastern and southwestern portions, with a narrow fringe of
sandstones and conglomerates forming a portion of the
southwestern coast line ; igneous rocks and crystalline
limestones through the western portion.
The geology of the greater portion of the interior of
the island can only be guessed at because of the lack of
usually fully crystalline, prevail to the coast line. This
condition is demonstrated by travelling down the Alberni canal to the Pacific ocean at the entrance to Barclay
sound. From these premises the conclusion is apparently warranted that to the northwest the same geological conditions exist, but in addition there is the fact
that around Comox as well as Hardy bay on the east
coast, coal of commercial value occurs, also near the
head of Quatsino sound, where the distance from the
east coast to the head of the sound is only about ten
miles. Along the west coast and as far into the interior
as prospectors have explored, igneous rocks with the
crystalline limestone (often excellent marble) are the
prevailing country rocks.
Consequently from the present knowledge of the conditions of Vancouver Island, the assertion is warranted
in a general way, that so far as its geology and mineral
Tfl
IS*
&3
fJm
j&m
Wharves at Nanaimo from which the Coal is Shippi
.trails, the heavy timber and the luxuriant growth of sal-
lal and other underbrush which has rendered exploration or prospecting so extremely difficult that but very
few men have ever attempted the task. The stage road
from Nanaimo to Alberni offers a good opportunity to
study the geology of that portion lying between Na-
noose bay on the east coast and the head of Alberni
canal on the west. Roughly speaking, sandstones and
conglomerates of the coal measures occur until Cam-
eron lake is reached ; there igneous rocks are encountered, apparently belonging to the same class as make
up the southern portion of the island, especially in the
vicinity of Victoria ; between the lake and Alberni another comparatively narrow belt of conglomerates and
sandstone occurs, but about seven miles from the town
these give place to igneous rocks which, with limestone,
* Abstract from article published in the "Victoria Times Royal
Souvenir Number," and reproduced by special arrangement with the
proprietors.
resources are concerned, the former is made up of igneous rocks in the extreme southern portion ; a belt of
semi-crystalline slates traversing the island, northerly
from these igneous rocks, from the neighbourhood of
Saanich peninsula, on the southeast coast, to San Juan
harbor on the southwest coast ; while to the northwest
from these slates the island is divided into two distinct
geological divisions, the sandstones, conglomerates and
other sedimentary rocks, forming the eastern portion,
with crystalline limestone and intrusive dykes of igneous rocks forming the western portion, except at some
points along the west coast line where narrow strips of
sedimentary rocks still occur, having apparently escaped destruction from the immense work of erosion which
has been going on for ages. The mineral resources embrace the coal on the eastern side of the island, together with copper ores carrying low gold and silver values,
together with occasional occurrences of gold-bearing
quartz and immense "deposits of magnetic iron ore, occur throughout the western and southeastern portions.354
THE MINING RECORD.
The island, when considered in detail and with regard
to its mining divisions, is found to embrace all of the
Victoria, Alberni and West Coast divisions, as well as
a large portion of the Nanaimo division.
VICTORIA  DISTRICT VICTORIA   MINING  DIVISION.
" Commencing at a point in Portier's Pass, between
Valdes and Galiano islands, thence southwesterly, passing to south of Kuper island to the northern boundary
of the Chemainus land recording division ; thence west
along such northern boundary to a point where it intersects the height of land separating the drainage area of
Cowichan lake from the drainage area of Nanaimo river ; thence northwesterly along such height of land to
a point where it joins the height of land separating the
drainage area of the Nitinat river and lake on east from
drainagfe area of those streams flowing: into Alberni can-
followed by the location of a large number of mineral
claims in that immediate neighborhood, as well as in
the Sooke mountains, and on Mount Sicker, some 30
miles north from Goldstream.
The Sooke mountains are formed from the uplifting
of the semi-crystalline slates. These slates have much
the appearance of metamorphosed Cambrian shales, and
carry quite an appreciable percentage of graphite. The
strata have been tilted from their horizontal position to
nearly vertical, either from lateral pressure or from the
upheaval-of the intrusive igneous dykes, or both. The
strike of these slates is northwesterly. Interfoliated
conformably with line of strike are numerous lenses of
quartz ; usually narrow and quite limited in length.
This quartz is generally gold bearing, and evidently
was the source of the placer gold of Leach and Sooke
rivers, the waters of which have cut channels through
the mountains, and crosscut the formation.
Head.Works at„the New Vancouver Coal Company's Colliery.
al and Barclay sound on west; thence southwesterly
along such height of land to the Pacific ocean ; thence
by Straits of Juan de Fuca, Haro Straits, Gulf of
Georgia, to point of commencement."
Prospecting in this territory began as early as i860,
when placer gold was discovered in the Leach and
Sooke rivers. Leachtown, a typical mining camp, was
built and the population is reported as at one time having reached several hundreds. The yield of placer gold
was satisfactory for some years, but when worked out,
as no gold-bearing quartz of suffiicent grade and extent was discovered, prospecting was abandoned and it
was not until about 1896 or 1897 that prospectors revisited this section of the island and resumed their explorations. The discovery of a heavy iron capping,
below which was found high grade chalcopyrite ore on
Skirt mountain, at Goldstream, aBout ten miles from
Victoria, gave the incentive to the prospector and was
Owing to the auriferous character of the quartz lenses quite a number of mineral claims were located some
years back, but none of them have developed into mines
although on some much work has been done.
MOUNT   SKIRT.
Mount Skirt is situated on the southern flank of the
belt of slate, and apparently belongs to the same formation ; but the rocks, which are schistose, have been
very much more metamorphosed. The ore body on the
Phair-Lubbe group of mineral claims has every appearance of filling a series of lenticular fissures. The general line of strike is approximately conformable to that
of the country rock, but through faulting the continuity of these fissures has been disturbed and consequently the one ore body appears from a cursory examination to be really three distinct bodies.
Since operations were commenced  on   this group ofTHE MINING RECORD.
355
claims, it is said about $25,000 have been expended in
development work. During 1900 this property entered
the list of shippers, the ore being hauled to the Esquimalt & Nanaimo railway, about ij^ miles distant, and
thence to Victoria and by steamer to the Tacoma smelter. The ore body averages about three feet in thickness, and the shoots of pay ore vary in length. The ore
is a chalcopyrite of good grade.
MOUNT   SICKER.
At Mount Sicker the mineralised zone appears to be
much more extensive than at Mount Skirt. The most
important working propositions, the Lenora and Tyee,
are situated about six miles by wagon road from Westholme station on the E. & N. railway to Victoria, and
from there by steamer. But during the early spring of
1900 a tram track was laid from near Westholme station to within about three miles distance from the mine.
The shipments, under these conditions, were increased
to about 30 tons a day, and the railway haul was short-
fissuring process has been so violent that the lenses of
ore sometimes reach a thickness of thirty feet or more,
as at the Lenora, but at others are narrow, and of limited extent longitudinally.
The Tyee mine, which adjoins the Lenora on the east,
has been equipped during 1900 with machinery, including hoisting, pumping and compressing plants.
The underground workings on both the Lenora and
Tyee mines are being prosecuted with vigor. The former, since the completion of the railroad, has been shipping about 60 tons of ore daily. The policy of the management of the latter is to develop and block out ore in
sight with a view to erecting their own smelter on some
site in the neighbourhood.
' Development work has been prosecuted on the following mineral claims located in the vicinity of the Lenora and Tyee : Seattle, Copper Canyon, Queen Bee
and Lord Roberts. Assessment work has been done
on several situated between Maple bay, on the east
coast of Vancouver Island, and Mount Brenton, to the
New Vancouver Coal Co's Head Works and Shipping Wharves, Nanaimo.
ened to Oyster Bay or Ladysmith, where the ore wa *
reshipped to Tacoma by steamer. During the summer
of 1900 a railway was built direct from the mine to connect with the E. & N. railway, consequently at the present time the freight charges on this ore are very materially reduced from those on the earlier shipments.
The altitude of the summit of Mount Sicker above sea
level is about 2,000 feet. The country rock is princi-
' pally schist, and would probably be cast as a senate if
microscopically examined. It apparently contains considerable chlorite and feldspar. The line of strike of
this belt of schist is nearly due magnetic east, and the
strike of the ore bodies conforms with that of the schist.
The structure of the ore bodies in this vicinity is similar to that of the large majority on Vancouver Island,
which have come under the writer's observation, and
should be classed as lenticular. The ore apparently falls
fissures produced when the rocks were folded and contorted. The present cleavage planes of the schists on
Mount Sicker are not the original cleavage planes of the
formation. %4Mr. S
At points along the line  of strike of the schists the
west of Mount Sicker. The same mineralised zone appears to extend between these points, but to what further distance west is unknown.
At the present time the Mount Sicker camp is the
most active metalliferous mining camp on the island.
A townsite has been surveyed and platted, and every
indication points toward its building up into a permanent, prosperous and progressive town.
A short distance northerly from Mount Sicker the
change in formation from the metamorphic or crystalline to the unaltered sedimentary rocks and coal measures occurs.
SAN JUAN.
The western portion of the Victoria Mining Division
has not been as thoroughly prospected as has the eastern. The San Juan and Gordon rivers have been explored for considerable distances above their mouths,
and several mineral claims located. Most of the ore
bodies so far discovered are composed of immense deposits of high-grade magnetite, while others are bodies
of pyrrhotite carrying some  copper  and gold values.These last mentioned have been found in semi-crystalline slate country rock, very similar to that which makes
up the Sooke mountains. The magnetite occurs on the
Gordon river near San Juan, usually with limestone
(fully crystalline) on one wall, and a basic igneous rock
on the other wall.
In addition to the ore bodies found on the west coast
in this mining division, several deposits of black sand
(auriferous) have been discovered at points where beaches occur. These are all limited in extent. There is no
doubt that the source of the gold is the Sooke mountains, that range being composed of the semi-crystalline
graphitic slate with intercalations of quartz.
As a field for the prospector,   in   view of the results
11s
&.m
which have been obtained at Mounts Skirt and Sicker,
and the possibilities which present themselves from the
surface showings in other portions of this mining division, it is the opinion of the writer that this portion of
Vancouver Island should be one of the most promising
in the Province. The great, and one may say, the only
drawback, is the difficulty of travelling in the interior,
where a man has to pack his supplies on his back and
fight his way through sallal, devil's clubs, fallen timber
and underbrush. The total shipments for 1900 reached
14,346 tons of ore, valued at $450,914. This output includes shipments from other districts on Vancouver and
Texada Islands.
\°<£?&THE MINING RECORD.
35
ALBERNI  MINING   DIVISION.
" Commencing at Amphitrite Point ; thence northerly along height of land separating drainage area of
those streams emptying into the Pacific ocean north of
such point, from the drainage area of those streams
emptying into Barclay sound, following such height of
land to a point where such height of land joins the
height of land separating drainage area of streams emptying into Pacific ocean on the west, from drainage area
of streams emptying into the Straits of
Georgia on the east; thence southerly
along such height of land to a point
where it joins the height of land separating the drainage area of Nitinat
river and lake on the east from drainage area of those streams flowing into
Alberni canal and Barclay sound on the
west; thence southwesterly along such
height of land to Pacific ocean, including coast islands, to Amphitrite Point
and point  of commencement."
Lode mining was commenced in this
division at an earlier date than anywhere else on Vancouver Island. Prospectors took advantage of the Alberni
canal, which enabled them to explore
the mountains contiguous to the shore
line. China and Granite creeks, which
empty into the canal, had been prospected some years previous to lode
mining prospecting, and placer gold
mined from the beds and banks. This fact led to the
installation of hydraulic plants and a more systematic
exploration for gold-bearing quartz. The former are
idle to-day, in fact appear to have been failures from
the  start, but as a result of the latter a large number of
Owing to various causes except at the Golden Eagle,
situated at the head of China creek, but little activity
has been shown around this section of the camp of late,
although many promising prospects occur.
The geological conditions prevailing on Mineral Hill
and in the vicinity of Granite creek appear to be peculiar to that immediate section, at least as far as known
at present, because no discoveries of similar character
of ore have been reported from the west side of the can-
Head Works at Nanatmo.
claims were located on Mineral Hill, at the head of
China creek, and the adjoining mountains as well as on
the mountains near the head of Granite creek.
Outcroppings of gold-bearing quartz veins indicated
the occurrence of free-milling gold ore, and led to the
building of small stamp mills and the expenditure of
considerable money in an   attempt to  develop mines.
Coal Shipment Wharf at Protection Island.
al in this mining division. There, so far as exposed,
all the ore bodies are either magnetite, chalcopyrite or
pyrrhotite, carrying copper and low-grade values.
The most important of the chalcopyrite bodies are
those located in a zone about fourteen miles below the
town of Alberni. The full extent of
this zone in width is hardly known, but
ore bodies of the same character have
been exposed at intervals, northeast
and southwest, for a distance of about
five miles. At that point Uchucklesit
harbor causes a break in the zone,
but southwest of that lies Copper
Island in Barclay sound, on which occur very extensive deposits of magnetite, while on the opposite side of
the sound or southeast from Copper
Island occur the ore bodies on the
Sarita river, composed of magnetite
and pyrrhotite.
Northwesterly from Copper Island,
a few miles distant, occur vast bodies
of magnetite, known as the Sechart
group. Consequently this mineral
zone may be considered as extending
in width from Nahmint bay, about
twelve miles below the head of Alberni
canal, to the coast line at the -entrance
to Barclay sound, a distance of about
twelve miles as the crow flies. In
length the zone apparently extends to
the northwestern extremity of Vancouver Island. In area this mineral belt
is the most extensive on the island, but up to the present time the results attained from working have not
reached the importance of the camps at Mounts Sicker
and Skirt combined.
The mineral claims situated in the Alberni Mining
Division and located on this particular zone, on which
the most extensive development has  been performed,358
THE MINING RECORD.
are the Three Jays, Uncle Sam, Mountain Treasure,
Lake Shore, Belvidere, Blue Bells and Great Expectations.
On the Three Jays it is claimed that there are about
75,000 tons of ore in sight, as exposed by the drifts and
crosscuts on the three levels opened. Sample shipments
aggregating about three hundred tons were made from
this property in 1899, since which cime the management
has been actively engaged in developing ore in sight,
with a view to ascertaining the capacity of the mine
previous to installing an aerial tramway, ore bins and a
permanent mining plant. The management of this property, which is owned by the Nahmint Mining Company, has shown the utmost confidence in the district,
having  expended about   $100,000  in   developing   the
menced in the winter of 1899 and 1900. The outcrop-
pings were so extensive and of such high grade that a
New York syndicate purchased the property, organized
the Monitor Mining Company, and started work on an
extensive scale. During the year a camp of substantial
cabins has been built, a wharf, ore bins and an aerial
tramway constructed and about 1,100 tons of ore
shipped.
The ore body apparently fills a fissure in an igneous
rock. Crystalline limestone is also closely associated
with the ore body near the surface, but whether deeper
work will determine the ore body to be a contact vein
or deposit between limestone and igneous rock, instead
of filling a fissure, remains to be proven. The structural geology of this section of the district is quite com-
wti'llE
Surface Works, Extension Colliery.
Three Jays to its present condition. The ore is a good
grade of chalcopyrite, with occasional occurrences of
native copper. The smelting returns show an average
of about 11 per cent, copper, with low gold and silver
values.
The installations of an aerial tramway about 5,000
feet in length, compressor plant and extension to wharf,
including ore bins, has been recently completed. A
crosscut tunnel have also been started 425 feet below the
lowest workings and about 700 feet below the apex of
the outcroppings.
The country rock is crystalline limestone, diorite and
a greyish color feldspathic rock, having a porphyritic
structure. The ore is usually found either at the contact
of the limestone and feldspathic rock, or else at the contact of the latter rock and diorite.
Systematic development of the Uncle Sam was com
plicated and very difficult to study, because of the heavy
covering of moss and material from slides which hides
the geology on the surface.
The limestone is most capricious in its occurrence,
sometimes occupying quite extensive areas, then again
appearing as a narrow seam as though filling a fissure
in an igneous dyke, or as filling the space between two
dykes, and at one point on the Three Jays it has the
shape of a wedge with the thin edge downwards. On
the Uncle Sam this rock has maintained the same capricious characteristics, thereby rendering it extremely
difficult to classify the ore body.
About $5,000 was expended on the Lake Shore group
of claims, which are situated on the east shore of Anderson lake. The outcroppings of pyrrhotite are extremely persistent, and unlike many other outcrops on Vancouver Island can be traced a long distance.THE MINING RECORD.
359
Four parallel ore bodies occur, the first at the contact
between limestone and diorite, the second filling a fissure in the diorite, the third apparently as a contact between amphibolyte and diorite, with which is associated
large quantities of epidote, and the fourth in this latter
rock, with no well-defined walls but apparently as a deposit caused by replacement. No work has been done
on the last named, and it is impossible to classify the
occurrence from the surface showings. More development .may determine that all these bodies, which appear
as distinct and separate at present, are really only one
deposit, filling a wide zone between a crystalline lime-
copper entirely disappeared, leaving the iron ore practically free from all impurities.
Satisfactory results from the work of 1901 with regard to these deposits of magnetite mean inestimable
benefits to Vancouver Island, and consequently to Victoria as its metropolis. Apparently commercial reasons
only have been retarding the successful development of
these important mineral resources, but the members of
the syndicate working last year claim to have these
causes removed and to be prepared to develop an iron
and steel industry on the Pacific coast extensively.
stone footwall and amphibolyte hanging  wall.      The        west coast Vancouver island mining district.
rock, which is designated as diorite may prove, if microscopically examined, to be merely an alternation of the
other igneous rock.
I Commencing at Amphitrite Point, thence northerly
along height of land separating drainage area of those
streams emptying into Pacific ocean north of such point
Electric Locomotive at Mouth of Tunnel, Extension Colliery.
Work was suspended on this property July 1st, 1900,
because the installation of a pumping and hoisting plant
was considered necessary in order to prospect at deeper
levels.
During 1900 considerable interest was aroused in the
immense deposits of high-grade magnetite occurring on
the Sarita river, Copper Island, and in the vicinity of
Sechart. A syndicate from Pittsburg has bonded these
properties on a royalty basis. So far as the grade of
this iron ore is concerned, the analyses show that the
content of metallic iron ranges from 58 per cent, to 62
per cent., and that the phosphorus is usually so low as
to bring the ore within the Bessemer limit.
The fact that most of this ore carries a low percentage of copper may prove detrimental to the manufacture of iron and steel, but deep work on the same character of ore body on Texada Island has shown that the
from drainage area of those streams emptying into Barclay sound, following such height of land to a point
where it joins the height of land separating drainage
area of those streams emptying into Pacific ocean on
the west, from drainage area of those streams emptying
into the Straits of Georgia on the east; thence northwesterly along such divide to Cape Scott ; thence by
Pacific ocean, including all coast islands, to point of
commencement."
Within a few miles of Amphitrite Point, by following
the coast line, Wreck Bay is reached. It is there that
during 1900 the first commercially successful attempt
was made to save the gold occurring in the black sands
on the beach. About $12,000 is reported as having been
saved from a portion of one claim.
The discovery that gold occurred in this black sand
in paying quantities  was  made during the  summer of360
THE MINING RECORD.
1899, but owing to the difficulty of saving the particles
but little was accomplished during that year. In the
spring of 1900 Messrs. Sutton and Graham made a contract to work the sands on the basis of a royalty. They
constructed a long, expensive flume, and after commencing work in a systematic manner found that the
sand carried much more gold than had been apparent
from the prospecting done previously. The area of
beach comprises some ten or twelve claims, and at the
rate of working during last year considerable time will
be consumed before the ground is all worked out. Several years ago it was known that gold occurred in black
saiid on the beach near Cape Scott, at the extreme
northwestern end of the island, but several attempts had
been unsuccessful in saving it on a commercial scale,
because of its flakey character and the heaviness of the
that portion of the district is not sufficiently easy of access to warrant the performance of extensive work.
The claims are all held by prospectors, who can ill afford to do more than their yearly assessment work.
The occurrence of this class of ore when considered
in connection with the fact that on Elk river, at the
head of Kennedy lake, auriferous quartz has also been
found, is significant. If a straight line be drawn from
the gold-bearing zone on Mineral Hill, in the Alberni
Mining Division, following the line of strike of the formation about N. 60 degrees W. mag., it will intersect
that portion of the Elk river in the vicinity of the Rose
Marie group of mineral claims, and if continued in the
same direction will also intersect the gold zone on Bear
creek. The strong probabilities are though that the
sulphide ores  of West   Coast Mining Division will, in
Mm
W^^^^^^^^
Train of Coal Cars, Extension Colliery.
sand. Consequently when the Wreck Bay diggings
were first discovered but little attention was paid to
them. However, since the successful work of last and
this summer there is a strong probability that all the
beaches along the coasts of Vancouver Island, and possibly Queen Charlotte Islands, will be thoroughly prospected. No other placer mining of sufficient importance
to mention has been done for years in the West Coast
Mining Division, but at one time Bear river, which
empties into Bedwell sound, was the scene of active
placer mining. Because of this fact a good deal of prospecting for gold-bearing quartz veins has been done
near the head of this river. This has not all been wasted
because several mining claims have been located on
which the outcroppings are quite promising, and some
assay very high values in gold.  But at the present time'
the near future, prove to be the most important of the
mineral resources.
In connection with the occurrences of chalcopyrite ore
in this portion of the island it is noticeable that nearly
all the outcroppings are of magnetite, having particles
and masses of almost theoretically pure chalcopyrite
disseminated through the ore. Outcroppings of pyrrhotite are comparatively scarce, while ordinary gossan
is hardly ever found. This last fact is probably accounted for by the extreme shallow zone of oxidation. Erosion has been so general and active that nearly every
evidence of oxidation has disappeared and unaltered
pyrites are encountered on the present surface of the
ground.
This condition is not confined to one portion of the
island but is general throughout.     During the past twoTHE MINING RECORD.
361
years a considerable amount of development work has
been done in this mining division on mineral claims on
Elk river, which empties into Kennedy lake ; Deer and
Tranquil creeks, which empty into Tofino inlet, on
Meares Island, at the entrance to Bedwell sound ; on
Trout and Bear rivers, which empty into Bedwell sound;
Bedwell sound in the vicinity of Hesquoit harbor ; Sidney inlet ; Tahsis canal ; KoTcsitle inlet ; Kyuquoit
sound and Quatsino sound.
Many of these prospects have very promising possibilities, but none can yet be considered mines in the
general acceptance of the term. Depth is necessary in
order to determine fully the result of the association of
the magnetite and chalcopyrite, as well as to determine
the extent of the ore bodies.
The highest grade  ores found   in   this  division are
the drainage area between those rivers flowing into the
Pacific ocean from those flowing easterly ; thence southerly along the height of land forming the drainage area
between all those rivers flowing into the Pacific ocean
south of Seymour inlet and north of Hotham sound on
the west, from the drainage area of the Chilcotin, Chil-
co river and lake, Jervis inlet and tributaries on the
east; thence following Hotham sound, Thunder bay,
Malaspina straits, Straits of Georgia, passing to south
of Valdes and Kuper Islands to the north boundary of
Chemainus district, thence west along this same boundary to height of land forming the watershed between
Nanaimo and Cowichan rivers ; thence following the
height of land on Vancouver Island forming the divide
between the eastern and western watersheds of such
island to Cape Scott, then to point of commencement."
9 «rs
No. 5 Shaft, New Vancouver Coal Co's Colliery.
bornite from the mountains near the shores of Sidney
inlet, and pyritous gold ores from Meares Island.
Toward the end of the year more activity was shown
in the mountains bordering on Quatsino sound, where
it is claimed some very extensive bodies of chalcopyrite
occur, and which it is proposed to develop fully and systematically.
Coal was discovered in the same neighbourhood a few
years ago, and a San Francisco syndicate has been
working steadily since then to develop mines and open
collieries.
NANAIMO   MINING   DIVISION.
" Commencing at the north end of Lanz Island,
thence easterly through Slingsby channel and Seymour
inlet to the North Arm of Seymour inlet ; thence north
and east following the height of land forming the watershed of all rivers flowing into the Pacific ocean south of
Seymour inlet from those flowing into the Pacific ocean
north of Seymour inlet,   to the height of land forming
This district covers a larger area than any other on
Vancouver Island, because within its boundaries are included so many of the islands in the Straits of Georgia,
as well as an extensive territory on the Mainland.
The Vancouver Island collieries being located within
this district places it as the most important from points
of development and production of any of the island districts, though the actual operations are carried on over
a comparatively small area, being confined to the neighborhood of the following towns on the east coast of the
island ; Ladysmith, at Oyster bay ; Nanaimo, at Nanaimo harbor; Wellington, six miles northwesterly
from Nanaimo ; Comox, Union and Cumberland, near
Union harbor.
The collieries are operated by the following companies : New Vancouver Coal Mining and Land Company,
operating the Nanaimo colliery, consisting of the No.
i shaft, Esplanade, in the City of Nanaimo ; Protection
Island shaft, Southfield, near Nanaimo river.362
THE MINING RECORD.
Robert Dunsmuir & Sons, operating the Wellington
colliery, comprising No. i shaft near Departure bay ;
and Nos. 3, 5 and 6 shafts at Wellington.
The Union Colliery Company of B. C, Ltd., operating the Union colliery, consisting of No. 4 slope, and
Nos. 5 and 6 shafts in the Comox district ; Wellington
colliery in Douglas district known as the Extension
mine, consisting of Nos. 1, 2 and 3 slopes, and Tunnel
mine ; the Alexandria colliery in the Cranberry district
at Union bay, where coke, fire and ordinary brick are
manufactured by the same company.
Although the workings, haulage and methods of ventilating have been described in various publications several times,   the industry of coal mining is of such im-
6 feet ; No. 1 Esplanade shaft, worked  by shaft, seam
5 to 12 feet.
Description and length of tramway plant, etc.: Railway to Southfield, six miles, with sidings ; railway to
No. 1 shaft, one mile, with sidings ; railway from North-
field mine to wharf at Departure Bay, 4)^ miles ; rails
are of steel, 56 lbs. per yard, of standard gauge, viz.,
4 feet 8)4 inches ; 11 hauling and pumping engines, 19
steam pumps, 6 locomotives, 271 coal cars (6 tons), besides lumber and ballast cars ; bunkers with capacity of
10,000 tons ; fitting shops for machinery repairs, with
turning lathes, boring, drilling, screw cutting machines,
hydraulic press, steam hammer, etc.; diamond-boring
machinery for exploratory work (bores to 4,000 feet) ;
Protection Island Shaft New Vancouver Coal Co's Colliery.
portance on Vancouver Island that the writer deems it
advisable to give a brief description of such in this article. Probably no more concise or comprehensive description can be obtained than that published in the reports of the Minister of Mines, from which the following
is taken :
NEW  VANCOUVER   COAL  COMPANY'S   MINE.
Name of seams or pits : Southfield No. 2, Southfield
No. 5, No. 1 Esplanade shaft, No. 1 Northfield shaft,
and Harewood mine.
Description of seams, tunnels, levels, shafts, etc., and
number of same: Southfield No. 2, worked by slope,
seam 6 to 10 feet ; Southfield No. 5, worked by shaft,
seam 5 to 10 feet; No. 1 Northfield shaft worked by
shaft, seam 2 feet to 3 feet 6 inches ; Protection Island
shaft, worked by shaft,  lower seam 4 feet,  upper seam
150 horse-power electric plant, engines, boilers, dynamos, four 30 horse-power 8-ton locomotives, and one
15 horse-power locomotive ; hauling and lighting equipment ; wharves, 2,000 feet frontage, at which vessels
of the largest tonnage can load at all stages of the tide.
A brief descriptions of the workings, etc., at No. 1
shaft, Esplanade, will suffice to give an idea of the
workings, etc., at other shafts.
At a point on the Esplanade, to the east and to the dip
of the site of the old Douglas pit, still to be seen between Nicol street and Victoria road, Nanaimo, a bore
hole was put down in 1881 by the New Vancouver Coal
Mining & Land Company. At a depth of 650 feet coal
was reached and a seam 8 feet 6 inches thick was bored
through.
The proximity of the shaft to the shipping docks hasTHE MINING RECORD.
363
been of great advantage in facilitating the loading of
vessels whether by night or day.
The main slope runs east from the bottom of No. 2
shaft, thei6-foot upcast shaft, for some 2,200 yards
from which levels Nos. 1, 2, and 3, north, have been
run.
Hauling is done in two parts, along No. 1 level for
2^ miles, and down No. 3 level for about i}^ miles.
The motive power employed is provided by electric motors, which haul as many as 96 loaded mine cars at a
trip, each car having a capacity of 15 tons of coal.
From points farther in than is reached by electric haulage sixteen mules are used.
Mining is carried on by the " pillar and stall panel
system."
The seam is from 3 to 8 feet thick and is well bedded
with good roof and floor.
Air ways are well constructed of sufficient sectional
area for ample ventilation. Connection has been made
by way of the No. 1 and No. 3 north levels with the
Protection Island shaft, which is used as an air " intake"
for the ventilation of the workings on these levels. No.
. 2 shaft, Esplanade (16 feet diameter) is the hoisting
shaft, and serves also as the "intake" for the ventilation of that portion of the mine in its vicinity, as well
as for the mule stables, etc.
Ventilation is effected through No. 2 shaft by a 36-
foot by 12-foot Guibal fan, to which is directly connected an engine making from 40 to 46 revolutions per
minute.
The volume of air drawn by these agencies through
and around the faces and workings amounts to from
150,000 to 165,000 cubic feet per minute.
An underlying seam of coal was discovered in 1887
at a depth of 71 feet below the Douglas seam, some six
feet in thickness.'
A large percentage of the screenings of the coal are
passed through a coal washer consisting of two jigs
with fixed screens, and having a capacity of ten tons
per hour.
The hoisting plant consists of a pair of 30 x 60 inch
Cornish valve, direct-acting, high-pressure engines, operating a 15-foot drum, provided with a 10-inch cylinder
steam brake, and capable of hoisting six tons 30 feet
per second on a steam pressure of 50 lbs. The steam
is generated by a plant of four two-flue Lancashire
boilers and four "egg-ended" boilers.
No. 1 shaft and the.engine houses above and below
ground are lighted by incandescent electric lights.
The electric plant consists of two flue boilers, two
150 horse-power Ball engines, each running a separate
dynamo, generating a current of 275 volts. This plant
supplies power for three electric motors and an electric
winch underground, besides providing all the electric
lighting.
WELLINGTON   COLLIERY.
No. 1 shaft, distant about 12 miles from Departure
bay, was sunk about 25 years ago by the late Hon.
Robert Dunsmuir. The coal was found at a depth of
300 feet below the surfaee^Jhe seam being about three
feet thick.
The mine is worked by a slope from the bottom of the
shaft, with levels therefrom to the westward. The roof
of the seam is tender. The ventilation is good, there
being 8,000 cubic feet of air per minute for thirty men
and two mules, The shaft is the "intake," the "return " being the fan shaft at No. 5 shaft.
UNION    COLLIERY.
The shipping wharves for this colliery are located at
Union Bay, Baynes sound,  on the east coast of Van
couver Island, where are also situated a well-equipped
Luhrig coal washer, a coking plant consisting of two
batteries, each of 100 bee-hive ovens, and large coal
bunkers. The mines being operated are situated at the
town of Union, about 11 miles north of Union bay, connection between the two points being maintained by
means of the standard gauge railway, built, owned and
operated by the company.
No. 4, the main slope, is down some 5,600 feet (N.
25 degrees W.), and from it a point 300 feet from the
surface the No. 2 or diagonal slope branches off to the
east at an angle of 45 degrees (N. 20 degrees E.). This
diagonal slope has been run about 4,000 feet, nearly to
the true dip of the coal, and although not as long as the
main slope, the vertical depth attained is greater than
in the latter, which runs across the dip.
At a point some 5,280 feet down the main slope a
second diagonal slope has been run parallel to the one
already mentioned (N. 20 degrees E.).
The hoisting plant consists of a large double cylinder
engine, geared to double-loose drums, boilers, etc. It
is situated about 700 feet from the mouth of the slope,
from which point the engineer hoists and dumps the
mine cars. The slope head arrangements are such that
the cars run to and from the tipple automatically.
Ventilation is effected by a 14 x 5 feet Guibal fan,
causing a circulation of 85,000 cubic feet of air per minute if run to its full capacity of 95 revolutions.
The coal averages about four feet in thickness, and is
worked by the " pillar and stall " system.
There are two steam and eight triple electric pumps
in the mine, the power for the latter being generated by
two dynamos on the surface.
No. 5 shaft is sunk vertically and cuts through two
seams of coal, the upper at 275 feet, and the lower at a
depth of 590 feet from the surface. The shaft is 23 x 8
feet inside, very substantially constructed of heavy timbers and well lined. A partition of 3 x 12 inch planking, lined with tar paper, divides the shaft into two
compartments, one used as the air " down take," and
the other as the " upcast."
The hoisting plant consists of a double cylinder engine, 30 x 60 in., connected with a 14-foot winding drum
fitted with steam brakes, and has ample boiler service.
This shaft is connected by railway with the wharves.
No. 6 shaft was bottomed in October, 1899, at a
depth of 814 feet. It is well constructed and timbered
with a mid-wall, and has been in working order since
spring of 1900.
The pit bottom is all timbered with 12 x 18 sawn
bulks, built solidly together, 16 feet wide and 12 feet
high.
The hoisting plant consists of a 16 x 35 engine, provided with suitable and sufficient boiler service.
The shaft is located close to the railway, and all
necessary sidings have been provided.
THE  UNITED  STATES  GOVERNMENT ASSAY
OFFICE AT SEATTLE.
By A. W.  Dee.
THE business done at the United States Assay office
at Seattle is not nearly so great this year as in
1900. The exact figures up to September 10, are
$7,000,000- as against $12,000,000 for the twelve
months preceding. The assayer in charge, Mr. F. A.
Wing, denies, however, that the falling oft is in any
way due to the establishment of the Dominion Purchasing Assay office  in Vancouver  during July last, an ac-364
THE MINING RECORD.
count of which is given in the August number of the
Mining Record. As far as the aggregate value of the
gold is concerned this is, no doubt, correctly stated, inasmuch as the present practice of the Vancouver office
is to send all its bullion to Seattle where it is purchased
by the United States office. The total thus is not affected by its Canadian rival, and cannot be so until the establishment of a mint within the Dominion creates a
local market.
The cause of the falling off is placed by Mr. Wing to
the lateness of the season in starting, which he declares
opened some six weeks after the usual time. Should
the fall be open the Seattle office expects to deal with
at least $25,000,000 in gold as against $22,000,000 for
1900.      This increase, which is about   15 per cent., is
United States Assay Office, Seattle, Wash.
based by the Seattle people on the reports received from
the north by their correspondents which are said to be
based upon the size of the dumps.
A further cause is assigned, viz.: the scarcity of water
for sluicing operations which, however, it is thought,
will be overcome later in the fall, always supposing
that the season remains open longer than is usual.
The equipment of the Seattle office and its method of
procedure is much about the same as that in Vancouver
but is, of course, conducted on a milch larger scale.
There is a staff of some thirty employees subordinate to
the assayer in charge, Mr. Fred. A. Wing. The clerical, melting and assaying departments are kept distinct
as in the Vancouver office. The first is under the control of the chief clerk, Mr. T. G. Hathaway, the second
under the chief melter, Mr. W. R. Towne and the third
is looked after by Mr. J. C. Newton, the chief assayer.
The building, of which an illustration is given, is one
that is leased by the Federal government and although
an appropriation has been recommended for the purpose
of erecting a government structure, yet, as Seattle has
just succeeded in obtainining a million dollar appropriation for a Federal building it is unlikely that any further
grants will be made in this direction for some years to
come. In the meantime the office will remain in its
present location. The building is a good sized one and
is practically—the basement being unusually well lighted
and commodious—of three stores. The melting and receiving departments, together with the strong room,
are situated on the ground floor, the assay offices being
above and the machinery and carpenter shop below.
The capacity of the plant is upwards of $500,000 a day,
but the melting department has proved itself on occasion capable of handling $750,000 within the limits of
one working day.
The system of receiving the gold is much about the
same as in Vancouver. The depositor sees his dust
weighed in before him on a huge Trcemner scale, a
duplicate of that to be seen in the Canadian office, and
is given a receipt for the same. This receipt is made
out in triplicate and bears a number which alone goes
up stairs to the assay offices. The melter, indeed,
knows the name of the depositor, inasmuch as this is
often a guide to the locality whence the gold is procured
and the correct flux to be used can by this means be arrived at without time lost in experiment. The weight
of the gold is checked by two receiving clerks weighing
separately. The depositor is given his money for his
gold within the next 24 hours following deposit. If the
melter is ready to receive the gold at once it is simply
placed in an open box and taken into the melting department, an illustration of which is here shown, but
not before the gold is carefully reweighed by him.
Should pressure of work preclude immediate treatment
the gold dust is locked into a separate box and put
away uutil the next day.
The melting department is one that is particularly
complete. It comprises one gigantic circular furnace
capable of treating over 2,000 ounces at one melt, two
other furnaces, whose crucibles will receive from 1600
to 1700 ounces of gold apiece ; four No. 4 furnaces,
whose capacity is from 600 to 700 ounces, and two
" little giants" whose charge is about30 ounces.
Underneath the melting room is a blower having a
capacity of 1200 cubic feet per minute for each cylinder,
and there are two, exerting a pressure of 2^ pounds to
the square inch. This is driven by a small electric motor. In addition gas is used, intermixed with the air in
the tuyere, which has four inches of pressure.
The crucibles used are known as the Dixon lead crucible composed of an admixture of graphite and high-
grade silicon. These are placed within the furnace and
the fluxes properly arranged with the gold, and on the
furnace being covered the air is let into the tuyere or
circular pipe surrounding the furnace. The air passing
under pressure into the tuyere creates a vacuum, passes a siphon through which the gas is drawn and mixed
with it. It then passes into the furnace through three
apertures set equidistant around the bottom. These
apertures are not at right angles to the inner surface
of the cylindrical furnace but enter at an angle of 60
degrees so that a rotary motion is given to the flame
which soon brings up the temperature to between 2200°
and 2300° Fahr. The method is slightly varied in the
largest furnace, as also in the two smallest.
At the bottom" of the furnace is a dumping arrangement by means of which the contents of the crucible, ifTHEXMINING RECORD.
365
spilled, can be readily recovered, but in the three years'
practice which have occurred since the installation of
the plant occasion to use this has never arisen.
The fluxes used are nitre, borax, soda and potash and
are so arranged that there is the very slightest possibility of oxygen gaining access to the gold through its
glassy covering of borax and so causing loss by oxidization. That such oxidization does take place is to be
seen by examination of the inside to the tops of the furnaces where the tint of " royal purple," a color only to
be obtained by oxide of gold, can be seen showing that
there has been a slight volatilization. The loss, however, is infinitesimal and can be recovered.
After the melting of the gold and the volatilization of
the impurities the metal is poured off into moulds and
allowed to cool.      The slag is broken off, crushed in a
The assayers' room presents no features of unusual
interest, being conducted in the usual manner.
The expense of shipping the bafs of gold and silver
to the United States mint is met by the Assay office
which has a regular carpenter shop in the basement.
The gold shipped away is invariably despatched in bars
whose value is from $20,000 to $35,000. The largest
bar produced seldom exceeds 1500 ounces as it is found
that larger bars are difficult of handling. The smaller
bars necessarily produced by the smelting of the smaller
deposits are remelted after a certain period and formed
into a brick of the usual shipping size.
Quite a large stock of gold is always on hand in the
Assay office strong room where there was stored on
September 10, the day of the visit of the representative
of the Mining Record, upwards of one hundred bricks-
3sss$iPi7
■*H
MM
m*
t^SsS*#
SjET .- >*i*R5*--*»&i
Melting Room, U. S. Assay Office, Seattle, Wash.
hand crusher and panned for any gold contained in it.
The resultant dust and small nuggets are placed in an
envelope and accompany the brick whose size depends
upon the amount of gold sent in by the depositor. The
gold is then reweighed by the chief clerk and two pieces
cut off the bricks from the front upper right hand and
back lower left-hand corners of the brick and each sent
to the assayers. Two separate assays of these must be
made and must agree within 2-10 of one per cent.
After the crushing and panning of the slag the remainder which still contains a slight trace of precious
metal is placed within a binn in the basement and is
sold to the highest bidder once every three months, j
It will be seen that the whole process is very similar
to that conducted in Vancouver, great care is taken in
the entire method ; even the very dust of the melting
room being gathered up and put through a muffle furnace.
of all sizes whose total value was considerably over
three quarters of a million dollars. This was the product of three days work ; the last shipment east being
made on September 7. This amount of gold was stated
to be the average amount always lying in the strong
room.
THE GOLDEN MINING DIVISION OF EAST
KOOTENAY, B.  C.
By James Brady, M. E., Etc
THIS Mining Division comprises the northern portion of the district of East Kootenay, and includes
the country on either side of the Columbia river
from the summit to the Rocky mountains on the northeast, to the summit of the Selkirk range in the south-366
THE MINING RECORD.
west, and extends in a northwesterly direction from
Galena, above Spillimacheen, to about 7.miles north of
the Big Bend of the Columbia—a distance of about 140
miles.
The Canadian Pacific railway traverses the district in
an easterly and westerly direction ; the stations within
the division being Bear Creek, Beaver, Donald, Golden,
Palliser, Otter Tail, Field, Hector and Stephen.
The predominating rock formation on the Rocky
mountain side of the Columbia is carboniferous limestone, overlying argillaceous slates and shales, which
are exposed in some of the deeper canyons and along
the banks of the larger streams.
On the southwestern or Selkirk side, igneous granular rocks such as diorites, syenites, granites, dolerites,
etc., (frequently porphyritic) form the higher mountains
and ridges, while on the flanks, and in the depressions
or basins, metamorphic slates and schists, with occasional bands of limestone form the country rock, and in
many places are traversed by porphyritic and other
eruptive dykes, and metalliferous quartz lodes.
On the northeastern side more or less development
work has been done at different times on the Monarch,
near Field, (argentiferous galena and blende), and on
some silver-lead claims along the Otter Tail, also on
Beaver Foot creek, and Ice river, and in the Blue Water
country north of Donald.
On the Selkirk, or southwest side, the mining camps
are much more numerous, and are generally found near
where the slates and schists have been broken through
by the eruptive rocks.
The Spillimacheen and Jubilee mountain camps, about
40 miles above Golden and on the southwest side of the
Columbia, are, however, exceptions, as at these points
and for some distance southeast the carboniferous limestone extends across the Columbia, and the lodes, argentiferous, galena and copper ores, are found either in
the schists or limestone near the contact.
The other mining localities on this side are situated
as follows :
On Bugaboo creek, (copper, gold and silver-lead),
from 8 to 25 miles west of Spillamacheen landing.
Vermont creek, (copper, gold, silver-lead and bismuth), about 21 miles southwest of Carbonate Landing.
Copper creek, (copper, gold and silver-lead), west-
southwest from Carbonate Landing, about 22 miles by
trail.
Spruce Tree creek, on north side of Middle Fork of
Spillimacheen river, (copper ores and gold quartz), 22
miles from Carbonate Landing. -
Carbonate creek and Carbonate mountain, (silver-
lead, copper ore, and gold quartz), on the south side of
the North Fork of Spillimacheen river, about 25 miles
from Carbonate Landing.
Cariboo creek, on the opposite side of the Middle
Fork and about the same distance from Carbonate
Landing, (gold quartz, galena and copper).
Robbie Burns basin, (gold quartz), on north side of
the Middle Fork, 27 miles from Carbonate Landing.
International basin, (gold quartz, silver - lead and
copper), on the' head waters of the Middle Fork of Spillimacheen river, 30 miles from Carbonate Landing.
Boston and Bennison, across the divide from the International basin, (gold quartz, silver, lead and copper
ores), 31 miles by trail from Carbonate and about the
same distance from Bear Creek station on the C. P. R.
McMurdo creek, (gold quartz, silver-lead and copper
ores), about 30 miles from Carbonate, and west of Robbie Burns basin.
Prairie mountain, (gold quartz, galena and copper
ores), about 10 miles east of Bear Creek station on the
C. P. R.
On Fifteen-Mile creek, (copper and gold), from 7 to
10 miles from the landing on the Columbia river.
Canyon creek, (copper ores and gold quartz), from 8
to 10 miles from Golden.
There are strong, well-defined lodes and very encouraging prospects in many of the above camps, and in
some of them the surface showings are unusually good,
but, except in one or two camps, very little work of importance in determining the extent of the ore bodies, or
the prospective value of the lodes, has been done.
Most of the claims are at a standstill for want of capital, and there seems to be a good opening here at present for one or more development companies to take
hold of properties on a stock basis or on working bonds,
and do a safe and profitable mining business.
There are government trails to all the camps, and the
cost of visiting and examining the most promising
claims would not be great.
In almost every locality where lodes are found there
are streams in the immediate vicinity capable of furnishing all the power required to generate electricity for operating mills, concentrators, trams, hoisting works,
compressors,  etc.
Timber is plentiful and in many places so abundant
that charcoal for smelting purposes can be supplied in
large quantities and at a moderate price for a number of
years. This is an important consideration, as a large
portion of the ores of this district might be smelted or
reduced to a matte on the ground thus saving, on an
average, probably 75 per cent, of the cost of shipping
crude ore to a market. Iron and limestone can, I think,
be obtained in or ne^r most of the camps.
GOLD MINING IN THE ROSSLAND DISTRICT,
BRITISH COLUMBIA.*
By J. J. Sandeman.
ROSSLAND, British Columbia, is situated in the
West Kootenay district, and from a geological
and mineralogical point of view it forms a study
of great interest. The present site of the town of Rossland was at one time the crater of a volcano from which
lava and ashes deluged the surrounding country. The
variety of igneous material which covers the district
seems to intimate that the eruptions were intermittent
and that the volcano itself was of great age. The occasional presence of quartzite or metamorphosed sandstone seems to indicate that a shallow sea existed here,
previous to volcanic outbreak. The district may be
roughly described as an area of gabbro, surrounded by
quartz-diorite so highly metamorphosed that the contacts are very indistinctly defined. The gabbro area,
though only about 1^ miles wide, by 4 or 5 miles in
length, is one of great importance to the district; for
it is in the gabbro, or closely bordering it, that the best
mines have been discovered. The Gertrude mine appears to be the only exception from this rule, for 200
feet below the surface, the top of a gabbro-dyke has intruded and scattered what had promised to be a fine
body of ore.
Many erroneous local conjectures have been made
about, the age of this district. Fossils have been found
which geologists declare belong to the carboniferous
period ; these, however, serve only to prove that at
some time carboniferous strata had overlain the present
igneous rocks and had been subsequently removed, probably by glacial agencies.    The writer has, so far, been
* From a paper read before the Institution of Mining Engineers.THE MINING RECORD.
367
unable to obtain any data proving that the fossils have
been found in any other location than near the surface
or in the upper part of fissures.
Another local controversy has greater justification,
and this difference of opinion is in regard to the nature
of the faulting which has so much disturbed and contorted the district. Compression or the shear-zone
theory, and elevation and depression have each their
supporters. But any engineer who strictly adheres to
either theory will soon find himself at fault in more senses than one, for each has been controverted by practical
experience. In the writer's opinion, the complex faulting is owing to the following historic sequence of geology :—This district, in conjunction with the rest of the
Pacific coast has been subjected to a great upheaval
with consequent faults and general weakening of the
surface crust. A great thrust from the west probably
started the volcanic activity, and the enormous mass of
igneous material, removed from below and precipitated
on the surface, reduced the support and greatly increased the weight—hence a general subsidence took place,
with its accompanying normal faults. The cooling of
this great mass caused shrinkage and compression, and
has caused some of the shear-zone phenomena, but the
consequent parallel fissures and reversed faults have
been intersected and cut off by previous faulting.
The veins are true fissure veins, the metal in them
being the result of metalliferous liquids flowing through
them, attacking the country-rock on each side, dissolving the rock and naturally replacing it with metallic sulphides. Such being the case, the shoots of ore often
fade away into the surrounding country-rock and there
being no well-defined walls the ore is frequently lost.
This, with the very irregular width of the veins and
their complex faulting, renders Rossland geology an
exceedingly difficult problem to mining engineers. Yet,
the writer has proved by actual practice that these difficulties may be overcome by careful study ; but the
conservative mining engineer with fixed ideas, formed
from experience in other districts, would soon convert a
mine into a worthless hole in the ground.
Thh principal ores are chalcopyrite and pyrrhotite
carrying various percentages of gold, silver, copper and
bismuth, but although some ore will run to a total value
of ;£io per ton, the majority is of so low a grade that
only the abundant facilities of transportation and the
comparatively low cost of smelting would justify mining
in such a country.
The diorite formation is intensely hard and expensive'
to work, but fortunately the water is easily handled.
At the present time Rossland is under a cloud, and
the constant friction between the Miners' union and the
companies has ended in several large mines being closed. In each case, the companies attribute this cessation of work to defective machinery ; although the
writer has no authority for questioning this statement,
judging from his own experience, the hoisting and drilling plants in the district are unusually good. Electricity is the motive power, the West Kootenay Company
supplying by cable transmission, power to run the dynamos at the mines at a cost of about 50 per cent, less
than the same work could be done by steam ; this, with
the various works lighted by electricity, gives the district a very business-like appearance, and the surrounding mountains with their railroads and self-acting trams
tipping into the railroad trucks all bear evidence of
practical and economical work.
As it is possible that members of the Institute might
be in a somewhat similar district to this, the writer will
point out a few matters that might be of use. First,
where chalcopyrite changes into pyrrhotite the continu
ation of the ore is pretty well assured ; on the other
hand, where pyrrhotite changes into chalcopyrite it is
likely soon to scatter out among the enclosing rocks.
When a lode gives out and leaves no visible trace, small
and sometimes almost invisible streaks of calcite frequently follow the strike of the lode or run parallel
with it. Once, by following one of these streaks a few
feet and then crosscutting, the writer found ore where
it would otherwise have been certainly missed. The inflow of water in underground workings is no sign of
vicinity to a lode, but rather the reverse. Where water
proves troublesome, a crosscut intersecting the water
flow and conducting it to the nearest fault line will
sometimes act as a drain and save much hoisting.
Where the gangue of a lode becomes silicious, the
quartz, though apparently worthless, frequently monopolizes all the gold values. The more valuable quartz
is clouded with a dark-grey substance : these stains are
probably caused by some form of petzite, this, however,
is merely a surmise, for the quartz on assay yields no
trace of tellurium.
NOTES   ON   SUMP  SOLUTIONS, EXTRACTOR-
BOX WORK, AND CLEANING-UP,  IN
THE CYANIDE PROCESS.*
By Alfred James, M. Inst. M. M.
ONE of the problems at present agitating the minds
of cyanide operators is the effect on the extraction
of gold by the continued re-use of the cyanide solutions. Such solutions contain, amongst other matters
salts of zinc, iron, occasionally copper, alkalies and alkaline carbonates, ammonia, and sulpho-cyanides ; and
it is obvious that, unless these constituents are prevented from accumulating in the solutions, the solvent power on the precious metals of any added cyanide must
sooner or later be impaired.
Solutions which had been in use for some months
were therefore examined, and the results noted: it was
found that the extractions returned were in every case
less than those obtained on the same material—ores or
tailings — by making up cyanide solutions of the same
strength with fresh water.    Thus :—
per ton.
It may be suggested that the presence of double cyanide of zinc and potassium (KaZnCy^ may have misled the operator as to the strength in cyanide of the solutions, but it will be shown that this matter has
received special attention, and that the results were
similar, even when equal quantities of solid cyanide of
potassium were added to fresh water and to a solution
of double cyanide of potassium with caustic potash
present.
Experiments were carried out with the object of overcoming this loss of power in the used or " sump " solutions, and it was found that the addition of lime improved the extractions from ores and tailings containing
practically only quartz and gold, but that such treat-
Extrs
ction
wilh
Ex
raclion   with
fresh
solutions.
used
solutions.
oz.
dwt.
gr-
oz.
dwt.       gr.
(a)
m
13
J4
15
O         12
(*)
20
18
3
18
13          16
[b')
21
O
J7
m
0       5
f
3
17
2
3
''3       5
W)
6
18
9
3
J3       5
* From a paper read  berore the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy.368
THE MINING RECORD.
ment had a deteriorating effect on ores, etc., containing
sulphides.    Thus :—
Extraction with Extraction with sump
sump solution only. solution treated with lime,
oz.      dwt.        gr. oz.        dwt.      gr.
(a)    12      15        2 27       o      23   per ton.
(a')   13        1        8 29        9        6
(b) 18
!3
16
25
H
4
(b') 19
0
5
25
14
7
(c)      4
1
1
3
1
0
(c)     3
18
9
3
0
2
With fresh solution the extractions in this set on c
and d were 4 oz. 1 dwt. 1 gr. and 3 oz. 19 dwt. 7 gr.
respectively, a and b were simple quartz ores cantain-
ing free gold, and c was an ore carrying a considerable
percentage of sulphides.
A number of experiments were carried out on the
above lines, and the above results were confirmed. Lime
being thus shown to be ineffective, except with simple
quartz ores, treatment of the solutions with sodium sulphide, followed by excess of a soluble lead salt, such as
acetate of chloride, was tried with the following results :
Extraction   with
Extraciion with Extraction with        " treated" sump
fresh solution. sump solution. solution,
oz.    dwt.    gr. oz.    dwt.     gr. oz.    dwt.    gr.
(c)       3    i7      2 3    *3      5 3    i7      2
{?')       3    18     9 3    13      5 3    19    16
It is thus evident that the continued use of sump solutions is a cause of serious loss in actual work, and
that, though a universal law cannot be laid down for
the best treatment of such sump solutions, it is strongly
desirable that these solutions should, from time to time,
be tested, and the results obtained compared with those
from freshly made-up solutions ; also that the addition
of lime, with time for the subsidence of any precipitate
formed, is of advantage in the case of very free and
coarse gold ores ; and that the treatment with sodium sulphide, care being taken to avoid an excess,
followed by the additian of a small amount of lead salt
in excess, is efficacious where lime fails. In this latter
treatment time must also be given for any precipitated
sulphides to separate out and subside.
By such treatment the necessity of running foul sump
solutions to waste may be avoided, when water is scarce
or the cyanide or gold contents are high.
The Effect of Zinc in Solution.—The usual practice of
precipitating the gold by running the aurocyanide solutions through boxes containing zinc, causes the accumulations in the solutions of a considerable quantity of
zinc salts. It has been more than once suggested that
the double cyanide of zinc and potassium in the presence of caustic potash was split up into a simple cyanide
plus oxide of zinc and potassium—
K2 ZnCy4   +  4KHO = 4KCY + K2 Zn02   +   2H2 O.
The author, however, discovered by means of experiments involving the crystallising out of the products,
that the above equation did not hold good, but that, on
the contrary, any oxide of zinc and potassium in solution combined with the added cyanide of potassium to
form the double cyanide of zinc and potassium.   Thus :
K2Zn02  + 4KCY + 2H2O =  K2ZnCy4  + 4KHO.
This shows that the zinc oxide in solution actually takes
up the cyanide added by the chemist in charge to make
the solutions up to normal strength, though the silver
test leaves the operator in ignorance of what has happened, and thus renders it less effective for the solution
of the gold than the cyanide by itself would have been^
The following experiments illustrate this point:—
Extraction with portion
of same 0.5  per cent, solution,
Extraction with a fresh to which 0.25 per cent.
0.5 per cent.  KCy solution. K2Zn02 was added,
oz.      dwt.      gr. oz.       dwt.      gr.
(a) 2        9        o 1       11        9 per ton.
(b) 16        2        3 13        6      14     "
(c) 1       17      21 1        2      20     "
(d) 12 18 17 740 "
This is one of the drawbacks of the zinc process as compared with the electrical deposition process, which leaves
the solutions in a condition of much greater energy,
though the iron anodes used in the latter process are
necessarily detrimental. Insoluble anodes are much
needed. The accumulation of zinc in solution is, however, prevented by the action of the sulphides contained
in the ore and in the cyanide, and treatment with sodium sulphide and lead salt as shown above is a good
remedy for this inefficiency.
Losses in Cleaning Up.—Perhaps in no other part of
the process are there so many variations in the methods
pursued as in that of the clean-up. At the end of the
bi-monthly or monthly period the boxes are charged
with slimes containing usually gold, silver, lead, zinc,
iron, lime, and, in certain instances, copper ; and the
object in view is the conversion of these slimes into bullion with the least possible loss. To accomplish this,
the treatment varies from the direct melting of the
coarse zinc and slimes to separation by sieves, roasting
or acid treatment, with or without filter pressing, and
subsequent fusion.
To determine, if possible, the amount of loss arising
from these different methods, and the best general
course to be adopted, a system of very carefully conducted experiments has been carried out and the results
tabulated and compared.
At first the experiments were on known weights of
metallic gold and zinc in the proportions used in practice ; the gold was dissolved, precipitated from its aurocyanide solution by the zinc, shaken off the zinc in the
form of gold slimes, the zinc remaining was dissolved
separately and the residue added to the gold slimes,
which were then treated by the various methods, and
the amount of bullion recovered noted together with its
fineness ; the deficit from the amount originally taken
represented the loss in treatment. In some cases the
coarse zinc was disintegrated and dissolved by the addition of alkali and cyanide, instead of acid, with the
results given below.
In the final experiments, however, to gain more accurate comparative results, a large quantity of gold
slimes was made, shaken off the zinc, dried, well mixed
and equal quantities taken from the bulk for the various
experiments ; these were carried out in duplicate, no
two duplicate samples, however, were weighed consecutively. In the first set the losses were found to vary
from 0.5 to 6 per cent., and, as a general rule, the less
handling the slimes received the less was the loss. The
heaviest losses were due to roasting, and varied with
the amount of stirring or handling during the operation;
the least loss from this cause was o. 23 per cent, additional to that resulting from the rest of the treatment.
In a method of roasting with nitre recently described
in the Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry (Jan.,
x897)> the total loss amounted to 2.57 percent., in spite
of the greatest care in heating the mixture, and in adding as little nitre as would act in the manner described
in the paper ; probably with practice, this loss would
be considerably reduced, but it is still too serious a matter to be lightly considered.
Acid treatment yielded results varying with the kindTHE MINING RECORD.
369
of acid used, nitric acid showing a greater loss than hydrochloric and sulphuric. On the other hand with impure zinc, that in ordinary use, nitric acid gave the
purest bullion, but with lead-free zinc dilute sulphuric
acid gave both the purest bullion and the lowest acid
loss.
A comparison between melting direct and a preliminary treatment with sulphuric acid gave results depending on the purity of the slimes ; where these had been
passed through a 40-mesh sieve to free them from coarse
zinc, melting direct gave a fairly pure bullion and at
least as good results as with acid tVeatment, but with
scrap and coarse zinc included the advantage lay with
the latter method.
The least total loss in the first set of nineteen experiments was 0.75 per cent., and this was obtained by
treatment with sulphuric acid before melting. An experiment with lead-free zinc gave a total loss of only
0.52 per cent, with direct fusion of the sieved slimes,
the coarse zinc being treated with sulphuric acid and
the residue added to the slimes. Pure zinc invariably
showed a smaller loss than with ordinary zinc, and very
careful work on identical lines showed such gain, or
lessened loss, to be 0.2 per cent.
Treatment of the slimes with strong solutions of alkali and cyanide, with or without subsequent acid treatment, gave heavier losses.
There was, however, considerable variation in the
results obtained, though the general direction of the
losses was well established, and to limit such variation
as well as to still further study the effect of the use of
lead-free zinc in the cleaning-up operations, the final
sets of experiments were carried out, in which all the
samples were taken from the same bulk of previously
prepared and well-mixed gold slimes, as mentioned
above, and these samples were then submitted to variations in treatment. Similar experiments were also
made with the slimes from lead-free zinc prepared under identical conditions. The results were as follows,
the loss for simple melting with borax being taken,
as x:—
Melting with borax x
Roasting, then melting  x + 0.23 per cent.
Sulphuric acid, then melting x + o. 17       "
Sulphuric acid,  roasting,  and  then
melting x + 0.40       "
Nitric acid, then melting x + 0.29       "
and x in the case of pure lead-free zinc amounted to
0.43 per cent.; in the case of ordinary zinc it was greater than this, the amount of excess exceeding the 0.2
per cent given above.
With lead-free zinc, sulphuric acid gave the purest
bullion and roasting the most base, the roasted bullion
being more base than that melted direct with borax.
With ordinary zinc, however, nitric acid gave the purest bullion ; sulphuric acid came next; direct melting
with borax yielded bullion considerably baser than the
others. The loss by acid treatment was greater than
with lead-free zinc, and the loss by roasting less ; it is
suggested that the presence in the slimes of lead, which
is converted during the roasting to fluid lead oxide, may
accounc for the lessened loss in roasting with the ordinary zinc.
These last results confirm those from former experiments, and show that with ordinary zinc, as well as
with lead-free zinc, direct melting with borax gives the
great loss, and that the safest method of purifying the
bullion is by sulphuric acid treatment ; that the use of
lead-free zinc with a sieving arrangement renders any
special method of purification unnecessary, and diminishes the treatment loss.    All the experiments agree in
showing that roasting is the cause of more or less heavy
loss, and though effective with ordinary zinc in raising
the grade of the bullion, is less efficient than acid treatment for this purpose.
It is therefore suggested that in cleaning up means
should be employed to avoid handling, and to limit the
number of vessels used, and that roasting should be absolutely avoided. The following description of a plant
has been prepared on these lines.
Zinc boxes (extractors) to have steel side launders for
discharging the slimes direct through a 40-mesh sieve
into small steel vessels with perforated bottoms, over
which a filter cloth is placed. These steel vessels fit into small vats, one for each vessel, and are arranged so
that the overflow of slimes passes into a large vat of
sufficient capacity, from which the lighter slimes which
have passed out of the small steel vessels in the overflow may be collected by the aid of a filter connected to
a vacuum receiver, to which all the filters are connected.
The slimes may thus be collected and sent to the drying
and mixing plate immediately after cleaning up, the one
vessel having sufficed for the whole operation ; but if
acid treatment is used, the steel vessel with its contained cake of slimes, is taken to the acid vat and emptied
into it. The acid vat may be of wood, lead lined, or of
steel coated with special protective varnish, or of aluminum, which answers perfectly and is clean, and is not
attacked by sulphuric or even nitric acid. The dissolved slimes are washed with hot water and filter-pressed,
or preferably run into a detachable steel-lined filter vat
with a vacuum connection, washed, vacuum dried, mixed with fluxes, and melted. The author prefers a vacuum vat in place of a filter press as being cleaner, easier
•to handle, and leaving the slimes in one mass without
the inconvenience and loss attendant upon the use of
the many connections, plates, and filter cloths (all impregnated with gold slimes)   necessary to a filter press.
Purity of Gold Bullion.—The fine, amounting to from
3d. to is. gd. per ounce of fine gold, imposed by the
London refiners upon base bullion containing lead, has
caused much attention to be paid to the question of the
advisability of returning bullion so pure as to avoid
these heavy charges. An investigation has also been
made into this matter, and a suggested remedy is to replace the zinc ordinarily used for precipitation by a
special brand of lead-free zinc.
In the early days of the cyanide process the investors
feared that lead-free zinc would not be sufficiently energetic to precipitate effectively the gold present in very
dilute solutions, but in recent experiments with some
lead-free zinc, which contained a minute amount of iron,
It was found that in every instance, whether with strong
or with exceedingly dilute solutions, a better extraction
was obtained with this zinc than with that ordinarily in
use, with the single exception of a fortnight's run. in
which the results were equally good.
The importance of this result will be understood when
one recognises that the adoption of the lead-free zinc
will give a purer bullion, and thus avoid the refiners'
charges of, on an average, gd. per ounce ; will lessen
the amount of slimes to be treated and the loss during
clean-up of o. 2 per cent., as shown above. Against
this is the greater price of the lead-free zinc, but as it
takes with low-grade tailings an average amount of
1 lb. of zinc to produce 1 oz. of gold, it is easy to calculate that even if lead-free zinc were nd. per lb. dearer than the ordinary zinc it would still be preferable and
cheaper to use the former brand, but, as a matter of
fact, the difference in price is very much less than this
sum.
In conclusion, it  is
suggested that increased extrac370
THE MINING RECORD.
tions may almost universally be obtained by the proper
treatment of sump solutions, or where water is plentiful, by the making up of fresh solutions from time to
time, the old solutions being got rid of as water-washes
after an intermediate period as weak solutions ; and
that much of the usual "mysterious" discrepancy between theoretical or assay results and the amount of
bullion actually returned is due to losses in cleaning up,
and that these losses may be lessened by avoiding roasting and unnecessary handling, and by adopting the precautions detailed above.
The gain to the Witwatersrand Gold Fields from the
treatment of sump solutions should be an additional extraction of 5 percent., or, say, ^200,000 per annum,
whilst the avoidable loss in cleaning" up is estimated to
vary from 0.5 to 2 per cent, of the cyanide output from
each particular plant.
COMPANY MEETINGS  AND  REPORTS.
NEW  GOLDFIELDS  OF  BRITISH  COLUMBIA.
SIR CHARLES TUPPER presided at the ordinary
meeting and said that the subscribed capital of the
company had been increased during the period under review by 17,573 shares, of which 10,000 were paid
for in full and 7,563 had been issued with ios. remaining
uncalled. The shares in various companies stood at
^62.651, against ^56,944. The unfavourable condition of the mining market referred to in last year's report had continued, and it had specially affected mining
interests in British Columbia. Though the directors believed the depression only temporary, they had thought
it prudent to considerably write down the value of all
its mining securities, and under the circumstances did
not propose the payment of a further dividend beyond
the interim dividend of 5 per cent, already paid, leaving
the reserve of ^5,000 shown in last year's balance sheet
and the balance of this year's profit, together amounting to ^7,240, to be carried forward. The board were
of the opinion that the sum of ^62,651 was an extremely low valuation for the shares owned by the company, and in the case of the Velvet mine their holding
had been written down to the extent of 50 per cent.
The profit and loss account showed a gross profit of
^7,604, expenditure ^6,111, leaving a net profit for
the year of ^1,492. That balance, together with the
amount brought forward from last account—^8,590—
gave a total credit balance of .£10,083, from which had
been paid dividends as declared, special remuneration
to directors, and income tax, amounting to' £7,842,
leaving a net credit balance of ,£2,240. The chairman
then alluded to the work which had been carried out
on the various properties owned by the company, and
the change in the management of the Velvet mine, and
in conclusion, spoke favourably of the prospects of their
investments, and moved the adoption of the report,
which was  accepted.
KENNETH  MINES.
The following report of the enquirer, Mr. R. Roberts,
on the Tamarac mine, has been forwarded to shareholders of this company.
The management of the Tamarac (Kenneth) mine has
issued a circular to shareholders giving particulars of
the work accomplished at the property. Excerpts from
the statement given by R. Roberts, the engineer, are
as follows :
"After the dyke winze was pumped out, crosscutting
from the winze was continued. Ten feet of crosscut
were run, and as no vein  appeared I put in an upraise
at the 32-foot level of this winze and succeeded in cutting the vein, showing a fair body of ore. The main
dyke winze was then continued at a less inclination in
order to crosscut the vein at a lower depth. At the
186-foot mark a small vein, dipping at a steep angle,
was encountered which, when first tapped closeto the
dyke, was of promising appearance. This vein was
on for 32 feet, but narrowed down to a small stringer
striking in a direction towards where the main vein
should lie. A drift and crosscut were then run to locate
the main ledge", but this was not encountered when
work ceased, though I estimate that the crosscut ought
to be in close proximity to the vein."
The detail of work done since August, 1900, showed
that a total of 281 feet was driven, 200 tons of ore
stoped and 120 tons shipped.
The report continues :
I In addition to the work in the mine, a substantial
aerial tramway 6,000 feet long and complete in every
detail has been erected, so that ore can be cheaply
handled from the mine to the railway or to the mill
when erected. The tramway so far has worked very
smoothly and well, the cost of handling fifty tons of ore
a day being 15 cents a ton. After an exhaustive sampling of the mine as at present developed, I was able to
determine that the width of the higher grade portion of
the vein was not so great as previously estimated and I
should place the average width of the paystreak at one
foot, of an average value of $10 to $12 per ton. The
development done since last September has proven the
vein for a further depth of 62 feet, thus increasing the
amount of ore in sight. The 20 feet of raising at the
250-foot mark in the north drift has shown up a fair
body of ore in the face, and the winze in the dyke may
be utilized for ore handling and ventilation purposes
when sufficient development work has been done to drift
along the vein at the lowest level now reached by the
dyke winze. On the discovery-post portion of the vein
I obtained most satisfactory values, from $48 to $58
per ton over 12 to 18 inches wide of the paystreak. As
the development on this portion of the vein is practically
nil no estimate of the values can be given. In connection with that part of the ground I would point out that
a curious anomaly exists, viz.: that on the best showing
on the property where high values were obtained,
nothing more than six feet of work has been done, and
it would appear that the best portion of the mine exists
on the southwest side of the dyke as cut in the adit tunnel. With regard to development in the immediate future, before undertaking that mentioned above, for the
more economical working of the northern portion of
the vein I would strongly advise the sinking of a preliminary prospecting winze at the discovery post for at
least 100 feet. On this most promising portion of the
vein care should be taken to follow it closely, and I estimate that this work would pay for itself, as the value
of the ore that will probably be encountered would permit of its being shipped direct to a smelter by means of
the tramway. In conclusion, I consider that given the
above further development done on the northern portion
of the vein, as well as on the discovery portion, sufficient tonnage of an advantageous grade would be forthcoming to supply a small mill with thirty tons daily."
The tests of Tamarac ore made at the Silicia works
shows that under favourable conditions $8 ore from the
mine would net $4.33 profit, and that $10 ore would return a profit of $5.85.
THE  WINNIPEG  MINES,   LTD.
A meeting of the shareholders of the Winnipeg Mines,
Ltd., was held on the 1st of October, and an adjourn-ment taken to 29th inst.      A statement of receipts and
expenditures to Sept. 26th, was submitted as follows :
RECEIPTS.
Assessments 1 to 9 (both inclusive)  $38,285 70
Net proceeds of ore sold      5,048 01
Proceeds 81,000 shares Treasury stock      4,35° °°
Sundries  164 80
Total $44,84851
PAYMENTS.
Reorganization expenses $      635 48
Liabilities of old Winnipeg company         7,188 51
Operating expenses: — Labour, $18,141.64; materials,
$5,275.67 ; repairs, renewals and tools, $124.95 ;
assaying, $124.95 5 general charges, mine and office,
$2>239-87       27,343 24
DEVELOPMENT EXPENSES.
Buildings, $484.99 ; plant and machinery, $2,642 44 $ 3,127 43
Cash in Canadian Bank of Commerce, $6,503.70 ; cash in
hand, $50.15      6,553 85
$44,848 54
In the report on the company's position it was stated
that the treasury shares sold by the company were forfeited shares sold to provide against contingencies and
to furnish money to pay for a winter's supply of cord-
wood, the purchase of which in the fall has effected a
saving of $1.60 per cord, as compared with the price
that had to be paid for wood last winter. This receipt
will be regarded in the light of a realization of arrears
of calls. There still remain in the treasury more than
450,000 shares, • the total number of shares held by
stockholders being less than 800,000.
Work is now being done at what is known as the
station ledge, at the 300-foot level and on the railway
ledge, near the surface. Development was resumed on
the latter at 20 feet depth, the ledge having narrowed
at that depth to about one foot in width. Now, at 45
feet in depth, it is seven feet wide. A hoisting engine
and gallows frame have been placed over this shaft and
a machine drill is used in it. Two cars of ore from this
ledge recently brought the company $i,28g.26 net.
More ore from this ledge has since been sent to the
smelter, but the returns have not yet been received.
Fifteen cars of ore from the station ledge, value about
$10 gross and a little more than $5 net, have been sent
to the Granby smelter.
ALASKA  TREADWELL  GOLD   MINING   COMPANY,    ALASKA.
The eleventh annual statement of this  company for
the year ending May 15th, igoi, shows the following
exploration and development work completed during
the year :
Crosscuts, Raises,             Total,
feet. feet.                 feet.
10 406                   879
212 482                 1,941
52 501                 1,948
No. of
Drives,
level.
feel.
220
463
33°
1.247
440
i,39S
Totals...
•    3.i°S
274
1,389
4,678
As shown above no development work was done on
the 110-ft. levels last year. The drifting on the 220-ft.
level was in the intermediates. Two raises were put
through to the 110-ft. level and used for running ore
down from the pits. In the 330-tt. level, No. 1 east
drift reached the slate footwall 320 ft. from the main
crosscut. The footwall here takes a sharp turn to the
north. Over this drift and No. 1 west drift is a stope
360 feet long and from 4g to 110 ft. wide, half way up
to the 220-ft. level. The ore in the east drift shows an
average assay of $5.go and that of the west drift $6.04.
No. 5 east drift on the same level has driven 386 feet
from the main cross cut. The ore in this drift is found
to be lower grade than that of No. 5 east drift in the
440-ft. level just below it. Nine raises have been made
in this drift. East drift No. 1 in the 440-ft. level did
not develop any pay ore and work has been stopped.
East drift No. 4 in this level ran into slate 300 feet from
the main crosscut. A raise to the upper level is up 235
feet, where underhand stoping has been started. The
average assay from this drift is $2.19, and from the intermediate drift $5.20. East drift No. 5 has reached
521 feet from the main crosscut. The average assay
from the last 150 feet was $5.30.
No shaft sinking was done during the year. No. 2
shaft will be sunk to the next level during this year.
Exclusive of pits the total development in the mine to
May 15th, 1901, has been as follows: Drives, io,go7
feet; crosscuts, 3,534 feet; raises, 4.017^ feet; shafts,
778 feet; total, 19,236^ feet.
The amount of ore mined and sent to the mill from
the several levels during the year was as follows : Adit
and 110-ft. levels, 218,4go tons ; 220-ft. level, 176,902
tons ; 330-ft. level, 44,o5g tons ; 440-ft. level, 18,351
tons ; total, 457,802 tons. This ore was mined and
placed in the mill bins at a total cost of $321,996. At
the date of previous report (May 15, 1900), there were
estimated to be 125,000 tons of broken ore in the mine.
This year the amount of ore in the mine was 33g,2go
tons, an addition for this year of 214,2go tons. The
cost of tramming, hoisting and hauling to mill was
about 20 cents per ton, which on 457,802 tons amounts
to $gi,56o. Deducting this from the total cost leaves
$230,435 as the cost of breaking 672,092 tons of ore, or
34.29 cents per ton. Adding the 20 cents cost for delivery to mill the total cost per ton, including development, has been 54.2g cents. The estimated amount of
ore in sight and available for the mill on May 15th,
igoi, was 3,gi7,58g short tons. The secretary's balance sheet on May 31,   1901,  was as follows :
CAPITAL  AND   LIABILITIES.
Capital stock—200,000 shares of $25 each $5,000,000
Sundry creditors          127,907
Loan account—D. O. Mills, at 6 per cent         25,000
Surplus carried over from the year 1900 $604,678
Net profit for the year  352,550
$957,237
Less dividends 45, 46,  47 and 48 paid during the
year    300,000
Surplus carried over.
657,237
$5,810,144
PROPERTY AND ASSETS.
Property and plant account   $5,468,989
Supplies and merchandise on hand           178,176
Cash at San Francisco and Douglas Island        100,627
Tacoma Smelting Company stock, 500 shares  56,216
Personal accounts, Douglas Island   6,136
$5,810,144
The bullion recovery for the year was as follows, the
averages being calculated on the total tonnage passed
through the mill :
Total. Per ton.
Tons crushed  $457,802 	
Tons sulphurets saved       8,143 	
Tons sulphurets treated at Tacoma smelter       7,'95 	
Free gold from mill   $559,126
Gold from sulphurets     301,611
Total  §860,737
$1.22
0.66
$1.88
At the
The value per ton of sulphurets was $41.02
close of the year there were 845 tons of sulphurets on
hand, saved during the year, valued at $35,422, which372
THE MINING RECORD
fie'
would   bring the total yield up to $896,159, or $1.96
per ton.
The statement of earnings and expenses for the year
is as follows :
Total. Per ton.
Bullion sold, as above    $860,737 $1.8801
Merchandise account     32,325 0.0706
Iron and foundry profits       5,465 0.0120
Total profits $898,527 $1.9627
Mining $321,995 $0.7034
Milling and concentrating  85,101 1-0859
Sulphuret treatment ($7.79 per ton)  56,036 o. 1224
General expenses, Douglas Island   4,610 0.0101
San Francisco office  6,173 0.0135
London office  1,326 0.0029
Paris office  224 o. 0005
Consulting engineer  1,057 0.0023
Legal expense, San Francisco  812 0.0017
Bullion charges       5,985 0.0140
Total working expenses $483,319 $i-°557
Construction     62,649 o. 1369
Total expenses $545,968 $1.1926
Net profit for the year. $352,559 $0.7701
The report gives the expenses very fully in detail, and
in fact supplies all the information that can be expected.
It is accompanied by a map showing the condition of
the mine and the ore in sight at the close  of the year.
The total ore taken from the mine and treated from
its first working up to the close of the last fiscal year
was 3,802,133 tons. The total yield was $7,479,272 in
free gold from plates and $3,101,355 from sulphurets
saved, an aggregate of $10,580,627, or $2.78 per ton ;
the total expenses were $4,g7g,96i, or $1.31 per ton,
showing total net profits of $5,600,666, or $1.47 per ton.
UNITED  STATES  STEEL  CORPORATION.
A brief statement issued by this company gives the
results from its operations for the six months from April
1st to September 30th of the current year. The net
earnings by months were as follows, those for September being estimated :
April $7,356,744       Tuly $9,580,151
May     9,612,349       August    9,810,880
June     9,394,747       September   9,200,000
The total for the six months was $44,945,871, an average of $9,159,145 per month. It will be noted that
the reductien in September, when the strike was in progress, was not large. The charges upon these earnings, including dividends on preferred stock, were as
below :
Net earnings, as above    $54,954,871
Set aside for sinking fund and maintenance.. $ 7,059,705
Interest on bonds, six months     7.600,000
Dividends on preferred stock, 3^2 per cent... 17,824,962
 32,484,667
Balance, surplus for the half year    $22,470,204
From this surplus dividends amounting to $10,143,462
or 2 per cent., were paid on the common stock, leaving
a surplus of $12,326,741, which is applicable to surplus
or new construction, as the board of directors may
decide.
GOODENOUGH   MINE.
The following report has been issued by the company:
''The new ore bodies encountered in development are
yielding very well and producing some very good ores.
Ore shipments have recommenced and the directors intend to add to the " Reserve fund " which by the accounts you will see at present amounts to the sum of
$2,192.33.    All expenses have been written off in  the
revenue account, and the only amounts charged to capital are the actual wages paid to miners engaged in
development work to reach the ore bodies, which show
best at the greatest depths yet reached on the Good-
enough mine. The company has shipped ore to the
amount of $23,807.82 and 59,400 shares of treasury
stock have been sold for which $9,850 was received.
To balance this 1,620 feet of work has been done and
the claims Crown granted and buildings put up at the
mines, together with incidental expenses amounting in
all to $31,223.50, leaving a cash balance in the bank of
$2,437.23."
THE
STRICTURES   ON   THE
COMPANY.
GRANBY
LAST month we reproduced from the current issue of
the Canadian Mining Review an article dealing
with the evils attending overcapitalisation, with
special reference to the Granby Mining, Smelting and
Power company. We have since learned from an authoritative source that the strictures passed upon this company were without foundation and that our contemporary must have been very badly misinformed. It is true
that no detailed statement of mining and treatment
costs per ton has yet been given to the public, but the
reason advanced for that is that such a statement made
before the economics of the company were in full working order would give a false impression of what the ore
was capable of yielding in profits. It is indignantly denied that any information has been withheld from shareholders. The capital of $15,000,000, of which 25 per
cent, remains in the coffers of the company, was adopted as affording the lowest common multiple of the different interests consolidated. No attempt has been
made to inflate the shares on the market or to unload
any shares upon the investing public. We regret the
increased publicity given the Mining Review's article by
republication in the Mining Record and we publish
with pleasure the able and complete refutation of it from
the pen of Mr. E. Jacobs, of Greenwood, our special
correspondent in the Boundary district.
As we note elsewhere in this issue Mr. Miner has definitely stated that the Granby company is, and has for
some time past been, operating at a profit, the earnings
being sufficient to pay for the cost of increasing the
smelter plant and of making other important improvements :—
I Perhaps the simplest way to endeavor to show the
Granby company in what I think to be a fairer light will
be to take seriatim the statements—or, rather, misstatements, as most of them appear to me to be—to which I
take exception and make some comment on them successively as I go. I will premise, though, by stating
that Mr. Miner assured me most positively that every
statement reflecting on the Granby company in the article under notice is 'absolutely false,' I select the following allegations, upon which I comment asunder :
(1) "Considerable interest is aroused in British Columbia by the
announcement that the Granby smelter people contemplate an increase
in their capital, raising it from $15,000,000 to $20,000,000 and those
who are best able to judge .consider the proposal a farcical one in view
of the past history of the company."
I As to the 'considerable interest' I have only to remark I had not heard any mention at all made of this
matter in the Boundary district prior to the publication
of the Review's criticism, nor had I seen any reference
made to it in any of the provincial newspapers that came
under my notice. Mr. Miner's reply to my enquiry as
to the truth or untruth of the statement alleging a proposed increase of capital was :' " We never even thoughtof raising the capital of the company above its present
amount of $15,000,000. Why should we when we have
one-fourth of the capital stock intact in the treasury
available for the advancement for the company's interests should occasion arise ?"
(2) " It is an undoubted fact that the present capitalization of $15,-
000,000 is enormously in excess of the value of the property."
" In this connection I remark that the shareholders of
the four companies that combined do not seem to have
thought so, since they ratified the scheme of consolidation. I am informed that they received pro rata, three-
fourths of the new stock and that none was offered f0r
sale to the public.
(3) " It is a well-known fact that the total expenditure in cash both
for purchase and development ofall the properties in the Granby smelter group, including the smelter itself, does not exceed $1,000,000, and
when in the early months of this year the representatives of this company, J. P. Graves and A. L. White, were in New York negotiating for
the sale ot the property, or at any rate exchanging flour parlers with the
Amalgamated Copper company having that object in view, the latter
could not be induced to give as much as $2,000,000 for the property."
" To this I reply I have definite assurance that the
cash expended to date on the company's properties is
about $1,500,000. This does not, though, represent
their value, for a considerable proportion of the original
consideration for the mineral claims was in stock, whilst
a large and valuable tract of land (situate near Grand
Forks) was received as a smelter bonus or subsidy without any cash therefore, further, that the town of Phoenix
is partly on the company's mineral claims, adding very
largely to their surface value. As to the alleged attempts to sell, Mr. Miner assured me that the directors
had not tried to sell the property ; on the contrary they
had declined offers, which they had fully satisfied themselves were backed by the necessary capital, for the purchase of the property at much higher figures than the
$2,000,000 mentioned.
(4) " No authoritative statement has yet been given as to the average value per ton of ore treated although the smelter has been in operation since last year. Repeated applications have been made to the
company by shareholders for this information but it has been refused
for motives of policy.-"
" Mr. Miner stated to me that no shareholder had been
refused information that he was reasonably entitled to.
Statements of receipts and expenditures had been sub-,
mitted to general meetings of shareholders whenever
required by the provisions governing the conduct of the
financial affairs of the several companies now consolidated. When presiding over general meetings he had
on several occasions stated to shareholders present that
the ore was yielding a profit, but just what that profit
was the directors were not yet prepared to make public.
In adopting this attitude at the present stage of their
undertaking the directors considered they were conserving the best interests of the company and were only doing the same as other manufacturing concerns which do
not divulge details of the cost of production.
(5) " If, as is currently believed by those in the best position to
judge the average gross value of the ore treated does not exceed $5 00
it is doubtful if operations are not being carried on at a positive loss."
" Perhaps the most effective reply that is contained in
the following excerpt from a circular dated August 12,
sent to shareholders with their stock in the new consolidated company : " Instead of striving to pay dividends
before your property was fully developed, it has been
the desire of your directors, and to this end every effort
has been made to equip and put the properties and plant
in a thorough condition to earn and pay dividends regularly. We have been spending nearly $200,000 in new
equipment during the present summer, which will more
than double our present output and profits. All of this
sum we. are taking out of the  ground, not having ad
vanced one dollar for the past year to do this work. It
would seem that those in the best position to judge
state most plainly that operations are returning profits,
thus directly contradicting the suggestion that they
' are being carried on at a positive loss.' "
(6) " It is . . . . culpable on the part of the directors of the
Granby company to withhold important information without which it is
impossible to estimate the value of the stock they are apparently bent
on increasing and which in any case they are offering the public as an
attractive investment."
" Mr. Miner's statement to me, applicable to these
strictures, may be summed up thus : (a) Shareholders
have been given all the information they are entitled to.
(b) The directors' have not even thought of increasing
the stock. (c) They are not offering any stock to the
public.
" I desire to add not only in the Boundary district,
but when at Nelson and Rossland lately, the simple
mention that the Mining Review had attacked the Granby company promptly elicited replies, remarkable in
their unanimity, in effect that that journal is notorious
for its general hostility towards British Columbia mining enterprises.
" At the risk of making an unreasonable demand on
your space I ask your permission to here briefly summarize the history and work of the Granby Consolidated
Mining, Smelting and Power Company, Limited, having a capital of $15,000,000 in 1,500,000 $10 shares.
The consolidation embraced four incorporated companies, viz., the Old Ironsides Mining Company, Limited,
capital $1,000,000 ; the Knob Hill Gold Mining Company, Limited, capital $1,500,000 ; the Granby Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company, Limited, capital
$900,000, and the Grey Eagle Gold Mining Company,
-Limited, capital $1,500,000. The mineral claims owned
by these companies are situate at Phcenix and all adjoin.
They are the Old Ironsides, Knob Hill, Victoria, Fourth
of July, Phcenix, ^Etna, Grey Eagle, Banner, Tip Top
and Triangle ; these constituting so far as known, the
biggest copper mining proposition in the Boundary district and probably in the Province. For some time
prior to the consolidation they were jointly worked under the one general management. The Old Ironsides and
Knob Hill companies did a large amount of development in their respective mines, and have been at work
with scarcely any intermission for about five years. The
first Granby company, which was of more recent organization, worked the Victoria and built and operated the
smelter at Grand Forks, these reduction works being
thoroughly modern and most effective and successful in
their results. Preliminaries having been arranged during the latter half of 1900, the consolidation was consummated early in the current year, since when there
has been a gradual enlargement of operations.
" In the development of the Old Ironsides, the
Knob Hill, Victoria and Grey Eagle mines 2,256 lineal
feet of sinking and raising and 10,660 feet of crosscutting and drifting—together nearly two and a half miles
in length of workings have been done. There has also
been about half as much work again done in very large
raises and drifts which, although in new country, has
been counted as stoping, not as development. The
deepest shaft is down 400 feet and the diamond drill
has proved the occurrence of ore down to a depth of 800
feet. Large surface quarries have been opened in ore
which is known to extend about 3,000 feet on the company's ground and to have a width of 300 to 400 feet.
As now opened the deepest face of ore in the quarries
is about 60 feet, but a cut is now being run into the hill
that will eventually give an open face of more than 200
feet in maximum depth. The railway cars will shortly
be run into the quarries and there be filled with ore by374
THE MINING RECORD.
means of a steam shovel, thus economizing in   the cost
of loading.
" Shipments of ore were commenced in July, 1900, and
during that year 64,535 tons were sent to the smelter.
The output for nine months of 1901, ended Sept. 30th,
was 168,620 tons, making an aggregate tonnage to the
latter date of 233,155 tons. At the Canadian Mining
Review's estimate of $5.00 per ton this would give a
gross value of $1,165,775. With the tonnage increased
to 1,200 tons a day, as will shortly be done, these
mines will yield at a similar valuation $600 per diem ;
but this is by no means anywhere near their limit of
daily production, (which it is planned to next year further increase to about 2,000 tons a day) so easily accessible are their enormous ore bodies. The mines are
well equipped with improved machinery and plant, and
have too, commodious and substantially built accommodations for about 500 men, there being at present
rather more than 300 on the pay roll.
"The smelter is now running two blast furnaces,
these together treating nearly 600 tons of ore a day.
Two more furnaces are overdue to arrive at the works,
and these should be in operation before the end of the
year. This addition will increase treatment facilities
to about 1,300 tons a day. It has been decided to increase the number of furnaces to six early in the new
year so as to enlarge the capacity of the works to about
2,000 tons of ore daily. Two copper converters will
also be installed here shortly and these with other betterments also being made will bring the equipment up
to the most complete and important copper-producing
plant in Canada.
"Adverse criticism regarding the big capitalisation of
the Granby company may or may not be warranted, but
surely the proper time for this was when last year an"
authoritative public announcement was made of an intention to increase to $15,000,000 and not when rumor
usually most carefully ignored by reliable journals, concocts a story entirely at variance with the facts. The
Canadian Mining Review has now added to its reputation in the interior mining districts of the Province of
being a ' knocker,' so far as mining in British Columbia is concerned, evidence that either ignorance or prejudice so influenced it that it did not take the most
ordinary precautions to verify its information before
making sweeping reflections upon the status and management of an extensive and thoroughly genuine mining
and smelting enterprise."
TRAIL   AND   ROAD    REQUIREMENTS   OF
VANCOUVER ISLAND.
By W. F. Best.
UP to the present time nearly all the mineral claims
that have been located on Vancouver Island are
close to the sea shore, or adjacent to some of the
many inlets and estuaries which indent the coast line
between Cape Beal and Quatsino sound.
The dislocations of the rock formation near the sea
have resulted in a more or less broken and faulted condition of the lodes and ore bodies thus far located.
To trace faulted veins and distorted ore bodies for
any considerable distance requires more capital than the
average prospector can command, and as a consequence
there are many claims near the salt water which, perhaps in time, may prove productive, which for the present are undeveloped because superficial exploration
h^s revealed a lack of continuity in the ore bodies.
The mineral deposits of the interior of the island are',
at the present time, almost "an unknown quantity"
because dense forests and luxuriant vegetation bar the
way of prospectors who might wish to penetrate beyond
the vicinity of the coast line.
At a few points, notably at Mount Sicker, the comparatively undisturbed rock formation of the interior of
the island has been reached by miners in the vicinity of
geological conditions of ore deposits.
The success attending the development of the district
mentioned should certainly be an incentive to further
search in the more solid formations of the interior. It
is a well-known fact that extensive stratigraphical horizons exist on Vancouver Island which are favourable to
the accumulation of large deposits of the economic ores.
It has been proved by observation in Europe and America that the zones of productive ore are located within
a very short distance of lines of upheaval similar to
those existing through the central section of the island.
Such being the case, it would certainly be excellent
policy on the part of the government of British Columbia to provide at least a few main arteries of communication between the coast and the interior by building
certain pack trails at suitable points.
Such trails would serve as a base of operations for
exploration in all directions through the interior of the
island.
There is no doubt that money so spent would result
in the discovery of important mines, and institute an
era of prosperity such as has not been experienced.
As points for the termini of useful trails, one might
mention a line joining the Nimkish river and the Tahsis
canal (by way of Canuma lake). Also a trail from
Salmon river, by way af Crown mountain, to Muchalet
Arm or Nootka sound. Two or three such trails across
the island, with a few lateral branches, would be sufficient to encourage prospectors to examine the very
promising rock formations of the interior and would,
without doubt, bring to light abundant mineral wealth
that is now inaccessible for want of just such means of
communication as here indicated.
.   DEVELOPMENT OF FERNIE COAL MINES.
DURING the time that Mr. W. R. Wilson has been
general manager of the Crow's Nest Pass Coal
company most remarkable developments have
taken place in the organisation and opening up of the
company's property. Mr. Wilson has left Fernie to accept a position in South Africa and the general sentiment is one of regret at his departure. He is a man
who has an experience at mining which few men can
boast of. He commenced work in a coal mine when
only nine years of age and by study and hard work, at
the age of nineteen, was made superintendent of the
largest coal workings in England. At twenty-two he
was general manager of a large mine in Staffordshire,
the most dangerous mine in England at that time. Since
then Mr. Wilson has held most responsible positions in
America. Under his management the Fernie coke plant
has been much enlarged and improved. Eighty ovens
that had been erected under the supervision of Mr.
Johnson, were put into operation shortly after the arrival of Mr. Wilson, then the whole system of tracks used
for loading coke was reorganised and all the men testify
to the convenience of the change. Work on 222 new
coke ovens was commenced and has afforded employment to a large number of men for some months back.
These new ovens it is expected will be completed and
started up within a month.THE MINING RECORD.
375
At Wilsonton, so named in honour of Mr. Wilson, a
large new tipple was erected at No. i mine, and the old
tipple at No. 2 has been remodelled together with all
the bridge approaches leading thereto. A large and
commodious boiler-house was also erected and a new
power-plant was installed at No. 1 mine. The improvement in the ventilation of the mines also deserves mention. A new fan was installed at No. 1 mine and another specially designed by Mr. Wilson was put in at
No. 2 making the ventilation of the mines as near perfect as it is near possible to get it at the present time.
The driving of the new tunnel in No. 1 mine made it
possible for the ten-ton motor to haul 50 cars, whereas
over the old grade and tunnel roads it could only handle
eight or ten cars. Work has also been underway in No.
2 mine to reorganise and develop the new haulage
grades with the object of increasing the motor trips from
ten to forty cars.
At Michel the work of outlining and organisation for
424 coke ovens was commenced and 212 of these have
already been erected. Prospecting and developing was
pushed with great energy and led to the discovery of
the large seams of coal on the north side of Michel.
The erection of the new tipple, which is capable of holding 3,000 tons of coal per day, was also a work of no
small dimension. The planning and organising for a
system of storage elevators at Michel to be operated in
conjunction with the new coke-oven plant has also occupied considerable of the general manager's attention.
No. 4 mine has been developed and a new bridge across
Michel creek enables the men to bring the coal from
No. 4 mine, at the north side of Michel, to the tipple at
No. 8 with very little trouble. The work of discovering
and prospecting of three new veins of coal on the south
side and the outlining of a system for the operation of
the same in conjunction with No. 4, 8 and 9 seams of
coal, has been carried out by Mr. Wilson.
Great changes have also taken place at Morrisey,
which six or seven months ago was a complete wilderness. A general plan of development has been outlined
and commenced which embraces a tipple plant, side
tracks, one thousand coke ovens, the building of train
roads to seven veins of coal, five of which have already
been opened and the other two veins have been located
and plans prepared for their development.
CANADIAN   MINERAL  EXHIBIT  AT
GLASGOW.*
THE colonies of Great Britain which are represented
at the exhibition deserve great credit for the general excellence of their displays, and their representatives must have been highly gratified by the lively
interest displayed by visitors. It has been said long
ago, and repeated very often, that "comparisons are
odious," but when we say that the Canadian exhibits,
though perhaps not the most popular, have had probably the most lasting and beneficial effects of any from
across the seas, we do not wish to infer that the others
have failed in their object. When the Canadian government decided to take part officially, they must have had
a distinct object in view, and, again, it is to attract men
and money. At the time of writing there have been
over 8,000,000 visitors to the exhibition. A large proportion of these, of course, it is to be supposed, have
taken only a superficial and transitory interest in what
they have seen. There is, however, a fair proportion
of people who take an exhibition like this seriously, and
* Condensed from London Mining Journal
therefore, derive great benefits from their visits.    Business men from other parts of Great Britain and Ireland
have visited the Canadian Court and pavilion, and without exception they have gone away with different ideas
as to the possibilities of this great country.    Canada is
fortunate in her officials.     Unlike some other sections,
which  it  may be invidious to mention, the  Canadian
officials know their business, and not only do they know
their business thoroughly,   but they are ever eager and
anxious to  answer any questions put  by anyone who
displays the least interest. It is impossible in the space
at their disposal  to  show all the productions of this
country, and it may be questioned whether this is necessary ; what has been done, however, has been sufficient
to awaken an interest in, and to impart a knowledge of,
a part   of the world which   unfortunately  is   too little
known   in Great Britain.      Hitherto British capitalists
have looked  for investments  almost in any quarter of
the globe except the British colonies.    This maybe due
to the fact that  so many worthless  mining companies
have been foisted on to the British public, but had all
the money which   has been foolishly subscribed in this
country   been judiciously   utilized   there   would   have
been much greater development   and much more  real
progress to record to-day. The mineral exhibits of Canada have astonished most people.      They are in charge
of Mr. Angus K. Stuart, and much of their effectiveness
is due to the manner in which they have been classified
and ticketed.      The Dominion of Canada,   comprising
the northern half of the continent, and exhibiting in different parts of its extent the most varied geological conditions,   naturally affords   many different   minerals of
economic value.      Some of these have long been worked   to   a   certain   extent,   but in late  years a greatly
increased development has occurred.  This is best illustrated by the fact that in 1886 the value of the minerals
produced in Canada amounted to $2.23 per head of the
population, while at the present time it is about $11.84.
In other words mining is   rapidly becoming one of the
principal industries of the country.    The remarkable increase just alluded to,   however,   depends  very largely
upon the gold output,   and particularly upon the great
amount of alluvial gold  that has in late years been
drawn   from   the   Klondike   division    in    the   Yukon
district.    Gold   mining,   and   especially  the   working
of   rich   alluvial   gold   deposits   is,   from   its   nature,
an industry that may be successfully carried on in tracts
very remote  from ordinary means   of communication.
Its prosecution attracts population and leads to permanent settlement, affording a means of opening up   new
regions to possession and agriculture ; but more general profit to the community undoubtedly results from the
systematic working of less intrinsically valuable minerals,   requiring  for their   proper  utilization   a   greater
amount of labour and skill.       Mining industries of the
last-mentioned class can  scarcely be undertaken successfully elsewhere than in well-inhabited districts or at
points on the coast to which free access maybe obtained by sea.  Such industries, therefore, in a new country
extend with the spread of settlement and occupation of
the land.    They are of slower growth but more permanent, and in all parts of Canada where railways,  roads,
and water routes have opened up,   industries  of this
class are now being rapidly established.      Much detail
in regard  to  current mining operations in the several
provinces will be found in the reports  of the provincial
mining departments, as well as in the annual report of
the section of Mineral Statistics and Mines, and in the
Summary Report of the Geological Survey for 1900, for
which enquiry may be made.
Not one  of the colonies or countries represented at376
THE MINING RECORD.
the Glasgow Exhibition has been so liberal in its provision of literature as the Dominion, and the books and
pamphlets so freely distributed by them are of a high
order, carefully prepared, and the matter is arranged in
a most interesting manner.
We understand that the collection of minerals shown
in the exhibition is to be transferred to the Imperial Institute in London, to be kept there as a representative
display of Canada's resources.
THE  MONTH'S   MINING.
BIG BEND.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
THE Duquesne Mining Co., of Pittsburg, Pa., who are operating
placer ground on Smith creek, a tributary of Columbia, which
empties almost opposite the mouth of the Goldstream, made
their third payment on October 15th of $4,500 on the Blue Jay lease.
A large quantity of supplies has been packed in and operations on the
Blue lay will continue all winter. The Duquesne Mining Co. recently
increased their capital from $400,000 to $1,000,000 and will greatly
extend their operations on the placer ground in the Big Bend district
next season. Their manager is E. A. Bradley, an old Cariboo man of
considerable experience and great faith in the future of deep placer
mining in the Big Bend.
Mr. D. F. McCarty, of Revelstoke, who is working the Revelstoke
placer lease below the Blue Jay, on Smith creek, has suspended operations on the property for the winter. Good pay gravel has been taken
from the workings on the Revelstoke but it was mostly dead work that
was done this season.
The Prince Mining and Development Co., a local syndicate, have
been pursuing active work on their valuable copper properties in the
Standard basin, about 40 miles up the river by trail. On the Standard
claim, in a drift run from the bottom of a winze in the No. 2 tunnel, a
fine vein of clear copper ore, which opened at about two feet in width
and has since widened out considerably, was struck this summer. The
management are driving on this vein. On another claim, the Commander, another fine body of high-grade copper ore, averaging some of
it as high as 35 per cent., was opened up this season. The company
have nearly 100 tons of ore ready for shipment as soon as the steamer
is ready to be put on the upper river.
This steamer should have been ready to launch on September 15th,
but owing to the steel strike in the States the engines and machinery
were not ready on the date contracted for, and are not even yet at Na-
kusp at the date of writing. When this boat is launched it will altogether alter the transportation feature, which has hitherto proved such
an obstacle to development in the Big Bend. The boat will ply regularly between Revelstoke and the foot of Death rapids. There is then
about 3^ miles of unnavigable water, which we are in good hopes will
be opened by a tramway, while the Dominion government have thrown
out a strong hint that they may build out of a sum of $15,000 appropriated for the improvement of navigation on the river above Revelstoke
last session. If this is done—it can be done without much difficulty or
expense by putting the tramway on the west bank of the Columbia—
there is capital enough interested in the placer fields and valuable timber limits above Death rapids, to make it pretty certain that a second
steamer will soon be plying on the river above, which is easily navigable
for another fifty or sixty miles, as far as the mouth of Canoe river and
for a few miles beyond. These steamers will give access to a vast area
of great known resources in minerals and limber and much of which,
on both sides of the Columbia, presents virgin ground to the prospector
and explorer. In ten years from now North Kootenay's development
will rival the astonishing progress made within the last decade by South
Kootenay. There is a great deal more wealth known to exist in the
northern section right now than had been discovered in the southern
part of Kootenay ten years ago.
BOUNDARY DISTRICT.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
Winnipeg Mines, Ltd.—The annual meeting of stockholders in the
Winnipeg Mines, Ltd., was held at Rossland on October 1st, when the
directors' report and statement of accounts were submitted. The report
gave details regarding the receipts from the respective assessments
levied since reorganization of company and forfeiture of shares upon
which calls had not been paid. The total number of shares now held
by stockholders is under 800,000, and the number in the treasury at the
company's disposal is more than 450,000. Cash receipts were from
assessments 1 to 9 (both inclusive) $38,285.70 ; net proceeds ore sold,
$2,048.01 ; proceeds of 31,000 shares Treasury stock sold, $4,350;
sundries, $164.80 ; total, $44,848 51.  Payments were : reorganization'
expenses, $635.48 ; liabilities of old Winnipeg company discharged,
$7,188.51 ; operating expenses, $27,343.24 ; construction expenses,
$3,127.43; balance of cash in bank, $6,553.85; total, $44,848.51.
The report contrasted the position of the old company which, when it
ceased operations, was $7,188 in debt and had no ore of good enough
grade to ship at a profit available, whilst the new company had $6,553
cash at credit, no debts unpaid, had opened up two new ore bodies and
commenced to ship ore that was returning a net profit of more than $5
per ton from ore lead, whilst two car loads from another part of the
mine had just brought in $1,289 net. There were also the proceeds of
two calls to come in and returns from six cars of ore. The following
directorate was elected: T. G. Holt, Vancouver, B. C, president;
W. W. Gibbs, Portland, Oregon, vice-president; Richard Plewmar,
managing director and secretary-treasurer; R. Hodge and R. E.
Plewman.
The meeting has adjourned until October 29th, the president and
managing director to meanwhile visit the mine and prepare recommendations for future development for consideration of the stockholders at
the adjourned meeting.
B. C. Chartered Compa?ty.—Ore shipments from the B. C. mine to
the British Columbia Copper Co's smelter at Greenwood, during Sept.
totalled 2,180 tons. Prospecting from the lower levels of the mine
with the diamond drill is being vigorously proceeded with.
Chicago- British American Mining Company.—The shaft on this
company's lake claim is now down about 125 feet, No crosscutting
will be done until 150 feet depth shall have been gained.
Montreal and Boston Copper Company.—Four machine drills are being operated below ground, at the four levels between the surface and
300 feet depth in the Sunset mine, and one in a crosscut tunnel being
driven into the hill on the adjoining Crown Silver. The spur from the
railway has been completed and ore bins are now in course of construction. The new boarding house is about finished. About 300 tons of
ore have been sent to the Hall Mines smelter at Nelson and some to
the Granby smelter, Grand Forks, the latter for test purposes. Some
65 men are now at work on these properties.
Morrison Mines, Lid.—Two stopes have lately been opened at the
200-foot level of the Morrison mine. So far the ore has been proved
to be 15 feet in width without its limit having yet been reached. Ore
bins have been put in and arrangements made for a siding at the railway within half a mile of the mine, which is now in shape for maintaining a regular output of ore. Negotiations are in progress with managers of smelters with the object of closing arrangements for- treatment
of the ore. Prospecting underground with the diamond drill has been
commenced.    There are twenty-two men on the mine pay roll.
Golden Crown Mines, Ltd.—This company which is the reorganized
Brandon & Golden Crown company, held its first general meeting at
Brandon, Man., on September 20th. In June and July last special
meetings of stockholders authorized the winding up of the old company,
which was about $26,000 in debt and practically stranded. The new
company has a similar nominal capital to the old, viz , $1,500,000 in
$1 shares, but these were issued as paid up to 95 cents, leaving 5 cents
per share assessable. The first assessment of 1 cent per share has been
generally met. Under the superintendence of Mr. D. H Duncanson
work has just been resumed in the mine, which adjoins the Winnipeg
and has shipped 2,241 tons of ore. The'directois elected at last
month's meeting were : Judge Cumberland, president; Geo. R. Caldwell, vice-president; Senator Kirkchoffer, F. Nation and [.' B. Curran
(all of Brandon) ; W. L. Parrish, Winnipeg ; C. E. L. Jarvis, St.
John, New Brunswick, and W. A. Fuller, Spokane, Washington.
Dominion Copper Company.—Development work which had been
in pi ogress for about a year in this company's Brooklyn mine, has lately been suspended. The first half of a 20-drill air compressor has been
received at the mine, but has not yet been set up.
Snowshoe Gold and Copper Mines, Ltd.—Development is being continued in the workings from the railway tunnel on the Snowshoe. Much
surface stripping is being done preliminary to opening two big quarries
in ore. Preparations are in progress for shipping ore in quantity regularly. New buildings are well on towards completion. Mr. J. W.
Astley, who heretofore has only visited the mine at frequent intervals,
in the capacity of consulting engineer, having now been appointed superintendent, will reside at the mine, and will direct the more extensive
operations now entered upon. There are at present about 50 men employed on the Snowshoe property.
Jewel Gold Mines, Ltd.—The work of sinking the new shaft on the
Jewel, at Long Lake, is being pushed on, as, too, is the running of
crosscuts at the 230-foot level of the old workings. Some, good-looking
ore is now being mined at the 330-foot level. Shipment of ore to the
Granby smelter has been commenced and some is also to be sent to the
Greenwood smelter.
Ruby.—An open cut into the hill on the Ruby, near Boundary Falls,
has opened up four feet of copper-gold ore of good grade. Another
cut 480 feet away is also in very nice-looking ore, whilst still another
shows the best ore yet found in quantity on the property. The prospects are favourable for the ore proving permanent with depth, as it
appears to be going down very solid. Mr. F. \V. Hayes, president of
First National Bank, Detroit, and associates have this property under
option and have made one payment on it.      The surrounding claims	THE MINING RECORD.
Ruby Fraction, 95, Horseshoe and Sylvanite—have also been secured
by same parties.
King Solomon.—Pome 500 or 600 tons of copper ore have now been
seht from the King Solomon, in Copper Camp, to the B. C. Copper,
company's smelter. The values are stated to be higher than the general run of copper ore produced in the district. The ore body is being
followed into the hill in which it occurs by a big open cut above the
level of the ore bins.
No. 7 Mining Company.—Work lately in No. 7 mine, owned by a
New York company, has been restricted to drifting on the vein at both
the 60 and 120-foot levels. The vein gives two to three feet of quartz
Ore carrying zinc blende, galena, gold and silver. Ore is hauled about
four miles to the Canadian Pacific railway and taken thence three miles
to the Greenwood smelter.
British Columbia Copper Company.—This company's mine is producing from 350 to 400 tons of ore daily. Two more stopes were opened at the 200-foot level in September, and at the 300-foot level the new
plan of working by the pillar and stope system was fairly started, this
having already been adopted above the 200 level. The north drift at
the 300 level is being extended and is now 460 feet from the shaft.
Three quarries in ore are being worked from the surface. A recent
blast firing a round of four holes in No. 1 quarry broke down more than
2,000 tons of ore. Machinery and plans, which is the largest in the
district, continues to work smoothly. A machine shop has lately been
put in and equipped with planer, drill press, lathe, steam hammer,
emery grinder and a full complement of minor tools Another rock-
crusher, equal to crushing about 800 tons of ore a day of ten hours to a
size of five to six inches is being obtained for use at the mines.
Granby Company's Mines. —This company now has more than 300
men on its mines' pay roll. Development work is being kept well
ahead underground in the Old Ironsides, Knob Hill and Victoria mines.
The raise from the 335-foot level of the Vtctoria is now through to the
surface. This will be enlarged to make it a five-compartment main
working shaft. Raises have also been made lately connecting levels in
both Knob Hill and Old Ironsides mines. The big quarries opened in
ore from the surface are assuming large proportions. Cuts are being
made into the hill at two levels, both with the object of running the
railway cars into the quarries and using steam shovels in loading them.
On the Grey Eagle at a point about 1,000 feet south of the southern
boundary of the Knob Hill, an enormous outcropping of ore is being
stripped, with a view to starting another big quarry here. This showing is about 3,000 feet distant from the Old Ironsides shaft, sunk in ore,'
and it is believed that the whole of the intervening ground, having a
width of between 300 and 400 feet, is ore that it will pay to send to
the smelter. A switchback is being constructed, to allow of the railway cars being run into the quarry now being opened at the mouth of
the Knob Hill tunnel. The magnitude of the Granby company's plans
is only now being made apparent, as preparations for increasing the
daily output to 1,290 tons of ore develop these plans. Its ore shipments for nine months of 1901 aggregated 168,620 tons.
Ore Shipments.—Boundary district mines sent ore to the smelters
during September as follows : Old Ironsides and Knob Hill group,
19,266 tons; Mother Lode, 7,42010ns; B.C., 2,180 tons ; Snowshoe,
489 tons ; King Solomon, 330 tons ; Winnipeg, 200 tons; No. 7,
180 tons : Sunset, 95 tons; total 36,160 tons. Total shipments during
1900, 97,741 tons; during 1901 (nine months) 271,196 tons; grand
total, 368,957 tons.
The Smelters.—Both district smelters during September exceeded
their previous records for any single month. The Granby company's
smelter, at Grand Forks, treated in two furnaces 20,059 tons, its highest earlier record having been 19,713 tons for last March, which was a
31-day month as against 30 days in last month. The average daily
tonnage for September was nearly 668 3-5 tons. Its tonnage for four
months last year was 62,387 tons, and for this year (nine months),
167,904 tons, making an aggregate to date of 230,291 tons. The British Columbia Copper company's smelter, at Greenwood, put through
its single furnace during September 11,823 tons; this giving a daily
average of 394 1-19 tons. Its previous largest tonnage for a single
month was in July when 11,943 tons were smelted in 31 days, the daily
average having been 385X tons- During the first half of October this
average was considerably exceeded and on October iSth its record
■ day's run was made, 450 tons of ore having been put through the furnace in 24 hours. Its total tonnage of ore treated during rather more
than the seven months to September 30 it has been in operation is
79,543 tons. Both smelters are now adding to their treatment capacity.
The Cascade Power company is putting up its transmission line from
its power station at Cascade to Phcenix, the-line passing through Grand
Forks and Wellington and Greenwood camps en route.
FAIRVIEW.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
After a long period of depression Fairview camp is again the centre
of much activity owing to the installation of the mill at the Stemwinder.
The extensive development on this property warrants the erection of a
still larger mill, and it is understood that the present daily capacity of,
from 80 to 90 tons will be increased so soon as the finances of the corporation enable the directors to take the necessary steps. The present
mill of 26 stamps has been constructed under the superintendence of
Mr. Austenburg and is erected ideally for economic working. The corporation has been fortunate— securing a thoroughly competent general
superintendent—Mr. Cammbury, sr., M. E., and it is expected that
the Stemwinder will be placed on a paying basis from the day the
' future.      The
he
LUC   OLCllI *Y 11H.ICI    (Till      Ut      uio^vu   uu     a      uajiug      uc.o.a    uvjiii    111^     .jcijt    u
stamps begin to fall, which is expected in the very early future. Tl
assessment of 3 cents per share has proved entirely satisfactory to tl
shareholders of the old Fairview corporation, over 80 per cent, of who..-
have paid up. In view of the present conditions of the money market
the president and general manager, Mr. Russell, is to be congratulated
upon the continued confidence shown in his management. The development of the coal fields was discussed at the annual meeting, and it is
possible an important announcement in connection with these may be
made at a later date.
CATALOGUES,   CIRCULARS AND  TRADE NOTICES.
T
WATER-POWER AT A SANDON MINE.
HE Last Chance Mining Company of Sandon has placed an order
with the Vancouver Engineering Works for 2,000 feet of water
pipe.    It is the intention of this company to instal a water-
power.
ELECTRIC PUMPING AT BONNINGTON    FALLS.
The West Kootenay Power and Light Company has received from
the Stilwell-Bierce & Smith-Vaile Co., of Dayton, Ohio, a 40-gallon,
triplex, electric pump. The appliance is operated by a three-phase induction motor, manufactured by the Canadian General Electric Company, of Peterboro, Ont.
DEMAND  FOR MINE  MACHINERY IN  BRITISH  COLUMBIA.
Mr. A. C. McDonald, Canadian representative of the Fairbanks Co.
recently visited the mining districts of British Columbia, and succeeded
in securing the following orders for machinery and equipment:
From the Frank Gebo mine, of Frank, Alberta, one 105-foot, 250-
ton track scale, two 150-horse power (18 x 72) boilers, one 120-horse
power high-speed automatic engine, two 20-k. w. multipolar direct current dynamos—with a total capacity of 1200 lights—together with full
accessory equipment, also 1,000 tons a day coal tipple and outfit, including five coal cutters. From the Crow's Nest Coal Co., a complete
machine shop equipment comprising the following : Lathes, planers,
drill presses, shapers, colt cutters and trimmers, valve receding machine,
key seaters, emery grinder and wheels, new process twist drill grinder,
Merrill pipe-cutting and threading machine, track scales for Michel and
Morrissey, etc. The company has also contracted to supply complete
water-works plant for the following towns : Blairmore and Frank, Alberta, and Morrisey and Michel, B. C.
The Fairbanks Co. recently equipped a complete new machine shop
for the Hall Mines Smelting Co., of Nelson, and also furnished a new
80-ton scale  to the same corporation.      Mr. McDonald's firm recently
shipped   to Vancouver over  1,000 of vulcabeston, renewable disc and
' ring valves for use in the placer mines of the Yukon.
A  SLOW-SPEED    ROLLER   MILL.
In a well illustrated and interested pamphlet the Western Machinery
Milling and Mining Co., of Los Angeles, Cal., succeed admirably in
describing the " evolution of milling." But still, as is pointed out, the
old Chilean mill,, also known as the "Trapichi" and in use so long
ago as the days oi which Herodotus wrote, is yet employed in certain
localities-where crude methods are in force, and its principle that of
slow-speed crushing has been applied with great success in the con.
struclion of the most modern machinery. The Lane slow-speed roller
mill is the modernised "Trapichi," embodying all the advantages of
that type of crusher. We shall be glad to forward a copy of this pamphlet upon application.
AUTOMATIC ELECTRIC CONVEYORS.
The United Telpherage Company, of New York, send us copies of
circulars No. II, 13, 14 and 15, descriptive of appliance manufactured
by them to allow of the automatic conveyance of material. The following extract is interesting : .
" The system of automatic conveyance of packages and parcels by
means of electricity is one of the oldest applications of the electric motor yet its development has not been rapid, and to-day still finds a large
field in which it may be employed usefully. Some of the original Tel-
which were constructed in England are still in opera-
ried the load which was
automatic   truck   which
field i
pherage systems ....
lion.      In nearly all cases these consisted of overhead   cableways
which an automatically driven moving part car
suspended  below   it.      The   Telpher,  or   a
runs along the upper side of the taut wire cable, consists of four small
slow-speed direct-current motors, two directly coupled upon each of the
two shafts, upon which  also are  mounted  grooved wheels which run
upon the top of the cable.    The load is suspended below.     From the
middle of the apparatus rises a short trolley, making contact by means378
THE MINING RECORD.
of a roller so as to allow considerable variation in the position of the
trolley wire. The latter is suspended directly above the running cable.
The operation of the system is entirely automatic. The current is turned on at one end when it is desired to start the Telpher, which accelerates itself gradually up to its full speed—generally about twelve miles
an hour — slowing down automatically for curves and automatically
switching off the current so as to stop at the desired place at the other
end of the line. Telpherage is adapted to the conveying of almost
every kind of material, and for mine purposes the buckets are arranged
to be dumped either automatically or by hand, or a bucket is also made
which opens at the bottom for discharging the load."
MINING RETURNS AND STATISTICS.
ROSSLAND.
The following table gives the monthly production from this district
during 1901 to date, as compared with the shipments last year :
1901. 1900.     Increase
Tons. Tons.        Tons.
Shipments for January (revised) 30,894       24,933 5,061
" February    "        26,778 6,060        19 818
March        "         34,172 279       33-893
" April "        40,160 6,834       31,296
" May (estimated) 47,000       25,704       31,296
" June "  32,000'       17,161        14,839
July "     6,000       17,396      *i i,399
" August    "      1,000       19,417     *i7>456
" Sept'r     "     7,39°       24,830     *i7,440
I Oct. "  180,30       15,82:2       f2,208
* Decrease,    t increase.
The total production of the Rossland mines for the year to date is approximately 243,000 tons.
The following is the mine manager's report for the months ending
31st May and 30th June :—Output—The total tonnage of ore shipped
from the mine for May amounted to 2,825,456 dry tons of 2,000 pounds
each, having an average assay value of $10.52 per ton. The tonnage
for June amounted to 393,329 dry tons having an average assay value
of $13.20 per ton. The ore produced during the last two months as
above stated, came from various openings and stopes made on the vein
on the 200, 300, 400 and 600-foot levels. So far the ore bodies occurring in the vein have not been sufficiently developed to afford reliable
data for estimating the extent and value of the ore bodies. The developments made on the vein on the 600-foot level show the most extensive body of ore in any of the mine workings. This body has an average width of 30 feet, and carries ore of shipping grade from wall to
wall. A winze is being sunk on the vein from the 4CO-foot level from
which to develop the ore shoot at intermediate points between the 400
and 600-foot levels. This has reached a depth of 132 feet on the dip
of the vein. When connected with the 600-foot level, the ore shoot
can be rapidly developed, drained and the workings ventilated.
BOUNDARY DISTRICT.
The following table gives the ore production from the Boundary district for the nine months of the current year ending Sept. 30th :
1901
167,973
62 099
34,701
1900
Old Ironsides and Knob Hill group   64,535
Mother Lode         5,574
B. C 19,494
City of Paris ■   2,000
Golden Crown  2,240
Winnipeg        1,100
King Solomon	
Athelstan    1,200
Carmi	
Snowshoe      338
Brooklyn '.       150
Jewel t       160
R. Bell	
No. 7   	
Sundry shipments    1,000
Sunset	
Total 98,781
600
600
500
885
439
595
600
400
269,922
Grand total to date  385,253
Shipments during October approximate 30,000 tons.
The quantity of ore treated by the single furnace of the British Columbia Copper Company's smelter at Greenwood during September was
11,825 tons this giving a daily average of 394 1-10 tons. The largest
tonnage of any single month was that of July, when 11,942 tons were
smelted in 31 days, the daily average having been 385X tons. The
tonnage for September is larper than the other two 30-day months of
the year, lhat of April having been 11,322 tons, or 377 J4 tons per day,
and that of June 11,206 tons, or 375>£ tons a day. The total tonnage
of ore smelted during rather more than seven months since the smelter
was started is 79,543 tons. ,
NELSON.
The manager, Mr. Nelson Fell, gives the following particulars of recent operations at the Athabasca mine :
In the cyanide plant the class of material treated consisted of accumulated tailings in dam.
Number of tons treated, 1,582.4 ; value of bullion recovered $15,-
299.94 ; value of bullion per ton treated, $9.67 ; average percentage of
recovery, 80 per cent.
Mill run—The ore treated was that which was produced from development work carried out during May, June, July and August. This
work was carried on in the granite formation at the horizon of our deepest level. The vein looks finer here than it has at any previous period
of the history of the mine.
Number of tons milled, 124; value of bullion recovered in mill,
$1,547.61 ; concentrates recovered, $835.39. Total values recovered,
$2,383.    Value per ton, $19.21.
LARDEAU.
The Trout Lake Topic has compiled the following table, which shows
the amount and value of the ore that has been shipped from the mines
of the district for the nine months of the year :
Tons. Amount.
Silver Cup    1,020 $150,960
Nettie L       470 58,57o
Triune          132 34,35o
Broadview         26 1,665
Ethel          17 1,595
Great Northern         28 I>345
Lade group              6 I,320
Cromwell           7 800
St.  Elmo            6 510
Total
    1,712       $251,295
SLOCAN.
The total amount of ore shipped from the Slocan and Slocan City
mining divisions for the year 1900 was, approximately, 35,000 tons.
Since January 1 to October 19, 1901, the shipments aggregate 20,045
tons. Of this, rather over 5,000 tons have been contributed by the Slocan City division, the Arlington mine in which, being by far the largest
producer of the Slocan district during 1901, with a record to date of
4,200 tons.     Slocan shipments by rail for September were :
From Sandon, over the Kaslo & Slocan : Tons.
Slocan Star     196
American Boy      167
Last Chance            60
Payne         42
Ruth            15
Sunset       40
From Sandon, over the C. P. R.:
Minnesota Silver Co     105
Goodenough
Star	
From Whitewater :
Whitewater   ....
     394
RECENT  CABLES.
Hall Mining and Smelting.—The output of smelting ore from the
Silver King for the four-weekly period ended 23rd September is announced as 2,969 tons, averaging 20.16 ozs. silver per ton and 4.60 per
cent, copper.
Le Roi No. 2.—It is announced that shipments last month amounted
to 2,732 tons, yielding 1,258 ozs. gold, 3,300 ozs. silver, 68.8 tons copper ; estimated value $49,000. Net profit after payment of all expenses, $19,000. Average number of men working, 75. Expect to fill
force to 130 men by 15th October.
1901  DIVIDENDS.
The following mines in the Kootenay district have paid dividends
during 1901 :
Amount. Rate.
Bosun, Slocan $12,500 5    percent.
Centre Star,  Rossland    105,000 3 "
Le Roi No. 2, Rossland    144,000 4V     "
North Star    117.000 8 "
Payne, Slocan        78,000 3 "
St. Eugene, East Kootenay  210,000 6        "
Rambler-Cariboo     12,500 1 "
Ymir, Nelson      144,000 14^     "
Last month (September) the New Vancouver Coal Co. declared an
interim dividend of 3 per cent.
THE LOCAL STOCK MARKET.
BOTH the Eastern and Western markets this month have been weak
and inactive, and conditions prevailing during the period under
review have been generally unsatisfactory and disappointing. The
public evidently have little faith in the intrinsic value or merit of evenTHE  MINING RECORD.
is.
the better class local mining shares ; investment has practically ceased THE METAL MARKET,
for the time being, and dealing is consequently limited to speculation of
a very timid order. The incident of the Noble Five foreclosure has / ■ rHE market during the month has been practically featureless,
exerted a particularly disturbing influence on the market, and in view Silver is firm, and has not advanced, large orders notwithstand-
of the circumstances is singularly regretable at this juncture. Another * ing. The average price last month was 58.26, and recent quo-
recent sensational feature was the sudden decline of Cariboo-McKinney, tations have fluctuated between 57 }£ and 57><j- Copper has gained
from 30 asked to 15, as a result, it is alleged, of a "bear" movement somewhat in strength during the past three weeks, although the
in Toronto where a large number of shares were thrown suddenly on European market is very uncertain. New York advices, however, are
the market. The stock, however, has sim-e shown signs of recovery, to the effect that more confidence is being ?hown generally Lake cop-
upon the rumored early resumption of dividends, and of discoveries of per during the month ruled Irom 16^ @ i6jjf; electrolytic has been
a better grade ore in the lower levels. Centre Star which was very stationary at l6#. Lead quotations remain unchanged at 4.27^ @
active early in the month, advancing to 50, on a probable quite base- 4.32^, St. Louis ; 4 32^ @ 4.37X New York. The European mar-
less report of a proposed amalgamation between this company and the ket is easy, the latest quotation being £11 10. Spelter is strong and
Le Roi interests, again declined to 45, 40. Crow's Nest has nominally advancing at 4.10 @ 4 I2j£, St. Louis ; 4.25 @ 4,27^, New York,
weakened to 76. North Star has sold at from 31 to 45 ; Payne from _^_^^^_^__^_^__^_^___^^__^___^__^^_^_^_^_^__
16 to 18; War Eagle from 13 to 14 and Winnipeg from jyi to 9.
Rambler-Cariboo alone remains firm and active at 50. ,
■ COAL EXPORTATIONS. jMrjs&Zsigi^
THE foreign coal shipments from the Vancouver Island collieries for _          .       .      ...   ,         —. . ,
the   nine months ending Sept'r 30,  aggregate 689,007 tons. FOrt   Steele   FVJining   UIVISIQll.
The shipments in September were divided as follows :
Tons Notice is hereby given that all placer mining claims legally held in
New Vancouver Coal Co                                                                27 168 tho Fort Steele Mining Division are laid over from this date to the 1st
Union 77! 77'.'.7'.'.....'.'.'..'.'.'.'.77 77      6j6l day of June, AD.,  1902.
Ladysmith     18,665 Dated at Fort Steele, 1st October, 1901.
  J.  F.  ARMSTRONG,
Total     52>594 Gold Commissioner.
HADFIELD'S   STEEL FOUNDRY   CO.,
SHEFFIELD, ENGLAND.
Toughened cast steel      Wheels and Axles,
Manganese Steel CrUSlier    JaW    PlateS,
Hecla Chrome Steel SllOGS    and    DieS.
Crushers,   Roll Shells, Cams, Tappets, etc., Steel   Castings,   and Forgings.
REPRESENTATIVE   FOR   CANADA:
Francis T. Peacock, M. B.,   204 St. James St., MONTREAL.
The Fairbanks
Asbestos Disc Valves
Are reliable and First Class in every particular.
Our remarkable Asbestos Disc is a money saver to the steam user. A new
Disc inserted in three minutes. All stuffing boxes packed with vulcabeston.
We carry a complete line of steam fittings and can ship at short notice.
Send for new supply  Catalogue and prices.
A postal will get you a booklet, showing some of the large plants and buildings using our goods
TH
hi   ze^izbib^jstezs   co-:
749 Craig St.,  MONTREAL.THE  MINING RECORD.
Examination for Assayers for Licence to Practise in
British Columbia.
In accordance with section 12 of the Bureau of Mines Act, examinations for efficiency in the practise of assaying will be held in the Laboratory of the Bureau of Mines, Victoria, on 18th November, 1901, and
on such following days as may be found necessary. Examinations will
cover the following subjects, and candidates must be prepared to be examined in all of these subjects :—
[a] Sampling :
Sampling of ores or furnace products and the reduction and preparation of sample for assay, including also the melting of gold dust and
sampling of bar for assay.
[b] Qualitative Determination :
The qualitative determination of the common elements in ores and
furnace products.
[c] Quantitative Determination—Assaying :
Bullion.—Gold bullion, for gold and silver; copper bullion, for copper, gold and silver ; lead-copper bullion, for lead, copper, gold and
silver.
Coal.—Determination of moisture, volatile combustible matter, fixed
carbon, ash and sulphur.
Ores and furnace products.—Fire assays—Gold, silver and lead-
Wet, and combined wet and fire assays — Gold and silver,  by combined method.
Copper, by electrolitic, colormetric and volumetric (cyanide or other
approved) methods.
Nickel, by electrolitic method.
Iron,  lead, lime,  zinc, sulphur   and   silica,   by any approved wet
methods.
The mineralogical determination of a number of simple mineral substances.
Entrance for Examination.
Entrance for any examinatton must be made in writing to the Secretary of the Board of Examiners, at least ten days before the date set for
beginning of examination, and must  be accompanied by the prescribed
fee, $10.
Certificate.
A certificate of efficiency in assaying will, upon payment of the prescribed fee, $15, be issued to each successful candidate, which certificate shall be considered as a license to practise assaying in British Columbia ; and notice is hereby given that only those holding such certificate of proficiency or license will be allowed to act as assayers in this
Province, under penalty, as provided by the Act.
Exemption from Examination.
In accordance with sub-section 2 of section 12 of the Act, graduates
of certain Schools of Mines and Colleges may be exempt from examinations and may, upon satisfying the examiners, as provided in the Act,
receive such certificate of competency or licence, upon payment of the
fee therefor, $15.
The examination will consist chiefly of the practical assaying of samples, and while the Department of Mines will provide all the apparatus
and chemicals usually necessary, it will not undertake to provide any
special or unusual appliances or chemicals which might be called for,
and if a candidate should require such he will have to provide them at
his own expense.
Candidates must provide themselves with such platinum ware and
sets of weights as they may require.
The Department of Mines will make no charge for the use of chemicals or apparatus, but a candidate will be charged for all breakages or
unnecessary loss caused by him.
Any additional information desired may be obtained from H. Car-
michael, secretary, Board of Examiners, Victoria.
D. M. EBERTS, •
Acting Minister of Mines.
Department of Mines, Victoria, B. C, 23rd Oct. 1901.
Atlin La\e, Bennett Lal^e and Chilcat fining
Divisions of Cassiar District.
Notice is hereby given that all placer mining claims legally held in
the Atlin Lake, Bennett Lake and Chilkat Mining Divisions of Cassiar
District are laid over from the 15th day of September, A. D., 1901, to
the 2nd day of July, A. D., 1902.
J.  D.  GRAHAM,
Gold Commissioner.
Gold Commissioner's Office,
Atlin, B. C, September 1st,  1901.
Cariboo District.
Notice is heteby given that all placer mining claims legally held in the
Cariboo District may be laid over from the 1st November, 1901, to the
1st June, 1902, subject to the provisions of the Placer Mining Act.
JNO. BOWRON,
Gold Commissioner.
Barkerville, B. C, September 30th, 1901.
Victoria, flew Westminster and Skeena fining
Recording Districts.
Notice is hereby given that all placer mining claims which are legally
held in Victoria, New Westminster and Skeena Mining Recording Districts are laid over from the date of this notice until 1st June, next.
W. S. GORE,
Gold Commissioner.
Lands and Works Department,
Victoria, B. C,  17th October,  1901.
Mining Property for Sale in British
Columbia.
Tenders are invited for the whole property, including Crown granted
claims, mill site, cyanide mill, (capacity 45 to 50 tons daily), tramway,
assay office, laboratory and full equipment, of the
Toronto Lillooet Gold Ifeefs Company, Limited,
situate in the Lillooet district of British Columbia, including the Ample, Whale, Monarch, and Welland Vale mines, which are Crown
granted, also the North Star, the Golden Stripe, Golden Eagle, Ruby
and Jumbo mineral claims, in the same district, together with a ten-
stamp mill, machine drills and other equipments. Cash tenders for the
whole property are requested but offers on working options or for portions of the property will be considered. From the former group 950
tons of ore has been milled, with an assay value approximating $10.00
to $11.00. Wagon road from railroad to mill. The whole of the
above will bear looking into and investigating, and are an exceptionally
important and valuable group of claims with full working equipment. ,
Full particulars may be had on application to Edgar Bloomfield,
Liquidator. P. O. box 743; Vancouver, B. C.
Mining and Surveying Instruments.
Light Mountain Transits and Transit-Theodolites.
Scott's  Mine Tachymeter.
Most Improved Constructions.        Best Workmanship.       Send for List.
P. & R. WITTSTOCK, Berlin S. 59, GERMANY.
WINDERMERE   DISTRICT.
CHAS.   F.   NICHOLSON.
CER TIFICA TED A SSA YER
AND CHEMIST.
The district is attracting capital and affords the best field for investment in. the Pro
vince. Many of the best claims are still in the hands of original owners who want to ',
meet investors. Reliable reports furnished on these properties. These reports can
be referred to an expert who can decide whether it is worth while for him to examine
the property. Information concerning- the district and its resources furnished on application. Assessment work superintended for non-resident claim owners. Personal
attention given that g'ood work is done where it will most benefit the property.
PETERBOROUGH,   B. C,    EAST   KOOTENAY.
I ~
(Established 1857.)
Manufacrurers and Importers ot
Mining, Surveying,
and Engineering
Instruments
Office Instruments and Materials.     Repairs and!
^Iterations Executed Promptly.
Correspondence Solicited.     Catalogue Sent
Free on Application.
1640-1642  NOTRE  DAME ST.,
:aiiL Montreal,  Canada.THE MINING RECORD.
XI.
LOCAL STOCK MARKET FOR THE MONTH OF OCTOBER.
Prepared by
A. W
More
&Co.,
Ltd., !
3tock Brokers
3, Y
ict
oria, B
. C.
Week Ending Saturday,
Week Ending Saturday,
Week Ending Saturday,
Week Ending Tuesday,
Oct. 3.
Oct.  12.
Oct  19.
Oct. 24.
Companies.
Highest.
Lowest.
Highest.
Lowest
Highest.
Lowest.
Highest.
L0W68t,
00
p
•a
s
•4
-a
■a
■a
•a
"5?
H
M
■a
M
■a
■a
M
T3
M
■a
to
■6
■a
<h
m
■4
n
<
Si 00
M
|
m
CO
m
<
m
m
<
a
a
5
Athabasca 	
$2  00
$....
?2 00
8....
$4 00
*....
S I 00
?....
$4 00
s ....
f 5 00
1   ■■
So  00
I   ■■
Brandon & Gld'n C
3
3
IK
2
VA
3
2
Cariboo McKinY.
26
22
25
24
27
24
25
20
24
20
22
12
19
18
19
16
Caribuo HydraTic
1 10
1 00
1 10
1 30
1 10
1 20
1 00
1 20
1 00
1 00
90
1 00
80
1 00
Centre Star	
50
40
47
32
38
36
36
33
39
37
38
36
46
40
46
40
Crow's Nest P. C.
80 00
72 00
80 00
62 00
80 00
62 00
80 00
62 00
80 00
72 00
80 00
62 00
80 00
80 00
72 00
Dardanelles	
3
2
3
2
5
5
2
5
5
5
5
,
5
5
Fairview Corp'n..
16
13
m
12
1%
17
12
2
it
12
' 2%
if
i2
2
16
i3
19
13
19
13
Iron Mask	
I. X. L	
20
10
20
10
20
10
20
10
20
10
20
10
20
10
20
10
Jumbo  	
King (Oro Denero)
4
5K
4
5%
4
17
13
16
12
Knob HiU	
50
Mollie Gibson	
25
25
30
25
30
25
30
20
Noble Five	
10
8
10
9
10K
9
10
9
10M
9
10K
8A
5
8K
3K
2
North Star	
35
25
35
45
55
45
55
45
55
45
55
45
35
45
35
25
Old Ironsides	
85
75
85
85
75
Payne	
15
15
17
12
20
15*
17
12
15
15
15
15
22
15
19
16
Rambler 	
51
48
51
40
51
49
49
47K
49
47
48
46
52
46
52
50
Slocan Star	
1 00
90
1 00
1 00
90
1 25
1 00
1 00
1 00
Sullivan	
10&
9
11
iok
iiK
10K
UK
10K
11
9%
11
9H
wy*
9X
10
8
Tamarac Kenneth
5
3
4
4
2
Van Anda	
1%
3
IK
3
IK
3
VA
3
i%
3
VA
IK
iK
IK
WarKagle	
13
14
11
15
12
14
11
15
11
14M
10
10
nvi
1%
1
1
1
K
1
K
1
K
1
A
1
K
i
1-2
10
9%
3
3
9K
7
3J4
3
8%
Wi
7K
7
9
6K
M
6K
St. Eugene	
1 00
75
1 00
75
1 00
75
1 00
75
EAST KOOTENAY W
.     ,                                     Petroleum
Concentration
NINES AND             ™-
                   ...                                 and
i°» "">••• Ores.
The finest work is done by the                              *ifiP
MINING STOCK.      M
HOOPER PNEUMATIC SYSTEM.
rnlirmhln.
ADDRESS :
McVITTIE & HUTCHESON,
General Concentrates Company,
si7 W. 30th St., NEW YORK CITY.
Cranbrook, East Kootenay.                    British Columbia.
GEO. A. WALKEM, B.Sc
■
The Hall Mining & Smelting Co., Ltd.
(McUill).
MECHANICAL   AND   ELECTRICAL
■
SMELTING DEPARTMENT.
Consulting Engineer.
NELSON,
Purchases
COPPER   ORE,
Reports made.                 Plans and Estimates made.                 Expert evidence given.
Inst, of Mech. Eng. of England.                                VAlSTOnTTVTfP      R    O
Amer. Inst, of Elec. Eng.                             VAW.UUVBK,    X>.  \~.
Manager Vancouver Engineering Works, Ltd.
B.C.
LEAD   ORE,
DRY   ORE.
Not  an Experiment;  In General   Use Throughout the World."
SLNew Jackson Hand Power Rock Drill
Operated by ONE man will perform work of THREE men drilling with bits and
hammers. M/\DE OF STEEL, guaranteed against breakage for two years.
Extensively used in United States. Testimonials show this drill has in many
instances reduced the cost of mining by one half. Easier .to operate than to
drill by bit and hammer. SAYES ITS COST EVERY MONTH. Write for catalogue
and testimonials.
H.  D.   CRIPPEN,  52 Broadway,   NEW   YORK.
SOLE TT^^^TXZET^OT-CnRIEIR.XII.
THE MINING RECORD.
Simmons Patent Double-Jointed, Bail-Bearing Giants, "%£&.
NO CENTER  BOLT.
Deflectors,
Retorts
Water Gates
Hydraulic
Water Pipe,
Valves, etc.
Paul Ball Mill.
Rock Breakers,
Rolls, etc.
Oil Well Machinery
and Supplies.
Sole Agent for
Ingersoll-Sergeant
Rock Drills and
/^ir Compressors
BULLOCK    DRILLS.
ALL STEEL CONSTR UCTED
PARKE & LACY CO., 21 & 23 Fremont Street, SAN FRANCISCO, Cal.
Sole  Agent  for  KNOWLES'   PUMPS  and  PULSOMETER PUMPS.
THOS. DRUMMOND, M. E. and C. E.
B. A. Sc. McGil! University, Montreal,
Member Canadian Society of Civil Engineers.
Mining Properties reported upon.    Information furnished.    General Engineering work promptly performed.    References furnished.
QUESNELLE   FORKS,
CARIBOO,   B. C.
PATENTS,
Caveats, Designs, Copyrights and Trade Marks obtained in Canada and
all foreign countries.
ROWLAND   BR1TTAIN,
Registered  Patent  Attorney,   Mechanical   Engineer  and  Draughtsman
Write for full information and references.    Satisfaction guaranteed.
Room 20,
Bank of British North America,
Vancouver, B.C.
Geo. E. Dow Pumping Engine Co.
179   FIRST   STREET,   SAN   FRANCISCO,   CAL.
MANUFACTURER    OF
ZDO^AT     ZPTTIMIIP
OPERATED BY STEAM, AIR OR ELECTRICITY.
MINING PUMPS. ■ 1
li WATERWORKS PUMPS.
POWER   PUMPS.
Pumping Machinery of every
possible Description.
SEJXTXJ)   POE   O^a^T-A.LOa-TJTE!.
IT    IS    3STO    C3-OOID
Advertising in the British Press
Unless you understand how to approach the British public.      The best way to do this is to
EflPLOY   AN   UP-TO-DATE    ADVERTISING    EXPERT
Who can advise you and do your business at Lowest Possible Rates.
Quoted  by the newspapers  themselves.     Let  us know what you  want and we  will  be  pleased to  assist  you.
C. J.   WALKER'S,
' British and Canadian Press Bureau," • 24 Coleman St., London, E.C.Minin
There are
reasons
the adjustable and practically indestructible GATES ROCK AND ORE BREAKERS produce crushed material at a
much lower cost per ton than other breakers. To more than 5,000 users located in all parts of the world, the cause is
readily apparent. Gates Breakers not only have much greater capacity, require less power, run without vibration,
stoppage or delay, with less -wear on the crushing surfaces and permitting carloads of material to be dumped directly
into the hopper of breaker, thus reducing the employment of handling devices and manual labor to the minimum, but
other convincing reasons supported by indisputable evidence of the superiority of Gates Breakers are given in Gates
Catalogue No. 1. Avoid a false start and possibility of failure. There is absolutely no breaker made that will compare
■with the "Gates."
We are prepare:: to build crushing plants complete, screens and perforated metal of all kinds, elevators, hoists,
engines, and boilers.   We also build cement machinery of the latest designs.
ESTIMATES   FURNISHED   UPON   APPLICATION.
(FAVORS'." \.'Y:   ~    iMV.i.'k! !-:.\:.IU!lll>'.' i.ifiu.
yiTl>:B'UU<.r.!:-V..".--" '■SOS <i\'>-. N.ii B.iilMUcls
^lINNEAPOi.lS-NINN..  -iK> Corn lixci'i.in^o:.
BRANCH,'OIT^i'e:]^^XIV.
THE MINING RECORD.
HEDL
TY
;ITISH CGLUflBIA.
Situated on 20-mile creek, Similkameen  river.
(Owned by the Hedley City Syndicate.)
Nickle Plate Mountain is the most talked about mineral section of British
Columbia to-day, and hundreds of people all over the northwest are preparing
to go there at an early date.
On this mountain lies the famous Nickel Plate mines, which many mining
men consider the greatest prospective mining property in Canada; here also lies
the great Kingston Warhorse, Rollo Banner and other noted properties with
wonderful large, rich bodies of ore. Thousands of dollars will be expended in
their development during the coming summer. At the base of this mountain
'and close to all the noted mines lies the townsite of Hedley City. This town is
the only supply point for the mines of this district. The government is building
roads to the townsite. Trails to the mines are being built rapidly and a large
force of men are being employed. The new railroad down the Similkameen will
be built to Hedley City at an early date and in a very short time this place will
present a scene of activity seldom witnessed. Many predict it will be the great
est mining camp in the northwest Lots are expected to sell at very high figures
within a few months.
It is but a short time ago that lots in Rossland, Greenwood, Nelson, Phcenix
and Sandon, which are now worth thousands of dollars, were selling at the same
prices as are now being asked for lots in Hedley City, and the same thing is certain to be repeated at this place.
Until the first day of May lots will be sold at from $100 to $150, on easy
terms. After that date the prices will be more than doubled. Lots are sellino-
very rapidly. Intending purchasers should make immediate application in order
to secure the most desirable locations. We have made a personal examination
of the property and can assist purchasers in their selection.
Maps of the surrounding country, plan of townsite, location of mines, samples of ore, etc., may be seen at this office.
R. H. PARKINSON, - Manager and Trustee.
FAIRVIEW,   B. O.
For Terms and Prices address: R. H. Parkinson, general manager and trustee, Fairview, B. O; E. Bullock-
Webster, agent, Keremeos; J. H. Yates, Spokane, Wash, U.S.A.; G. Alers-Hankey, Vernon I Oliver Fetherston-
haugh, Hedley City.THE MINING RECORD.
xv
The Mining and Commercial Centre for the whole Similkameen;
SIMILKAMEEN C
Situated in Camp Hedley, close to the Nickel Plate, Kingston, Sunset and
Pollock Groups of Mines, and Stirling Creek Copper Camp.
Town Lots on th,e IVjarket
at a very Low Figure
whjch, will shortly rise
50 per cent.
PRICES
$75 to $150,
In three payments: one-thjrd cash;
one-thjrd   in three rr\ontris;   one-
third in, six months.
This townsite is located in the Similkameen Valley, half way between
Keremeos and Princeton, on the main government wagon road, which
forms the main street. Its geographical position is a natural one, comprising several large flats, which extend from the base of the mountains
in a fan-shaped area on a gentle slope of the Similkameen river.
It is protected from all opposition, by a large Indian reservation on
the east and southeast, which extends over seven miles along the Similkameen valley in Camp Hedley. The Townsite Company own all the adjoining land on the west, besides large timber limits for building purposes,
which is the only available timber in Camp Hedley for saw-mills. Already
a large number of lots have been sold, on which the purchasers intend tQ
erect buildings. The townsite is all cleared and ready for building purposes, being surveyed off into lots, and blocks on modern principals, and
Crown granted, the main street being 90 feet wide.
The townsite is situated on the location line of the V. V. & E., Columbia & Western, and the Coast-Kootenay Railways, in fact all roads, railroads, telegraph and telephone lines have to go through it, as it is the only
available pass from the interior to the coast, which in view of the enormous
mineral wealth surrounding it, is in itself a sufficient guarantee of its future
prosperity.
Camp Hedley and the surrounding mining camps, are considered by
mining engineers of repute, to embrace the richest mining section in the
Province, and Similkameen City is therefore the mining and commercial
centre of this important part of British Columbia.
Now is the Time  to   Buy Town Lots, they   will   Never be    as   Cheap   Again.
This   is   an   Investment   and   no   Speculation.
For further particulars apply to Frank  Bailey, gen'l  mgr., Greenwood, Fairview and Similkameen City.
Head Office: 4 Wallace-Miller Block, Greenwood.    H. M. Keefer, general agent.
Other agencies at Rossland, Nelson, Victoria, Vancouver, and all Boundary towns, as well as at Toronto, Ont.,
Spokane Wash., and other important cities.XVI.
THE MINING RECORD.
PROFESSIONAL  AND   BROKERS
J C GWILLIM, B. Sc
Mining Engineer.
Late of Geological Survey of Canada, (Atlin district), six years' experience in B. C.
mining' districts.
BAKER STREET,
NELSON, B.C.
JAMES BRADY,
Dominion  and Provincial Land Surveyor,
Mining Engineer.
Properties surveyed, examined and reported on.   Agent for procuring Crown grants.
GOLDEN,  B.C.
Code—Bedford-McNeii.
P. O. Box 43.
john   redman,
Mining    Engineer.
KAMLOOPS, B. C.
j. m. McGregor, b.a. sc.
w. d. McGregor, m. e.
A   S. ASHCROFT. D.L.S., P.L.S.
Greenwood, B. C.
MCGREGOR & CO.,
MINING   and   CIVIL   ENGINEERS ni   nAAM     B    r\
and LAND  SURVEYORS. O LOO AIM,   D. O.
Reports on Mines and Prospects.
Act as agents in doing assessment work, applying for Crown grants and in taking
general charge of preliminary development work.
W. A. BAUER,  D.L.S., P.L.S.
611 Hastings St., Vancouver.
BAUER & ASHCROFT,
Dominion & Provincial Land Surveyors
Surveys of Mines, Mineral Claims and Crown Lands.
VANCOUVER   AND   GREENWOOD.
BRITISH  COLUMBIA   MINES.
Gold, Silver, Lead and Copper Properties.
Excellent chance for profitable investments in legitimate mining* in British Columbia. Capital needed for developing promising- prospects. A specialty made of free
milling gold properties. Very promising free-milling- gold properties for sale—terms
reasonable. Mines examined and reported on by reliable mining engineers. Correspondence solicited.   Address
ANDREW   F.   ROSENBERGER,
P. O. Box 700. Nelson B. C.
E. O.  B. BAGSHAWE,
REAL ESTATE, INSURANCE
AND MINING BROKER,   %   %
Office: 15 Trounce Avenue,
VICTORIA, B. G.
THE YMIR DISTRICT2abS^i&=rn1
investments to be found in B. C. It has more stamps falling on ore than the
whole ot the rest of the Province. It has excellent transportation facilities, and is
within fifty miles (by railroad) of three smelters. Its output, during 1901, will be
second only to that or Rossland.
PERCY J. GLEAZER,
Stock and Share Broker, YMIR, B. C.
Many first-classproperties for sale on cash basis, or on working bonds with deferred payments. Stocking propositions arranged. Shares in all the Ymir companies dealt with.   Correspondence Solicited.
Assay  Office and Chemical Laboratory,
2        road    reet,      (Opp. DriardHotel.)      VICTORIA, B C.
WILLI AH F. BEST, f.c.s.
ANALYTICAL CHEMIST & ASSAYER
(Heidelberg and Leipzig1.)
Personal attention given to all assaying- and chemical analysis.
PRANK B. SMITH, B.Sc.
Civil and Mining Engineer.
Certificated Colliery Manager Great  Britain and British Columbia.
Reports on Mining Properties.
Helga Gold and Copper Mining Co'y.
Liues situated in Vancouver, B. C, District.
CAPITAL, $1,000,000. PAR  VALUE, $1.00.
Office, 75 Sullivan Building*.
V. R. PIERSON, President. J. A. FREEMAN, Secretary
B. H. HURST & CO'Y
\
x  mil ill
Bankers :
C. B. of Commerce.
Codes :
Clough ; Moreing & Neil.
44   FORT  STREET,
\ iZICTORIH, B. H       fl
J. C. HAAS, I M.
Member American Institute of Mining* Engineers
Examinations and Reports.
325 The Rookery, SPOKANE,   WASH.
A, W, MORE & CO, Ltd
MINING AND STOCK BROKERS
Codes used: Bedford-McNeill's, Moreing & Neal's,
Clough's, and A. B. C, Fourth Edition.
VICTORIA, B. C.
86 GOVERNMENT STREET,
TEL. 846.
P. O. BOX 43
T. J. SMITH,
^izlstitntg- iBiEfcoiKiiEK.
Syndicates and Companies formed to develop mining  claims.
Secretary Vancouver Mining Stock Exchange.
611 Hastings Street West,
VANCOUVER, B. C.
JOHN B. HOBSON,
g^^*" Hyd-     Consulting Mining Engineer,
BULLION, BRITISH COLUMBIA.
Ma;
Mining
28years' experience in the equipment and operation of large
Hydraulic, Deep Gravel, Drift and Gold Quartz Mines,
in California and British Columbia.
Telegraphic and Cable Address:   "HOBSON," Ashcroft, B. CTHE MINING RECORD.
xvn.
PROFESSIONAL ADVERTISEMENTS.
H   E. T HAULTAIN C E.
CONSULTING
MINING ENGINEER,
OFFICE ■ I8, 9 and IO>
Nelson, B. C.
J. B. TYRRELL.
IU. Inst M. M., M. N. Eng. Inst. M. M. E., F.G.S.,
Mining Engineer,
DAWSON.   YUKON.   CANADA.
Cable Address:   "TYRRELL," Dawson. Code: Bedford McNeil's
T. H. GORE.
J. H. MCGREGOR.
Gore & McGregor,
Provincial and Dominion Land Surveyors
AND   CIVIL   ENGINEERS,
Five Sisters Block. VICTORIA *J!£ NELSON.
HUGH  BURNET,
j^,    Civil Engineer, Dominion and
^ Provincial Land Surveyor,
Mines and Mining.    Estimates furnished for all kinds of modern up-to-
date Mining Machinery, Construction of Aerial Tramways, Ate.
Room6 IO& lOa, Five Sisters Block,
P. 0. Box 346. VICTORIA, B. C.
M. I. M. M.,   M. I. M. E.,
M. Can. I. M.
Cable Address: Phloxes, Nelson.
A. B. C. Code.
R. C.  Campbell-Johnston,
Mining Engineer and Metallurgist.
NELSON,  B.C.
A. H. HOLDICH,
Analytical Chemist^ Metallurgist.
Royal School of Mines, London.
Seven years at Morfa Works, Swansea.
Seventeen years chief chemist to Wigan Coal and Iron Co.
Late chemist Hall Mines Co., Ltd.
Assays and Analyses made on all varieties of mineral and
many organic substances.
Special experience in Smelting—both Swansea and American process.
REVELSTOKE, B. C.
SEIilABIiE ASSAYS.
Gold $ -50
Lead 50
Gold and Silver       $ .75
Gold, Silver and Copper...  1.50
Samples by mail receive prompt attention.
Rich Ores and Bullion bought/
OGDEN ASSAY CO.  1429 16th St.  DENVER, Colo.
CHRiy.  OUTHETT,
Associate of Royal College of Science,  London, England.
Inland Assay Office, - KAMLOOPS, B. C.
Provincial Assayer.
Mineral and Coal Analysis a specialty. Reports made ou Mining Properties.
Mail samples receive prompt attention.
J. C. T. CROFTS, M. I. Mech. E.
NELSON, B. C.    Box 676.
^™      tfir*     t&*
Machinery, Aerial Tramways, Etc., Supplied and Erected.
Wire Rope and Flexible Metallic Tubing from Stock.
^*   &r*   te&
IPL-A-IISrS.       XJR^WIJSTGrS-      ESTIMATES.
W. Pellew-Harvey, F.C.S., M.I.M.M.,    Cecil M. Bryant, A.R.S.M., A.I.M.M.
Assayer in charge of Provincial Govern-       E. Philip Gilman, A.R.S.M.F.G.S.
men t Assay Office at Vancouver.
Pellew-Harvey, Bryant & Gilman,
.   PROVINCIAL ASSAYERS.
The Vancouver Assay  Office aijd Ore   Testing Worlds.
Established 1890.
Reports on IVlines and Metallurgical and Milling Processes.
SPECIALTY:  UMPIRE and CONTROL ASSAYS.
Cable and Telegraphic Address: Analysis, Vancouver. )    ii ■ imn i itf r n     n    n
Codes : Moreing- & Neal, A.B.C. and Lieber. /    VANuUUVtK,   D.   U.
Victoria Office:   4 View Street (Opposite Driard Hotel.)
WM. M. BREWER, MINING ENGINEER,
MEM. N. of ENG. INST. MINING & MECH. ENG.
and AM. INST., M. E.
Njolson's Bank Building,
VANCOUVER, B. C.
lEID'W.A.IRID   .A..   :HLA.G-GKKi:rsr,
MINING    ENGINEER,
REVELSTOKE, B. C.
Mem. Am. Inst. Mining1 Engineers.
Mem. Can. Min. Inst.
A. A. WATSON, B. 5c.
PROVINCIAL ASSAYER,     VERNON, B. C.
Analyst and Mineralogist.
Honours Graduate in Chemistry, Victoria University, England.
Reports made on Mining Properties.
Seven years experience in Australia, South America, England and British Columbia
SS1 SPECIAL ATTENTION TO SAMPLES BY MAIL. *®S
E. JACOBS^
Accountant,   Auditor,   Etc.
GREENWOOD,   B.    C.
Books of Account Opened, Balanced or Audited.     Accounts Kept Regu.ar.y
Examined Periodically.   Assigned Estates Wound Up.
Gordon H. Hardie.
Nicholas Thompson.
HARDIE & THOMPSON,
Marine and General Consulting Mechanical Engineers.
520 Cordova Street, VANCOUVER, B. C.
TelegTams, "Gardie." Telephone 767.
Plans, Specifications, Estimates, Working- Drawings, Surveys and Reports. Also
contracts taken for Supply, Erection, Supervision, or Repairs and Alterations to all
classes of Machinery. Patentees and designers of the Hardie-Thompson Water Tube
Boiler, New High-Speed Reversing Engines, and Special Machinery in Light Sections
for Mines.   Engines indicated and adjusted.
Sole Agrent In B. C. and N. W. Territories for the United
Flexible Metallic Tubing Co.. Ltd., London, Engr. Stock
carried. Unequalled for Conveyance of Steam Air, Oils
and Gas.XVIH.
THE MINING RECORD.
HOTELS, MINING PUBLICATIONS, ETC.
Advertise in
Subscribe for
Tie Rossland Mir.
ALL THE MINING NEWS.
BRIGHT! NEWSY! WIDE-A-WAKE.
If you want to keep posted on the development of the Interior of
British Columbia you can't afford to be without the ROSSLAND MINER.
Send in your subscription at once.
Daily, by mail, per month	
Weekly, per year	
.$   50
.  2 00
ADDRESS:
Rossland Miner P.&R Co., Rossland, B.C.
the miHiNc joURHali
Railway and Commercial Gazette.
Established 1835.
Circulates all over the World amongst
Miners, Engineers, Manufacturers and Capitalists.
Advertisement and Editorial Offices:
46 Queen Victoria Street, London, E. C.
Pubushing Offices:
3 Dorset Buildings, Salisbury Square, E. C.
Canada
Every Saturday, Price Sixpence.
The subscription to The MrarSG Journal, including postage, is as to
1 a months
         28s.
Payable in Advance.
6 month:
14s.
lows:
: months
NOW READY.
The MINERAL INDUSTRY
Its Statistics, Technology and Trade in the United States and other countries
to the end of 1900.
Edited by Richard P. Rothwell and Joseph Struthers,
Volume IX.—Copiously illustrated) containing' numerous diagrams and  working
drawings.    Price S5.00, post paid.
This notable work incorporates the usual statistics of mining stock prices in igoo
in all the important markets, dividends paid and assessments levied by mining 0001"
paniesi together with a complete and faithful summary of the mineral statistics of the
entire world. Among the valuable technical monographs embodied in the present
volume are the following : Progress in the Aluminum Industry in iqoo, by J. B. C.
Kershaw : Production of Bromine in Michigan, by A. C. Lane ; Calcium Carbide
and Acetylene, by 1.. K. Bohm ; Clay and and its.manufacture into brick and tile, by
H. Ries; Manufacture of water gas, with special reference lo European conditions,
by George Lunge : Utilization of Blast-Furnace Gases for the direct production of
motive power, by G. Lunge ; Progress in the Metallurgy ot Copper in 1900 (review);
Progress in the electrolytic refining of arg\ ntiferous copper, by T. Ulke ; Wotes on
the leaching of copper sulphide ores, by S. R. Adcock ; Elimination of impurities
from copper mattes, by E. Kel er ; Raritan Copper Works — general description of
operating plant, by L. Addicks ; Manufacture of blue vitriol from argentiferous copper, bj' J. G. Clemmer ; Recent progress in the Henderson process for extracting
copper from p\ rites cinders, by J. G. Clemmer ; Fluorspar mines of Western Kentucky and Southern 111 nois, by W. E. Burk ; Diamondhvxous deposits in the United
States, by W. H. Hobbs ; Progress in the cyanide process in 1900. by L. Janin, jr.;
Present development of the barrel chlorination process, by J. E. Rothwell; Progress
in gold milling in 1900,^ by R. H. Richards; Filter-press treatment of slime in Western
Australia, by J. K. Wilson , Assay of graphite by blast and by fusion, by F. S. Hyde;
Report on iron and steel metallurgy at the Paris exposition, 1900, by H. M. Howe
Alloys of iron, by H. Souther ; Recent improvements in lead smelting, by H. O. Hof-
man ; Production of Manganese ores in foreign countries, by F. Drake ; Electrolyz-
ing nickel-copper matte, by T. Ulke; World's production of petroleum, by Dvorko-
vitz ; Origin and occurrence of petroleum in California, by A S. Cooper ; Statistics
of the potassium salts industry in Germany, by C Hornung and E. C Mackey-Heri-
ot; Geology and Technology of the potassium salts industry in Germany, by F.
Klockmann ; Manufacture of potassium chlorate by the Liebeg process, by J. B. C.
Kershaw ; Potassium and sodium chlorates and hypochlorites in 1900, by J. B. C.
Kershaw : Progress in the sulphuric acid industry in 1900, by F. J. Falding; Fibrous
talc industry of St, Lawrence Co., N7Y., by C. H. Smyth, jr.; Review of the tin industry of the Malay peninsula to the end or 1S98, bv F. Owen ; Review of progress in
the metallurgy of zinc in zqoo, by W. R. Ingalls ; Pyritic smelting, by F. R. Carpenter ; Progress of metallography in 1900, by A. Sauveur ; Manufacture of titanium
and its alloys, by A. J. Rossi; Progress in ore dressing in 1900, by R. H. Richards ;
Concentration of the Broken Hill (N.S. W.) sulphide ores, by T. J. Greenway ; Recent contributions to the science of ore deposits, by R. W. Raymond; Notes on electro-chemistry; by C, F. Chandler.
THE SCIENTIFIC PUBLISHING Cf., 253 Broadway, New York.
IRON   AND  STEEL
Trades' Journal and Mining Engineer
Established 1849.
Publishers: SAMUEL GRIFFITHS &  CO.,   LTD.,
4 Suffolk Lane, Cannon Street, LONDON, B. C
Annual Subscription Reduced to 12 J6,  post free to all
parts of the -world.    Single copies 3d.
Market reports from all Iron, Steel, Coal and Metal Centres, Engineering, Railway
and Mining Reports, etc
Telegraphic Address: "Cerebellum, London.**
M. R. SMITH & COMPANY
mVEITIElIX Established 1858.
Manufacturers of
High Glass Biscuits and Confectionery
Gold Medals awarded at Royal Agricultural Exhibition,
'95, 96, '07, '98. Medal and Diploma awarded at Colonial and
Indian Exhibitions. Silver Medals at Provincial Exhibitions, 18S6.
VICTORIA, B. C.
BRANCH:
4-30 CORDOVA STREET, VANCOUVER.
Opposite the C. P. R. Station.
Headquarters for Commercial Men.
Grand Pacific Hotel,
©—©JllllS—®
P. A. BARNHART, Proprietor.
w
KAMLOOPS, B. C.
WELL LIGHTED SAMPLE ROOMS.
Hotel Vernon,
Thoroughly Commercial.
66 Douglas Street, VICTORIA, B. C.
. Hotel Dallas,
VICTORIA, B. C.
Re-opened February 21st for igoi under same management.
DOMINION HOTEL,
VICTOEIA,  B.  O.
KIFW   AWI1   MflFlFRM     Telephones connecting rooms with office. Private Baths.
nt"   Hnu mUULnnt Electric Lighted, Return CallBellsand first-class service.
American Plan, $1.25 Up a day.       European. Plan, 50c. to $1.50 a day.
XLbc Silver IfUng Ifootel,
BAKER ST., NELSON. B. C.
Roles: $1.00 0 Day.
G.L.THE MINING RECORD.
xix.
BRITISH COLUMBIA WHOLESALE SUPPLY HOUSE, ETC.
A New Customer
Becomes a regular customer when once
started buying  of us—Why?
We have the best goods and largest assortment in the West.
We  Can   Fill   Orders   Promptly  from  our  Immense  Stock.
We manufacture  a  large quantity of Furniture,  and import direct in car lots from the best makers everywhere.
EVERYTHING TO   FURNISH A HOME.
Write for Illustrated Catalogue—Free.
Established 1862.
WEILER BROS..
VICTOEIA, B. C
Stock Certificates and
riining Stationery of an kinds in stock or supplied to order. First-class artists employed and satisfaction guaranteed.
We number among our customers some of tne largest producing
mines in B. C, and special attention is paid to this branch of our
business.
THE COLONIST P. & P. CO., Ld.,
VICTORIA,   B. C.
TURNER, BEETON & CO.
VICTORIA, VANCOUVER AND NELSON, B. C.
and at H. c. Beeton & Co., 35 Finsbury Circus, London, England.
Manufacturers of Clothing,
Etc., Etc.
Wholesale  Merchants.
Dry Coods, Liquors, Cigars,
Flour, Etc.
Qood Indented From AH Parts of the World.
Telegraphic Addresses:
"TURNER," Victoria; "BEETON," London; "TURBEET," Vancouver and Nelson.
MICHIGAN COLLEGE OF MINES.
An Engineering School with unique location giving it unusual facilities. Distinctive methods of Instruction. Special courses. For catalogues giving occupation of
graduates, address, W. McNAIR, President, Houghton, Michigan.
A. Van  Der Naillens'
School of Practical, Civil, Mining,
Electrical Mechanical Engineering.
Surveying, Architecture, Drawing and Assaying, Cyanide, Chlorination, Metallurgy.
Assaying of Ores, $25; Bullion and Chlorination Assay, $25; Blow Pipe Assay, $10;
Full Course of Assaying, $50.   Established 1864.    Open all year.   Send for circular.
113 FULTON STREET, One Block West of City Hall, SAN FRANCISCO.
ii Mil m
26 BROAD STREET, VICTORIA   B. C.
Fine Halftone and Zinc Etching.
a trial.
We make the best kinds of Printing Plates, both Line and Halftone.
We make a specialty of Catalogue Work.   Prices reasonable.    Give us
SEND FOR  SAMPLF"..
W.   H.  LEGS,
MANAGER.XX.
THE MINING RECORD.
MISCELLANEOUS.
ESTABLISHED  1817.
BANK OF MONTREAL.
Incorporated by Act of
Parliament.
HEAD OFFICE:        -        -        MONTREAL,
CAPITAL all paid up,$12,000,000.00. RESERVE FUND, $7,000,000.00. UNDIVIDED PROFIT, $427,180.80.
Board of Directors—Rt. Hon. Lord Slrathcona and Mount Royal, G.C.M.G., President.    Hon. G. A. Drummond, Vice-President.
A. T. Paterson, Esq.; Edward B. Greensbields, Esq.; Sir William C. Macdonald ; R. B. Angus, Esq.;
A. F. Gault, Esq.; James Ross, Esq.; R. G. Reid, Esq.
E. S. CLOUSTON, General Manager.
A. Macnider Chief inspector and Superintendent of Branches.
W. S. Ciouston Inspector of Branch Returns.
f.  W.   Taylor Assistant Inspector.
JAMES AIRD, Secretary.
Montreal—H.   V. MEREDITH Manager.
BRANCHES   IN   CANADA:
Province of Ontario—Almonte, Belleville, Brantford, Brockville, Chatham,
Cornwall,Deseronto,Fort William, Goderich, Guelph, Hamilton, Kingston, Lindsay,
London, Ottawa, Perth, Peterboro, Picton, Sarnia, Stratford, St. Mary's, Toronto,
Toronto Yong-e St. Branch, Wallaceburg".
Province of Quebec—Montreal: West End Br., Seig-neurs St. Br., Point St.
Charles; Quebec.
Lower Provinces—Chatham, N. B.; Frederickton, N. B.; Moncton, N. B.;
St, John, N. B.; Amherst, N. S.; Halifax, N. S.; Sydney, N, S.
Province of Manitoba and North-West Territories—Winnipeg-, Man.;
Calgary, Alberta; Lethbridge, Alberta; Regina, Assiniboia.
Province of British Columbia—Greenwood, Nelson, New Denver, New
Westminster, Rossland, Vancouver, Vernon, Victoria.
In Newfoundland—St. John's, Nfld., Bank of Montreal.   .
In Great Britain—London,  Bank of Montreal, 22 Abchurch Lane, E. C,
Alexander Lang, Manager.
In the United States—New York—R. Y. Hebden and J. M. Greata, Agents,
59 Wall Street; Chicago—Bank of Montreal.
Bankers in Great Britain—London—The Bank of England, the Union Bank
of London, the London & Westminster Bank, the National Prov. Bank of England.
Liverpool—The Bank of Liverpool, Ltd. Scotland—The British Linen Company
Bank and Branches.
Bankers in the United States—New York—The National City Bank, The
Bank of New York, N. B. A. Boston—The Merchants' National Bank, J. B. Moors
& Co. Buffalo—The Marine Bank, Buffalo. San Francisco—The First National
Bank, The Bank of British Columbia, The Anglo-Californian Bank. Portland, Oregon—The Bank of British Columbia.
The Canadian Bank of Commerce
WITH WHICH IS AMALGAMATED
The  Bhnk gf  British  Columbih,
HE-A-D   OFFICE:   TOBONTO.
PAID  UP  CAPITAL     $   8,000,000
Reserve Fund  2,000,000
Aggregate Resources Over       65,000,000
HON.   GEO.   -A_.   COX,   president. B.   E.   "W^AJOKIEIi,   General   Manager.
LONDON OFFICE:   60 LOMBARD ST., E.C.
The Bank has 68 branches extend ing'throughout Canada and elsewhere, including the following in British Columbia and Yukon District:
Atlin,
Greenwood,
Nelson,
Sandon,
Cranbrook,
Kamloops,
New Westminster,
Vancouver,
Dawson,
Nanaimo,
Rossland,
Victoria,
Fernie.
White Horse
New York,
BRANCHES  IN  THE  UNITED STATES.
San Francisco, Seattle, Portland,        Skagway.
Savings Bank Department.    Gold Dust Purchased,  and every description of Banking Business transacted.
GEO.   GILLESPIE,
MANAGER.
Nanaimo Saw Mill and Sash and Door Factory,
OFFICE:   MILL STREET, NANAIMO, B. C.
„^_   HZ^SL^ZMI,   Peopeietoe,
Complete Stock of Rough and Dressed Lumber, Shingles, Laths, Pickets, Doors, "Windows, Blinds, Mouldings,
Turning, Scroll Sawing, and all kinds of Wood Finishing, Cedar, White Pine, Redwood, &c.
Towing Done at Reasonable Rates by Steamer ALERT.
P. 0. Box 35.
Telephone 19.
To NORTHERN
NES!
The Canadian Pacific Navigation Company, Ltd.
DISPATCH REGULAR STEAMERS AS FOLLOWS, VIZ.:
FOR SKAGWAY AND WRANGEL,
Every Wednesday at ii o'clock, P. M.
FOR  NORTHERN  B. C. POINTS,
Every Sunday at n  o'clock, P. M.
FOR  WEST  COAST  POINTS,  ^ 7th,  14th and 20th of each Month at n o'clock  P. M.THE MINING RECORD.
xxi
VANCOUVER ISLAND COAL.
COAL!
COAL I
The New Vancouver Coal
Mining & Land Co.
( LIlvfclTIETD)
(FORMERLY THE VANCOUVER COAL COMPANY.)
Are the Largest Coal Producers on the Pacific Coast
\6 Mt tfe \fr Mf
NANAIMO COAL
(Used Principally for Gas and Domestic Purposes.  .
SOUTHFIELD COAL
Steam Fuel.
Protection Island Goal and New Wellington Coal
House and Steam Coal), are Mined by this Company Exclusively.
Mb & & Mt &
THE NANAIMO COAL S'ives a lar!?e percentage of gas, a high illuminating power, unequalled by any
other bituminous coal in the world, and a superior quality of coke.
-rue SOUTHFIELD COAL is used by a11 leading steamship lines on the Pacific.
THE NEW WELLINGTON COAL which was introduced in 1890, has already become a favourite
fuel for domestic purposes. It is a clean, hard coal, makes a bright and cheerful fire, and its lasting qualities make it
the most economical fuel in the market.
-pLip PROTECTION ISLAND COAL is similar to the New Wellington Coal. This coal is raised
from the sub-marine workings under the Gulf of Georgia and is shipped from wharves both at Protection Island and
Nanaimo.
The several mines of the Company are connected with their wharves at Nanaimo, Departure Bay and Protection
Island, where ships of the largest tonnage are loaded at all stages of the tide. Special despatch given to mail and
ocean steamers.
»*•     *9*     •§•
*       *       #
SAMUEL M. ROBINS, Supt., Nanaimo, B. C.XXII.
THE  MINING RECORD.
TRANSPORTATION  COMPANIES
Canadian Paeifle Railway
SOO-PACIFIG LINE.
v<uwRkn^uWknn^
THROUGH TRAINS
AThAfiTIC TO PACIFIC
ccuthout
CHANCE.
**************** rfWWl
Lowest Rates.
■
TO ALL POINTS IN
Best Equipment. T Canada and United States.
For full particulars as to rates, time, and copies of C. P. R. publications, apply to
Or to
B. W. GREER,
Agent,
VICTORIA, B, O.
E. J. COYLE,
Ass't General Passenger Agent,
VANCOUVER, B. C.
R P. RITHET & CO.
WHOLESALE MERCHANTS, SHIPPING AND INSURANCE AGENTS.       M
Proprietors of Victoria Wharf, Outer Harbour, Columbia Flouring Mill, Enderby, and Vernon Mills, Vernon.
Agents for Victoria Lumber and Manufacturing Company, Cheminus, V.I.; Victoria Canning Co'y of British Columbia;
Fraser River, Skeena River, and River's Inlet Canneries; Skeena River Packing Company, Skeena River;
Pacific Coast Steamship Company, San Francisco; Scottish Union & National Insurance Company of
Edinburgh; Lancashire Insurance Company of England; Queen Insurance Company
of America (Fire); and English and American Marine Insurance Co.
LLOYD'S   RGENCY
WHHRF STREET,
iZICTORIH, B. C.
Canadian Pacific Navigation Co., Ltd.
Time Table Effective October 15th, 1901.
ALASKA   ROUTE.
From Victoria and Vancouver for Skagway direct.    Steamship Amur or Dauube.
Every ten days, connecting* with Vyhite Pass and Yukon route.
VICTORIA—VANCOUVER ROUTE.
S. S. Charmer—S. S. Yosemite.
Leave Victoria 'daily i a.m.     Leave Vancouver daily at 1.15 p.m.
NORTHERN B. C. COAST ROUTE.
S. S. Tees—S. S. Willapa.
Leave Victoria 11 p.m..
p.m.
2nd and
Lowe In-
ist and 15th of month.     Leave Vancouver
16th of month.
For Alert Bay, Fort Rupert, Rivers Inlet, Namu, Bella Bella, China Hat
let, Skeena River, Metlakahtla, Port Simpson, Naas River and intermediate portss
calling at Bella Coola and Skidegate once a month.
VICTORIA—NEW WESTMINSTER ROUTE.
S. S. Yosemite.
Leave Victoria, Tuesdays and Fridays 7 a.m.   Leave New Westminster; Wednesdays and Saturdays 7 a.m.    Calling at Plumper's Pass, Steveston and Guichon.
NEW WESTMINSTER—CHILLIWACK ROUTE.
Str. Beaver.
Leave New Westminster Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays at 8 a.m. Leave Chilli-
wack Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays 7 a.m. Calling at Fraser River landings
between New Westminster and Chilliwack.
NEW WESTMINSTER—STEVESTON ROUTE.
Str. Transfer.
Leave New Westminster daily 3 p.m., excepting Saturday leave at 2 p.m.
Leave Steveston, Mon., Tues., Wed., Thurs., 7 a. m.; Fri., 6 a.m.; Sat., 6 p.m.
Calling at Fraser River landings between New Westminster and Steveston.
WEST   COAST   ROUTE.
S. S. Queen City.
Leave Victoria, ret, 10th and 26th day of month  for Pt. Renfrew, Carmanah,
Claoose,  Dodger's Cove, Ecole, Alberni, Sechart, Uclulet, Clayoquot and Ahousef,
for Cape Scott and Intermediate ports on the 20th each month.
This company reserves the right to change this Time Table at any time without notice.   For full particulars as to time rates, etc., apply to nearest C. P. R. agent or to
J.   "W. TROUP,
- Manager,   .
VICTORIA.
E.  J. COYLE,
Asst. Gen. Pass. Agent,
VANCOUVERThe Hudson's Bay Company
H K1ZE:
GKEIISriEjR^IC    STORES
H T =
Baie de Peres
j^JSattleford
ijjTCiAi.GARY
jU^AaPLEAU
Daoph
IN
Deloraine
Edmont<S$'"£
S' Fo&T WllStJAM
Kamloops*"?
Langley
Lbthbridge
Lower Fort Garry
Macleod
Matt aw a
?%,$     M OR DEN
Nelson
Pincher' Creek
Portage la Prairie
Port SpjjtTBSfiN'*'';
PRiN$^;^gE.RT  j
Quesnelle
Rat Portage
Riding Mount-a$W:7
Shoal Lake |
Sudbury
Touchwood HiitJs';"i
Vancouver
^-Victoria
Vernon
ii^V^hitewood
Winnipeg
And at ojfher principal points in British Columbia, Manitoba and NorthweSjhTTerritories.    Purchasers will find at these Stores th«
best goods at moderate prices, imported direct from all the principal markets of 4ft& worfai'v'v
iiSSWSSFSjjSS
jn^/SsSSfCS
3w5S
?*9gg
&M.
Cores without Diamonds.   W|RE ropesSormining
Tbe Canadian BeOrlll Co.
Rossland, B. C.
Greenwood*B. C.
FELTEN <& fOILLEAUME, Carlsweif
Actien Gesellschaft. Mulheim on Rhine
MANUFACTURERS   OF
ELECTRlljsAL  LEADS AND CABLES
&*fl|? Electric Lighting Gables for Coal Pits with arrang:©-
wjin^nt for avoKpng fire-damp explosions in case of the cable breaking.
Round and Flat Wire Ropes, "Albert," or so-caHM'"Lang:'s" Lay
Ropes, Patent Locked Coil Wire Ropes, Patented Flattened Strand
Wire Ropes.
IRON, STEEL, COPPEJ&AND BRONZE WIRE
Superior 'qualities,
SOLE AGENTS FOR CANADA:
WATSON JACK &ScO.   §Mhl
EVERT BELT GUARANTEED
GiuiJUE OAK TANNED LEATHER IbELTING
For Exposed Situations Use "t^incashjre" Hair Belting.
CATA.LOCUE AND DISCOUNTS
ON APPLICATION.
D. K. McLAREN, Montreal, Toronto.
m*
'. '.   <■" ■■'■^■■T    .- -   ;%-■"•'^77
&—iw
I THE WM§ HAMILTON
MANUFACTURING CO., Ltd.
MANUFACTURERS.- OF,
M
o
D
i  -.,-■--
N
:' I
7    N:
U5--1 Q
|A 7 .■■••
C
H
'■. -I     -
■   N
E
R
«T7S
OT
AGENCIES :
John Bertram & Sons,
of Dundas,
Manufacturers of Iron-working Machinery; etp.^x
M. Beatty & Sons,
^of Welland,
Manufacturers of Hoisting-.
Plant, etc.
R.   Hoe  & Co.,
of fJew York,
Manufacturers of Hoe's Famous inserted Tooth=Saw. ;
BRANCH   OFFICE:
Mackinnon Block,
Granville Street.
Vancouver, B.C.
WORKS:  PETERBORO,  ONT.
Published by The B. C. Record, Ld.
Printed by the " Colonist,"' Victoria, Canada.