THIS     MONTH   \ £cPort of tne Consolidated Cariboo Hydraulic Mining Co., Ltd.—(Illustrated).
g    m Wll l n. I The van Anda " Balance Sheet," Etc., Etc.
VOIv.VII.
APRIL,    1900.
No  4.
GEO. e. HINT0N & eOMPHNY.
BRITISH COLUMBIA AGENTS FOR ROYAL ELECTRIC COMPANY.
... Electrical Construction and Supplies...
ELECTRIC HOISTS, BLOWERS, FANS, MOTORS AND DYNAMOS.   "S.K.C." TWO PHASE TRANSMISSION
SYSTEM.    ELECTRIC MINING APPARATUS.
VICTORIA,   B. C. VANCOUVER,   B. C.
The Royal Electric Company
MONTREAL, QUEBEC.
Ifl MAKERS OF	
Electrical! Mining:  Machinery
MOTORS
Adapted for Operating Stamps, Compressors, Hoists, Trams, Drills, Pumps.
Lighting Plants for Mines and Buildings.
OUR   S. K. C.   SYSTEM
RENDERS DISTANT WATER POWERS AVAILABLE
FOB ALL CLASSES OF HINISG WORK.
White Ouk British Columbia  Bbanches at
VIOTORIA.
THE ONLY
VANOOUVER.
CRUSHER
OF   HARD   ROCK.
Does as fine work as Breaker and rolls
all at one operation.
STURTEVANT  MILL CO.,
107 Clayton Street,
Send for Circular. Boston, Mass.
PRICE,    20    CENTS.Cannery
Supplies.
We are as usual headquarters for supplies and this
year have a larger stock than ever and at prices that
are right.
Pure Manilla Rope.
Cotton Rope.
Rubber Belting.
Leather Belting.
Cut and Wire Nails.
Galvanized  Boat  Nails.
Boiled and Raw Linseed Oil.
Genuine White Lead.
Copper Paint, Red Oxide.
Bar Iron, etc., etc.
And everything you ask for we will have it for you.
Mail orders receive prompt attention.
McLennan, McFeely & Co.
L.IMITBD,
WHOLESALE and RETAIL,
122 Cordova St., VANCOUVER, B. C
m
m
m
m
•
v
FRIED KRUPP GRUSONWERK
Madgeburg-Buckau (Germany).
MINING - MACHINERY!
ORE  CRUSHING:
Stone    Breakers   of   especially   strong
construction.    Roller  Mills, Chilian
Mills,   Ball   Mills,  for dry  and   wet
crushing—more than 1,800 at work.
Stamp   Batteries—Shoes   and    Dies   of
Krupp's Special Steel.
AMALGAMATION :
Amalgamation Tables and Pans, Lasrlo's
Gold Amalgamators, Settlers, etc.
SEPARATION AND CONCENTRATION:
Separators, Exhaustors, Hydraulic
Classifiers, Percussion Tables Jig.
gers,  Rotating Round Tables.
LEACHING  PLANT-
COMPLETE   GOLD   ORE   DRESSING   PLANT.
(a)  For Treating by the Wet Method with Stamp Batteries, Amalgamation and Concentration.
jjIfjBIjIjllp8 C>)   For Dry Crushing by Ball Mills, Dust Extraction and Leachimr
C OAL   WAS HIN G   PLA NT—Large Testing Station for Crushing and Dressing Ores at the Works.
AGENTS;
For   CANADA—Jas. W. Pyke & Co., 35 St. Francois Xavier Street, Montreal.
For the UNITED STATES—Thos. Prosser & Son, 15 Gold Street, New York.
For MEXICO—Pablo Bergner, Apartado 549, Mexico.
For SOUTH AFRICA—United Engineering Company Ltd., P.O. Box 399, Johannesburg, S.A.R.THE MINING RECORD.
GENERAL   MIXING   MACHINERY.
Gates Iron Works
THE GATES GYRATORY ROCK AND ORE BREAKER, a out of which is presented,
is the most perfect machine of its kind that mechanical science has been able to
produce. Its crushing product is cubiform, its capacity is greater than that of any
similar machine, and it is operated at less cost.
We have manufactured MINING MACHINERY longer than any other house
in business. Our machines are used in every mining district in the world. Our
sales during the current year have been unparalleled, the increase in business
being greater than in any other year of our existence.
We manufacture Rock Crushing, Ore Crushing, Mining and Cement Machinery.
Gates Iron Works, Dept. SS, 650 Alston Av., Chicago, III.
First Quality in All Lines.
Mining Machinery
and Supplies.
STEAM I
Our Combined Geared Gasoline Engine and Hoist, and Combined Gasoline
Fairbanks, Horse & Co.,
Engines (Engines
Hoists    PAcnniupiHoists
Piimno      OMOULInC} Mrfnmni-acanrc Engine and Air Compressor especially
■ rumpS) AlrCOmpreSSOrS adapted for Mining Purposes.
[Boilers [Pumping Plants	
FAIRBANKS'  STANDARD  S6ALES.
Mining Oars, Car Wheels,  Spiral Riveted Pipe, Pipe and Fittings.
/~* ^ Chicago, Cleveland, Cincinnati. Louisville, Indianapolis, St.
Paul, Minneapolis, St. Louis, Kansas City, Omaha, Denver,
San Francisco, Los Angeles, Portland, Ore.
Link Belt
ELEVATORS
AND
CONVEYORS.
Conveyor 328 feet centers, bundling 4 tons
" run of mine" coal per minute.
ANY   MATERIAL.
ANY   CAPACITY.
'Cink Belt," 4-Whtcl Cocomotioe, 2 motor.
.Electric Coal Mining and Haulage Machinery,
Link-Belting, Sprocket wheels, Malleable Iron Buckets,
Shafting, Pulleys, Gearing, Clutches, .,    U4D        H
Patent Machine-Moulded Kope oheaves,  etc.
THE LINK=BELT MACHINERY CO., Engineers, Founders, Hachinsts, Chicago, U.S.A.
WM. R. PERRIN & CO., Chicago, ill, u.sa
I   -—-;-
■■■■^IM
WBR&
jjfei^,
■tf-""-  ft^_v\_ "-' "*
^*t«jj*]f^     jJS&m
jiiM^^mfc   /'
'tjjSBB
""^P "    ' V J^   ;
1^*3
SliiJb^j!
BfiS           •     -,__ __1
:    A _.!WL
PSPSS^^^^K.
|iT--j'Bffl
IK"*  * * ■ ■' -—^ ■
MANUFACTURERS
For Cyanide
and
Chloromatic Plants.
WRITE    FOR   CATALOGUE.
piker Presses
■it11.
THE  MINING RECORD.
HSSAYERS' SUPPLIES AND ENGINEERING INSTRUMENTS.
|Vq   0 Precision Balance.
-^„     5-inch Beam.
This is the most accurate and sensitive Button Balance made.
All contacts with the beam and hangers are of agate.   Improved construction throughout;   extension plate glass sub-base"
and cylindrical reading glasses for beam and index.
For full particulars regarding this and other Balances send
for catalogue " A " to
WM. AINSWORTH & S0N5,
Denver, Colo., U.S.A.
Agents for British Columbia
The British Columbia Assay & Chemical Supply Co , Vancouver, B.C.,  and W. F. TBETZBL & CO.,  Nelson.
ASSAY, MINING
AND
Write for Catalogue.
MILL SUPPLIES-
WE are Manufacturers and direct Importers, and carry a large
Stock of Balances, Furnaces, Fire Clay Goods, Scientific
and Practical Books, Glassware, Platinum Goods, Acids, Chemicals, and all other Assayers' and Miners' requirements.
SOLE AGENTS for Morgan Crucible Company, Battersea,
Becker's Sons' Balances, Etc.
B. C. ASSAY and CHEMICAL SUPPLY CO., Ltd.
Assay'"     #   P.O. Box 355 VANCOUVER, B.C.
Telegraphic address
Vancouver, B.C.
Codes, Moreing & Neal and A.B.C.
HEARN & HARRISON.
(Established 1857.)
MANUFACTURERS AND IMPORTERS OF
MINING, SURVEYING
^ENGINEERING
INSTRUMENTS.
Office Instruments and Materials.
Pepairs and alterations executed promptly.
CORRESPONDENCE SOLICITED.
Catalogue sent free on application.
*
1640-1642 Notre  Dame St.,
MONTREAL CAN.
THE DENVER FIFE CLAY CO
1742 to 1746 Champa St.,   DENVER, COL.
Established 1851.-
- Incorporated   1895.
ASSAYERS' F1ATER1ALS, nine and Hill Supplies, Chemists Supplies, Chemicals,
Chemical Glassware.    Prospectors' Outfits.    Special Agents for Morgan Crucible Co,,
Battersea, England,     Largest stock of Balances, Scales, Furnaces, etc.     Baker &
Adaamson's Acids.    Platinum Ware, etc.    Borax, Boneash, Cyanide Potassium, Mang-|
anese and other heavy Chemicals at manufacturer's prices.     Headquarters for Mining
and scientific books.
JOHN   TAYLOR   &   CO.,
New Illustrated catalogue on application. 63 First St., SAN FRANCISCO, Calif.THE MINING RECORD.
GENERAL   MINING   MfleHINERY.—Contin
546 Washtenaw Avenue, CHICAGO, ILL, U.S.A.
m     Mr     ^ q -HEADQUARTERS    FOR-
Mining Machinery.
Gray's IBB ^^ *" DeCP M!neS'     ProsPect°rs Ittfi    L
tZ       T'. ^ eageS' Sederholm Boilers,
eorhss Engmes.      Reidler Pumps and air eompressors.
£
S
o
o
<
u
i
ft,
p
Z
w
CO
I
O
to
o
00
O
2
S
r—I
o
>
O
a
00
I
m n
i
jo ffi
~     t—4
JO
o
f
00
Adjustable Comet Rock and ©re ©rushers.
Perforated Metals for all Purposes.(We""toimelfdiS^ur
screen samples
Improved (Brushing Rolls.
purchasers,)
Smelting and Roasting Furnaces.
Stamp Mills & Concentrating Mills
And eauinment of everv land.    Our machinery in these lines is more largely used than that of any othermanuf
sognised everywhere as the best.    The Whitewater Deep Concentrator is a recent pxar
nnfacturer.    It is in
nple of our work.
And equipment of eveiy kind
use on all gold fields and is re© _ .	
Ball Pulverizers such as used atthe Republic Mine and the Helena & Livingstone Mm are*oT our manufacture.  Write for Oatal	
-RBPRESENTBD BY—
MENNO UNZICKER, SPOKANE HOTEL, SPOKANE, WASH.
Exc.usive Manufacturers of Riedler Pumps and  Air Compressors for United States, Canada, Mexico   So th
America, England, South Africa and Australia. ' '       UTHE MINING RECORD.:
GABLES, WHTER WHEELS AND COMPRESSORS.
See those wires—how they interlock?  Note the smooth surface also?
THE PATENT
Locked-
No displacement of wires in any event.   Gives much greater service than other cables, and
adds correspondingly to the life of the rolling stock.
-Is used only on the patent--^
Track Cable
Blechert Wire Rope    "ramway
^and others manufactured bv-
The Trenton  Iron  Company,  Trenton,  IV.J.
Engineers and Contractors and sole licensees in Norih America for (he Bleichert System.    Also, Wire Rope Equipments for Surface and Underground
Haulage, Transmission of Power, etc.   Illustrated book upon application.
New York Office—Coopei, Hewitt & Co., 17 Burling Slip. Chicago Office -1114 Monadnock Building
Improved GRIP PULLEY
Patents Nos. 483,442: 610,353.
T=!Hallidie Ropeway
For Transporting Ore, Fuel, Earth, Sugar Cane, etc.. by Wire Ropes.
SIMPLE,  ECONOHICAL,   PRACTICAL,  DURABLE.
Loads Mechanically.    Dumps Automatically.
WIRE TRAMWAYS (Single and Double Rope Systems)
caDieways, Tran9mi9Sion by wire Ropes. Effective,   Simple,    Automatic.
Incline 3Pl#.«.es. Cable Grips.
Logging *y -Cable*.       Atxtonaatic Loaders.       SAVES   WEAR SLaS™ R°FE ANB \
Plowing, Scraping  and Transporting by Wire Ropes,    send for illustrated Pamphlet.
Correspondence solicited.
Designed, Supplied and Erected.      Estimates furnished.
CALIFORNIA WIRE WORKS,
9 Fremont St., San Francisco, Cal.
Compressed Hir   from Falling Water.
Ii HIGH TESTIMONIAL.
THE DOMINION COTTON MILLS, Ltd., MAGOG, QUE., JUNE 7th, 1898.
THE TAYLOR HYDRAULIC AIR COMPRESSING CO., Ltd., Montreal, Que.
DEAR SIRS:—
We have had your Air Compressor in successful operation for over twelve (12) months
in our Print Works, where it has replaced steam to drive the engines in the Printing
Department.    Your Compressor runs without attention or expense, and is saving the
cost of fuel formerly employed to drive the same engines by steam.
I am pleased to certify to its successful operation as a most efficient motive power.   :
Tours truly, W. T. Whitehead, Manager.
TAYLOR AIR COMPRESSING CO., SPOKANE, WASH.
■    •    t     I "^m   HI     *■% ras.     £3&.    ■    ■     m   K&     HBk —MANUFACTURERS OF —
WATER P0WERiThe"v'ctO'"-Turbine
Plants Developed and Installed.
The Stilwell-Bierce & Smith-Vaile Co.
DAYTON, OHIO, U.S.A.
HYDRAULIC MACHINERY and AIR COMPRESSORS.
30 YEARS BXPBRIBNCE.
Recent plants installed:—Lachine Rapids Hydraulic & Land
Co., Montreal, Que., 12,000 h.p.; Chambly Manufacturing Co
Montreal, Que, 30,000 h.p.; West Kootenay Power & light Co
Rossland, B.C., 3,000 h.p.■
THE MINING RECORD.
CRUSHERS, ENGINES, BOILERS, MILL 3JVO MINE SUPPLIES.
^^^MS^^^i^^s
IPiii^gft
ion Hoist.
le cyl. single drum.   Lifts one.ton 125ft. per minute.
Union
Gas and Gasoline
Engines
For all kinds ofcwori.
$     Sizes in
®
?
in actual
use
1V2 to 130 H. P.
H     Running Pumps,
Dynamos.
Stamp Mills.
Blowers.
Concentrators.
Machinery.
Gasoline Mining Hoists and Marine
Hoists a Specialty.
THfe" UNION " GASOLINE ENGINE is economical, reliable and steady, in fact everything that a first-class engine
should be ; and is the result of 15 years experience, having been built in San Francisco since 1885.
Union " Combined Hoists.     Air Compressors.     Marine and Stationery Engines.
■'    Send for illustrated catalogue, stating requirements.
UNION GAS ENGINE CO., 310 Howard St., SAN  FRANCISCO, Cal.
I
§
If
i
S^SS»K«i§tSlK»
The
"Truax" Ore Car
As made by us, is the best in the world.
Are YOU in the market for
RIVETTED   STEEL   PIPE      •
HYDRAULIC   GIANTS
BOILERS   AND   ENGINES
Or any class of Mining Machinery, it will be to your
advantage to communicate
with us.
Office and Works—
Foot of Heatley Avenue.
' Phone 250.   P. O. Box 51
Armstrong: & Morrison,
Vancouver, B.C.
To Kootenay Hardware Dealers.
For Lowest Prices on Iron, Steel, Picks, Shovels, Pipe, Fittings,
Brass Goods, Barrows, Trucks, etc.
M*       *MILL  AND   MINING  SUPPLIES,
ADDRESS v ^^^ ^^_ ^-^.
Walter S. Fraser & Co.,
^^ Limited.
Wharf St. Victoria, B.C.
Established 1862.
Tel.   3.
P. O. Box 423.THE JEIMCKES MACHINE  CO
Joshua Hendy Machine Works,
Nos. 38 to 44 Fremont St., SAN FRANCISCO, Cal., U.S.A.
 MANUFACTURERS  OF  AND DEALERS  IN	
Hydraulic § Quartz Mining ■" Milling Machinery
THE MINING RECORD.
MISCELLANEOUS MACHINERY, ETC.
Builders and Contractors for Complete
riming & Power Plants.
We carry a large stock of Machinery and Supplies at our Rossland
Warehouse. If in need of anything for your mill or mine, please write
our agent, MR. F. R. MENDENHALL, who will quote you satisfactory
prices, and probably be able to fill your order at once from stock.
HEAD OFFICE AND WORKS:
33-40 LANSDOWNE STREET, —
F. R. MENDENHALL, Agent, ROSSLAND, B.C.
SHERBROOKE, QUE.
 COMPRISING	
HYDRAULIC GIANTS, CONCENTRATORS,
WATER GATES, SMELTERS,
SHEET IRON and HOISTING and
STEEL PIPE, PUMPING PLANTS,
STAMP MILLS, SAW MILLS,
ORE CRUSHERS, MINE and MILL
ORE FEEDERS,
SUPPLIES, Etc., Etc.
Catalogues and Prices Furnished
XTpon Application j
IMPACT WATER WHEEL.
HK7vni_TON   POWDER   CO'Y.
(Incorporated 1861.)   Manufacturers of
High Explosives, Blasting, Mining and Sporting Powder.
DEALERS IN ELECTRIC BLASTING APPARATUS, SAFETY FUSE, DETONATORS, ETC.
Head Office:   MONTREAL.
LOCAL OFFICES:
WORKS:
Vancouver, Nelson. Rossland   Greenwood.
NANAIMO.
..PERFECT CUPELS.. •
can be made by anyone with
ease and dispatch, with
CALKINS'
Cupel Machines
Compact, easily operated, can't
get out of order.   Everlasting.
No   Assay   Office   Complete
THE »CT©M»Tie, Without ©ne.
This machine will make 5 sizes cupels '        *~
of ideal perfection.   Capacity, 600 an      Descriptive Pamphlet  and  Price
hour. List mailed on application. !'
l. & e.
Combination Melting and Muffle
Assayers'
Furnaces
Are   Economical,  Convenient   and
Efficient.
Gasoline Tanks.
PftTENTED, Sp
This illustration shows L. & C. Fur- Hydro-Carbon
nace in operation.   Melting and Cu- D. .        —      -..
• pelingat same time with one burner. DiOWpipe Outfits
F. W. BRAUN & CO., 'ZZ^r=: Los Angeles, California.
These goods may be obtained from the British Columbia Assay and Chemical Supply Co., Ltd., of Vancouver, B.C.THE MINING RECORD.
vn.
ELECTRISHL  MACHINERY.
CANADIAN GENERAL ELECTRIC
COMPANY, Limited.
Head offices, Toronto, Ont. CAPITAL, $1,500,000. Factories, Peterboro, Ont
BRANCH OFFICES:
Halifax, N.S.,    Montreal, Que.,    Winnipeg, Man.,     Nelson, B.C.,    Vancouver, B.C.
MHNCFHeTURERS OF
Electric - Mining I Apparatus
Hoists, Pumps, Blowers, Fans, Blasting
Apparatus, Dynamos for Lighting and
Power and Motors for all Purposes	
Electrical Transmission of Power Successfully Operated up to 50 Miles
BY    OUR
THREE PHASE TRANSMISSION SYSTEM
.WRITE US-
BRANCH OFFICES IN BRITISH COLUMBIA
ROSSLAND.   I      VANCOUVER.Vlll.
THE MINING RECORD.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Ingersoll-Seiroiit Rock Drills
For   TUNNELS     MINES   and   QUARRIES.
Straight Line Duplex and Compound AlP GOUIIFGSSOPS
COMPLETE   MINE   EQUIPMENT.
JAMES COOPER MANUFACTURING COMPANY, limited
 MONTREAL,   P.Q	
Branch   Office—ROSSLAND, B.C.
JAMES D. SWORD, Manager.
The Brackman=Ker Milling Co., Ltd.,
Victoria, British Columbia. manufacturers of the celebrated
Rolled
Oats.
Facilities unequalled for supplying the West with.
the best quality of
Grain, Hay or Mill Feed.
Victoria. Nelson.
Vancouver. Rossland. j
New Westminster.    Edmonton.
B.&K.
(Registered.)
.Unequalled in the World.
MITCHELL,  LEWIS   &   STAVER   CO.,
Seattle, Wash.
Mine Hoists. Air and  Hand Drills.
Air Compressors.     Pipe and Tubular
Pumps, Pipes, etc. Boilers,
nining and Hill Machinery and Supplies.
Correspondence solicited.
BftNK ©F BRITISH NORTH HMERICft.
BSTABLISHED 1836.     INCORPORATED BY ROYAX, CHARTBR 1840.
paid op capital  f.'. j.fTf■f.v%yTf... si.ooo.ooo sterling.
RESERVE FUND,..'..,  300.000
LONDON, ENG., OFFICES, 3 CLEMENTS LANE, LOMBARD STREET.
BRANCHES   AND   AGENCIES :
SIDNEY, N.S. HALIFAX, N.S.
ST. JOHN, N.B.
FREDERICTON, N.B.
QUEBEC, P.Q.
MONTREAL, P.Q.
OTTAWA, Ont.
KINGSTON, Ont.
TORONTO, Ont.
HAMILTON, Ont.
BRANTFORD, Ont.
LONDON, Ont.
MIDLAND, Ont.
WINNIPEG, Man.
BRANDON, Man.
NEW YORK, N.Y.
SAN FRANCISCO, Cal.
BRANCHES   IN   BRITISH   COLUMBIA :
YIGTORia, YHNeOUVER, R0SSLRND, TRHIL, KaSLO, HSHCROPT, GREENWOOD.
Hlso at the  Gold Fields—aTL,IN,   BENNETT and DAWSON ©ITY,
Highest Prices Paid for Gold Dust and Amalgam. G.   H.   BURNS,   Mgi\,   VICTORIA,   8.6.The Mining Record.
Vol. VII.
APRIL,  1900.
No. 4.
BRITISH COLUMBIA
MINING RECORD
Devoted to the Mining Interests of British Columbia.
PUBLISHED BY
The Mining Record Limited Liability.
ADVERTISING RATES ON APPLICATION.
H. ITORTIMER LAMB, managing Editor,
London Office : 24 Coleman Street, E.C
Vancouver Branch Office: Hamilton & Armour, Hastings St
Montreal: Gray's Agency.
Denver, Col.: National Advertising Co.
San Francisco : Dake's Agency.
SUBSCRIPTION TERriS:
Canada and the United States, one year -   -   $2.00
Great Britain and Foreign, "       "    -   -     2.50
All communications relating to the editorial department
of the British Columbia Mining Record to be addressed to
The Editor, B.C. Mining Record,
P.O. Drawer 645, Victoria, B.C
All communications relating to the business department
of the British Columbia Mining Record to be addressed to
the Business Manager, B.C. Mining Record,
P.O. Drawer 645, Victoria, B.C.
THE MONTH.
WE have much pleasure in announcing, that for the
second time within a period of six months, we
have found it expedient to increase the size of this
publication by the addition of eight pages. Eight
pages were added in October last, but since, the demands upon our advertising columns have very considerably increased and the income derived both from
this source and from a constantly widening circulation enables us to give our readers still better value for
their money. It is, meanwhile, very gratifying to
learn in so tangible a manner that the Mining Record
is growing both in usefulness and popularity.
It will probably be admitted by everyone that mining is the most important industry in British Columbia whether we regard its present dimensions or
consider what the province hopes from it the
maintenance and growth of the industry are largely
influenced by the character of the legislation by which
it is affected. It would seem therefore
that a legislature which would always
do the best possible for the mining
industry is at the present time the
most important political desideratum
in the province. And yet it is notorious that the interests of the industry itself are the last
consideration in the choice of members to represent
the mining constituencies. Of the present delegation
from Kootenay and Yale in the Legislature, while they
LEGISLATION
AND  THE
MINTNG
INDUSTRY.
may be men highly respected in their communities, it
is safe, to say that not one of them is capable of either
originating legislation or criticising by a just analysis
of its effect on the industry of mining such as has
already been brought forward. We have had legislation hastily passed through without criticism, without
comprehension, which has worked havoc in different
districts and departments of the industry. Take, for
instance, the law excluding aliens from placer mining. It is a pity for the province that .this enactment
was not as well understood on its introduction as it
was after a year's experience of its effects. Again, the
regulations for securing Crown grants were changed
without anyone realizing that a clause had been added
to the Mineral Act which would work endless damage, vexation and pecuniary loss. Another instance
is a stupid amendment to the Companies' Act introduced but not passed preventing the directors of joint
stock companies from borrowing money. This was
aimed at an abuse no doubt. But one does not as a
rule remove an obstructive boulder with a charge of
dynamite sufficient to wreck the. whole surrounding
landscape. Of such a provision it might be safely
said that where it was desired to retain the abuse the
law could be evaded, while it would come down with
crushing effect upon the legitimate business of companies organized in ignorance of the fact that the
Legislature had reserved from them a privilege without which no individual merchant or business man
could continue to exist. The functions of government
in reference to any industry are both negative and
positive. There is no more blighting influence upon
any industry possible, and that particularly while it is
in a condition of .growth, than sudden change in the
conditions under which it is carried on or the fear of
such sudden change. It is probable tnat the damage
done the mining industry by the eight-hours law has
not been occasioned by the effects of the change of
system, (for things go along very well under a custom
of eight hours' labour in Western Australia) so much
as by the actual fact of the change itself, and its being
made in so hasty and inconsiderate a manner. The
negative functions of government in this respect are
in most countries conserved by the existence of a second chamber. In British Columbia there is no check
save the individual intelligence of the members of the
Legislature and the expression of public opinion. Of
late years the individual intelligence of the members
has been monstrously ineffectual, and possessed of a
confidence in the inverse ratio of their ability, they
have seldom given public opinion the time and opportunity to declare itself. It is therefore of the first
importance that the personnel of the mining members
of the House should be carefully considered and that
a consensus of opinion should be available beforeio8
THE MINING RECORD.
lit1
changes affecting the mining industry are finally decided upon. As Lord Bacon puts it very admirably:
"I knew a wise man that had it for * by-word, when
he saw men .hasten to a conclusion, 'Stay a little that
we may make an end the sooner.'" It is possible for
any set of men tolerably well informed, and above all
gifted with a proper appreciation of their own limitations to discharge the negative functions of government satisfactorily, but the positive functions of government require organization genius peculiar and
special where the upbuilding of a country or an industry is concerned. Hallam, one of the dryest of our
political moralists, remarks that there is no reason for
the non-appearance of great men at any particular
epoch except that nature does not see fit to produce
them. South Africa has Rhodes, British Columbia
has Mr. Joseph Martin. The difference is well illustrated by the fact that the omission of "Mister" before
the latter's name would be an evidence of contempt,
while in reference to the former it is the due prerogative of his genius. But lest we lay too much blame
unon nature it must also> be confessed that the circumstances of the province are not favourable for the evolution of commanding men. The population is widely
scattered; the interests of the different centres are diverse; and each of these centres is animated by an intense parochialism as humiliating as it is natural. To
unify these warring elements and bend them to the
great industrial destiny of the province would require
the genius of a Pitt, the audacity of Napoleon and the
patience of Job. And yet there exists at the present
time in British Columbia a magnificent opportunity.
The progress of half a century could be compressed
into a decade were the genius of imitation and direction procurable. The main hope at present is that in
the general flux of affairs political some one with a
policy adapted to these ends may emerge. The time
is ripe.
The reason for the stoppage of work in the Le Roi,
War Eagle and Centre Star mines is now made
abundantly clear. These companies have long been
subject to dictation on the part of union labour. So
long as this was only manifested in petty details it
was vexatious and disagreeable but nothing more.
But when an issue was taken which affected the whole
mechanism of the mines it be-
the eight-hour came necessary either to submit
law and the for good and all or to resist. The
contract system, history of the question is interesting and a striking commentary
upon the futility of labour legislation to accomplish its
intended objects. The mine owners looked to a system of contract labour or piece work to mitigate the
worst effects of the eight-hour law. It need not be
supposed that under contract they expected more
work to be done or cheaper work to be done than
could properly be accomplished in eight hours. But
when men are working on time the parings come out
of the employers' pockets;when on contract out of their
own. And there is a continual tendency in time work
for these parings to become longer and longer. Under
a ten-hours system they did not matter so much, there
was plenty of time to accomplish a day's honest work,
which, after all, is practically an invariable amount,
whether it be compressed into eight hours or spread
over ten. But under an eight-hours system this paring of time makes a material difference and a very
sensible diminution of the actual amount of work done
in a day. On the contract basis the time thus lost is
the men's, not the employers'. It may be noted in passing that if the assertion made by the supporters of
tlie eight-hours law, that a day's work could be compressed into eight hours' labour, were true, no possible
exception could be taken to the contract system at
similar rates of payment to those paid before the law
came into force. The truth is that the real, if unavow-
ed, perhaps unconscious or subconscious, intention
of the unions is to diminish the actual amount of work
done in a day and at the same time to retain the same
rate of pay. On no other basis could the objection to
the contract system be understood. It must be remembered that the contract system can only be applied successfully upon the dead work of a mine. It
has been the custom even in the extraction of ore for
centuries in the copper and tin mines of Cornwall but
it could not be economically applied to stoping in
mines worked under modern conditions and with
modern machinery. It is precisely in dead work that
the greatest economy of time and labour is necessary.
So that while the eight-hours law may be a boon;
to working miners the application of the contract system would only be a particular, a partial exemption;
where such an exemption is most required in economical mining. The union in Rossland, however, finding that the mine owners wished to mitigate the effects
of the law by a general application of the contract
system to the dead work in the mines, determined to
combat the contract system root and branch. It is
upon that issue that the fight has been brought on.
First the men engaged in stoping ore were dismissed,
then the mines were entirely closed for short periods.
Finally the men were given the option of returning to
work on the contract system or not at all. For the
present they have chosen the latter alternative. The
action of the mine owners has been carefully planned
and is entirely reasonable. Further, it will be successful. The Miners' Union of Rossland has set itself
against a custom which is as old as mining itself, and
in its practical workings is eminently satisfactory. It
was done so for a purely arbitrary reason. It is said
that when a man tells a lie, in order to make it successful he must envelop his whole subsequent life in
falsehood. It is equally true when legislation interferes with natural conditions, that further action, at
each stage becoming more and more arbitrary, is
necessary to postpone the re-assertion of the natural
laws violated. Finally the whole edifice tumbles to the
ground. In order to make the eight-hours law as
valid as it was intended to be beneficient another law
should have been passed for the Slocan to make it
illegal to diminish woges and a third for Rossland making it illegal to offer and work on contracts, and so
on, until the finale was reached in the measure openlv
advocated by the present Minister of Mines, in his
capacity of agitator, vote-hunter and panderer to the
delusions of the many, to wit, an act to compel mine
owners to work their mines under penalty of the control being reft from them by the State. There is yet
another reason why the union will be badly beaten. " It
is not denied that under the contract system a miner
can make top wages without working harder than he
is willing and accustomed to work. But the struggle
may occupy a much longer time than those who are
optimistic are willing to allow. The direct dependence of this lamentable condition of affairs of the violent transition from the ten to the eight-hours system
should be carefully borne in mind.   The enormous lossTHE MINING RECORD.
109
to the miners themselves, to holders of property, investors and merchants should bring home to any
thoughtful mind the extreme danger and delicacy of
interfering with the social mechanism by hasty and
ill-considered legislation.
We have before us the annual report of the Van
Anda Copper and Gold Company, and while it has
been our privilege to peruse many very remarkable
productions in the way of joint stock company literature, the present document is with-
an out question entitled to pre-eminent
extraordinary rank as the strangest and most un-
balance sheet, businesslike report ever sent out
from the office of a presumably
responsible concern. The statement, or so-called balance sheet, covers a period from April, 1896 to December 31st, 1899, and consequently includes the
receipts and expenditures as set out in the balance
sheet previously published by the company to March
ist, 1899. Referring, for the present, to two items
under the heading of assets and liabilities in the statement of March, 1899, we find mineral lands, land and
townsite stands at a cost of $5,000,000. One would
imagine that this was sufficient; but seemingly the directors were not satisfied with this amount for they
added (under a second heading) $525,000 for "ore exposed" on part of the same property. Now, in the
present report we find a memorandum to the effect
that the management of the company "misled themselves" at any rate as regards the estimate of ore exposed in one of the properties. It is to be hoped that
the public were not also "misled" by the publication
of figures which where obviously and admittedly "misleading." Such mistakes are sometimes likely to
prove costly, and we would refer the directors of the
Van Anda Company to section 156 of the Companies'
Act, 1897. In the present report the error is again
committed of valuing the "exposed ore," which on
this occasion is estimated to be worth $450,000, and
described as an asset. It should surely be clear to
any board of directors that until the ore has been
raised to the surface and is "at grass" it cannot be
treated in the form of an asset in the accounts. The
amount of ore blocked out in a mine should be mentioned only in the manager's report and the only way
in which the company may incorporate in their accounts an asset relative to "ore blocked out" would
be the cost of (say) a shaft through which the ore
would have to pass out of the mine. Even with an
asset of this nature provision would have to be made
for each ton of ore extracted to pay its proportion^ of
the cost of such shaft or permanent work in order
that when all the ore is extracted the asset will have
disappeared.
Another misleading item set down as an asset is the
townsite valued at $50,000. This land is also included
in the company's chief asset valued at $5,000,000.
Again another doubtful asset is that under the heading of bonds, value $180,000. This raises the question
"when is a bond a bond?" Surely not until value has
passed for it. The correct way in which this item
should have been stated in the liabilities, surely is :
Bonds authorized..
unissued . .
10-year bonds issued
225,000
180,000
.$45,000
Thus the company would not have shown as an asset the item $180,000 to which we object. Another
asset, that of timber, valued at $2,000, is certainly
stretching a point, as the tenure is simply for one year
from the issuance of a special license, and it is hardly
likely that the company requires forty million feet of
timber in that period. Meanwhile we print the following extracts from the balance sheets of March and
December, 1899, in parallel columns:
balance sheet.
Receipts.                    March 1, 1899.
Stock sales $51,84608
commission  . .
Teaming ..
Cash loan, H. "W
Dec. 31, 1899
$54,667 18
409 17
415 80
81 27
. Treat.    5,026 05
Disbursements. March 1, 1899.    Dec. 31, 1899
Assay office and assaying
Labour and salaries   ....
Labour 	
Bills receivable	
Wharf	
Raven Copper & Gold Co.
Due on lots and buildings
Due on lots and advances
on buildings       I-592 58
Discount on bond sales	
$2,181 32
70,872 26
405 00
781 00
1,634 52
57,007 05
$162,038 97
3.057 14
• 17,645 06
9,670 00
The first item refers to stock sales, which shows that
shares to the value of $2,803.10 have been disposed of
for the benefit of the company during the period from
March ist to December 31st, 1899. There is no mention in any of the accounts that the company had any
unissued stock to sell, nor is it stated that any shares
in the nature of treasury stock are held by trustees,
the proceeds from the sale of which would belong to
the company. The item of $54,667.18 entered as a
receipt from stock sales in the December balance
sheet must therefore be regarded as a gift from the
promoters or others; and shareholders in lieu of information to' the contrary can only assume that the
enormous capital of five millions has been issued and
paid for by the transfer of the "mineral lands and
lands" appearing in the general statement at the same
amount as the authorized, issued and fully paid up
stock of the concern. On the other hand it is generally understood that a very large proportion of the
stock remains the property of the company; but if this
is true the accounts should undoubtedly show that this
is the case, otherwise the proceeds of future sales from
this source would be at the disposal of those in whose
name the stock is entered, the company having no
control of what should be an asset of value to be utilized for the purpose of working capital. Under the
head of commissions we find a difference between the
amounts entered in the respective balance sheets of
$6.63, and this would appear to show that the company
earned in commissions between March ist and December, 1899, this amount more than it paid out for
commissions. Several curious omissions are noticeable in the present statement. The March balance
sheet shows that the sum of $81.27 had been earned
on teaming work, but the balance sheet of December
—which is supposed to be a repetition of the March
statement as well as a statement of the company's
accounts for the nine months following—contains no
such entry. In the March statement $2,181.32 appeared under the head of disbursements against "assavno
THE MINING RECORD.
office and assaying;" there is no corresponding account in the December balance sheet. Again the
March statement showed that the wharf had cost up
to that date $781. Has this property since been sold
or disposed of? It does not figure in the December-
accounts. Between the dates we have under review
Mr. H. W. Treat, the president, treasurer and general
manager of the Van Anda company, is stated to have
advanced the company the sum of $51,981 in cash. It
would be interesting for the shareholders to ascertain
why there is no item in the accounts for salaries in
the present report, while in last year's statement this
important account was erroneonsly incorporated with
that of labour; how much, if any, of this $51,981 is
represented in the amount paid for labour (or salaries)
which in the last ten months of 1899 amounted to
$91,166.71 ? Again, how much of the $51,981 (if any)
represented directors' fees?
There are several other items in this so-called balance sheet deserving of comment, but which, however space limitations compel us to allude to but briefly.
From April, 1896, to March, 1899, "bills receivable"
had cost the company $405 only. At the end of December the amount had increased to $3,057.14. According to the first balance sheet (March, 1899) the
Raven Copper and Gold Company cost or owed the
Van Anda Company $1,644.52. Has this sum been
refunded or has the amount been placed under another
heading or incorporated into another account as appears to have been done with other entries? In December $17,645.06 was due on lots and buildings, but
in March under a slightly different heading the entry
was $1,592.58. Does this mean that the company is
financially, speculative builders, and if so, on what,
basis are the loans made? In March, 1899, after forty-
two thousand five hundred dollars' worth of 6 per cent,
bonds (of the authorized issue of 150 at $500) had been
sold; no "discount on bond sales" was paid. In the
December balance sheet a disbursement of $9,670 is
shown under this account. Hence it evidently cost
$9,670 to sell the balance of the bonds, the par value of
which was $32,500.
In conclusion we can only express the opinion that
the manner in which these accounts are presented calls
for very strong criticism on the grounds that they do
not concisely state the company's position. Take, for
instance, the placing of unpaid accounts amongst the
receipts of the company. The receipts show the sum
of $430,952.92, whereas nine items represent unpaid
accounts which are clearly not receipts, and which
should have been deducted from the expenditure.
Moreover this so-called balance sheet is not certified
to by an auditor. Such a statement emanating from
one individual only can hardly be satisfactory from the,
point of view of a shareholder. But this general looseness crops up even in the designation of the company,
as printed on the report itself. The Van A«nda Copper
and Gold Company is, we imagine, one of limited liability, but it is not so stated, although an omission of
this kind is illesral.
The decision of the umpire on the arbitration concerning the rule of the Coal Mines Regulation Act
requiring all underground workers in collieries to read
and understand the somewhat elaborate safety rules
printed in English, is in the nature of a compromise
on this as also in reference to the question of the danger or otherwise of general Oriental employment in
the British Columbia coal mines.   The two arbitrators
were unable to agree and Mr. McCrady, as umpire,
holds that the rule was too drastic and therefore cannot be upheld. He, however, suggests the drafting
of a new regulation, providing that mine workers in
colliery levels undergound shall be able to understand
instructions given in English. He also holds that
while not all Chinese and Japanese labour engaged in
colliery work is dangerous, a percentage of it is and
this percentage should be eliminated by careful personal tests. The result of the reference will therefore
probably be the establishment under a new rule of certain tests that will eliminate a moderate percentage of
Mongolian labour from British Columbia collieries on
the ground of incompetency. Any changes
made in colliery management as the outline of the decision will not be very far-reaching.
As a correspondent from Fernie sensibly points out,
if the only objection to Oriental labour in coal mines
is the inability of Chinese or Japanese miners to read
rules in English, it would be easy enough to print the
rules in the Oriental languages.
At the meeting of the Crow's Nest Coal Company
in Toronto this month, some exceedingly satisfactory
information was afforded shareholders. During the
year the mines produced 116,200 tons of coal, on
which a net profit of $47,308.17 was made. At first
sight this profit appears inconsiderable as the result of
a full year's operations, but the explanation is given
that owing to the small amount of development work
performed up to the end of the first six or seven months
of last year, the Coal Creek mine was until recently
operated at a loss. Thus while in January, 1899, this
mine produced coal at a loss of $5,000, in January of
this year a net profit of $12,000 over and above operating expenses is shown. The company is now opening up a second series of mines at Michel, about 30
miles from Fernie, so that there will be alternate
sources of supply. It is understood that a dividend
will be declared this year. The enormous value of the
coal properties may be gathered from a statement
made by the newly-elected managing director that
basing his figures on geological reports and then halving them, there exists within the area owned by the
company over 10,000,000,000 tons of coal.
We look for the very best results from the mediation
of Mr. R. C. Clute, Q.C, in settling the matters in dispute between mine owners and men in the Rossland
and other districts. In an interview published in the
Nelson Tribune, Mr. Clute stated that his visit on this
occasion was in consequence of the request of leading representatives of the Mine Owners' Association
and prominent officials of the Miners* Union with the
object of exerting his good offices toward securing
an adjustment of the questions in controversy between
them. The government has acquiesced in Mr. Clute's
mission, feeling that the prosperity of the Province
and of the Dominion, inasmuch as what affects the
Province influences the entire country, depends on the
permanent settlement of the labour troubles, and is
most anxious to promote an amicable feeling between
owners and men.
Speaking of the dredging prospects of the North
Thompson River, which has recently been explored
by dredging experts from New Zealand, "who claim
that as the result of their tests, dredging in the future
will quite eclipse lode mining in the Kamloops dis-THE MINING RECORD.
tnct, our Kamloops correspondent writes: "About
30 miles of the river have been staked and several
parties are prospecting further up the river. While
one company has got good returns from apparently
careful examination of the ground I do not think the
tests made have been sufficiently extensive and thorough to prove that the gold exists to any depth, and
old placer miners all agree that it is confined to the top
ten or twelve inches."
Mr. E. Nelson Fell is to be congratulated on the excellent showing of the Athabasca for the past year.
Considering, all things, the amount of development
work done, the condition of the labour market, among
others, a profit of over thirty thousand dollars is not at
all bad as a beginning. If all the English mining
companies had as careful and as good a man in charge
of mines on this side there would be fewer failures.
The directors of the Bend 'Or Mines are to be congratulated upon the eminently satisfactory report and
financial statement of the year's operations, which
they have been able to present to the shareholders.
The company's affairs appear to be in a flourishing
condition and there is every prospect of respectable
and regular dividends in the near future. The success
of the Bend 'Or will go far towards restoring confidence in the Bridge River district, which was so rudely shaken by the Golden Cache collapse. Not only is
the Bend 'Or an exceedingly promising property but,
as the accounts which we publish elsewhere show, it
is being managed on very careful and economical
lines.
A correspondent, a mining engineer, writes to the
Mining Record from Montreal expressing strong
approval of the article published last month and commenting on the close-down of the War Eagle. As
some of our correspondent's remarks are of public interest we quote as follows from his letter:—
"I much congratulate you on the more than able
article in your last issue on War Eagle affairs. The
issue arrived whlist our annual meeting of the Canadian Mining Institute was in session and met with
unanimous approval. Apart altogether from the personal aspect of the case and the unfair treatment of
both the public and the shareholders there is more
than sufficient justification for the severest criticism on
account of the prejudicial effect of their action on B.
C. investments generally. Only those who have tried
to place B. C. properties on the London market know
the lack of confidence felt there which is enhanced bv
such tactics as we are now condemning. The grave-
ness of the charge against Messrs. Gooderham and
Blackstock lies in the fact that they were told, I understand, in September last by Mr. Kirby as soon as he
went there that the mine was exhausted so far as profitable recoveries were concerned and yet after that,
in fact as late as November 15th Mr. Gooderham gave
a most optimistic 'interview, talked of a prodigious
output, increased value of shares and increased dividend.' Your estimates are perfectly sound and will
not be falsified by results. War Eagle at $1.00 is not
more than a "j\ per cent, investment if that. There is
reason to believe that the smelter returns for the last
six months show a gross value of less than $12, which
would not leave more than $2.00 to $3.00 profit, but
they will not even to their shareholders produce the
returns."
The Vancouver News-Advertiser recently quoted
Mr. Robert Murray, provincial timber inspector, as
having stated that "In the Boundary country, half a
dozen new stamp-mills have been put in since he was
there last and the smelters under construction are going ahead rapidly." It is true that the erection of two
smelters is being proceeded with, but so far as stamp
mills are concerned, not one has yet been put in
throughout the district generally known as "the Boundary country—that is the district lying between
Rock Creek on the west and Christina Lake on the
east. A lack of knowledge of Boundary mining matters on the part of whoever is responsible for that department of its news occasionally results in the News-
Advertiser, like other Coast newspapers, publishing
statements relating to the Boundary district that are
unreliable and misleading. Anyone at all familiar with
the ores of the Boundary country knows that stamp
mills will play a very small part in their reduction.
The off-hand way in which local mining companies
are managed has been well illustrated in the case of
the Winnipeg mine in the Boundary Creek district.
Without consulting the shareholders, the managing
director, Mr. Duncan Mcintosh, one day took it into
his head to announce that he was negotiating a consolidation with the Brandon and Golden Crown company, whose property adjoins the Winnipeg. Meanwhile the mine, for no known reason, was closed down,
which was followed by a fall in the stock from 32 to
13. The Winnipeg mine was originally owned by Mr.
Mcintosh, but since he has allowed it to be acquired
by a joint stock company, he should be taught that he
has no longer the right to do just what his fancy
pleases with it
One of the Greenwood papers recently remarked
that Mr. Paul Johnson makes a capital advertising
agent. He is certainly an adept at the art of booming.
But one trade at a time should be enough for any man
and would it not be as well if Mr. Johnson stuck to his
work of superintending the construction of the smelter at Greenwood and talked a little less freely? Our
Boundary Creek correspondent draws attention to
one of this gentleman's statements as recently published in the Rossland and Spokane newspapers, that "the
following mines will contribute ore to the Mother
Lode smelter, namely, the Ah There, the Buckhorn,
Morrison, St. Lawrence, Butcher Boy and Sunset."
Most of the mines enumerated are as yet not developed much beyond the prospect stage. Our correspondent writes: "The Ah There is installing a small boiler
and steam hoist. Its shaft is down seventy feet and it
has also a cross-cut, but from what I can gather the
mine could not produce at present five tons of ore a
day. The Butcher Boy and St. Lawrence are, so far
as I can ascertain, no further advanced as regards development. The Sunset has put in a good plant, but
nothing definite is heard of its ore bodies. The Buck-
horn is doing good prospecting work down to the
200-foot level, but up to a week ago had encountered
nothing but good indications and small stringers of
ore carrying fair values. My summing up of the
position is that all these "mines" together if systematically developed from now on for six months would
not at the end of that period be able to maintain a
regular total output of a hundred tons per day, so that
there does not appear to be much to justify Mr. Johnson's somewhat extravagant statements."I 12
THE MINING RECORD.
The Greenwood Times, in a recent issue, announces
the sale by the sheriff of the Granite and Banner
claims in Camp McKinney. The properties fetched
$300. Last September the following paragraph appearing on page 15 of that month's issue of the
Mixing Record was severely criticised in certain
quarters: "The Camp McKinney Mines, Ltd., is a
Vancouver promotion, concerning whose properties,
the Granite and Banner, many boom statements have
of late appeared in the Vancouver papers. One of the
promoters has, moreover, publicly and with a proper
show of virtuous indignation, referred in scathing
terms to the Golden Cache fiasco, as having largely
deterred Vancouver investors from speculating in
legitimate mining ventures, such, for instance, perhaps, as the Camp McKinney Mines, Ltd.? Our
Camp McKinney correspondent, however, in response to a request for information, does not appear to
hold a very high opinion regarding the value, as at
present determined, of the properties of the Camp
McKinney Mines, Ltd., i.e., the Granite and Banner
claims, the much-heralded production of a couple of
gold-bricks therefrom, worth each a few hundred dollars, notwithstanding."
Just previous to the publication of this comment,
a very glowing account of the Granite and Banner
claims was published in the Vancouver World at the
instance, it was stated, of Mr. Banfield, a stock-broker
of that town. Mr. Banfield,.who was financially interested in the promotion, was quoted as having stated
that there was then "$200,000 worth of ore in sight in
the claims' and 2,000 tons of ore on the dumps." Vet
the other day the properties only realized at public
auction a beggarly three hundred dollars!
It is fortunate that the profits made by the British
America Corporation out of its British Columbia and
other ventures more than compensate for the company's losses on its Yukon trading. This has, it-
seems, resulted in a present loss of over £29,474 with
an expected further depreciation of stock against
which another sum of £20,000 has been set aside. The
corporation has, however, been^able to declare a ten
per cent, dividend. So far as we know, no purely
British concern has made anything like a substantial
profit by Yukon trading, the great American Alaskan
organizations having too strong a hold on the field
and too large and complete a knowledge of the northern country for successful competition on the part of
less experienced rivals. It is understood that the British America Corporation's trading operations in the
Yukon were in the main due to resolves made in London, local advisers in British Columbia rather dissuading than counselling such a course.
As our Shoal Bay correspondent mentioned last
month there is every reason to believe that a very
valuable discovery of workable marble has been made
in this district. The deposit of which an almost unlimited quantity is exposed, is known as Doolmite marble, and is found in both the pure white and streaked
varieties. The marble takes an excellent polish and
we are given to understand can be placed on the local
market at an extremely moderate cost.
aggressive element will in any case, though doubtless
prevented by military control from taking such extreme measures, make things very uncomfortable for
British subjects in and about Cape Nome, from which
there being other good reasons against going, most
will do well to stop away.
Another Klondike company—the Klondike, Yukon
& Stewart Pioneers, Limited—has joined the great
majority. At a meeting of shareholders last
month, before the motion was carried approving the voluntary liquidation, the chairman explained
that the failure of the company was due to the incom-'
petency of their Canadian manager, Col. Domville,
who had acted contrary to instructions, and made a
mess of things generally. That somebody blundered
is quite certain, for there is no earthly reason why the
concern should not have been a success under ordinarily good business management. But this is the rock
upon which more than one English company has split
in this country.
The Engineering and Mining Journal of New York
commenting on the alleged discovery of workable coal
in the Yukon remarks very pertinently that the presence of coal, even of comparatively poor quality, ought
to result in a considerable reduction in the cost and
difficulty of mining and living in the country. In the
Yukon fuel is almost the first essential to maintaining
life at all, and a large quantity of it is needed in mining
operations in ground which is frozen all the year
round. The supply of wood in the region is not sufficient to last very long at the present rate of consumption, and the cost of transportation will prevent the
bringing of any quantities of coal from the coast.
Coal mining in the Yukon ought to be very profitable.
Mr. James de Lamare and his French associates evidently recognize the value of keeping their Klondike
and Atlin interests before the public by direct and indirect advertising. The syndicate own 22 placer
claims in the Yukon and 1,200 acres of hydraulic
ground in the Atlin country. The possibilties of these
are well advertised in France by a neatly printed and
well got up monthly paper published in Paris. It is
distinctly a "boom" issue, copying closely Western
American methods. And now Mr. de Lamare is further advertising the properties of his syndicate by taking a French made automobile to the far north. By
this means he hopes to make a speedy journey over
the ice from Bennett to Dawson. Almost every paper
in the province and many beyond it naturally chronicle
this novel experiment.
The restriction of the ownership of Atlin placer
claims to British subjects is serving as an excuse for
American prospectors at Cape Nome to threaten to'
drive Canadian miners from the Alaskan benches. The
The Dawson Board of Trade, which certainly should
know something of the subject, strongly urges the reduction of the Yukon gold royalty to 2 per cent. It
is possible, of course, that the Board, not being wholly
disinterested, suggests rather too large a reduction of
the impost. But it can hardly be denied that as it
stands, the royalty, allowing for all deduction, representing a levy of at least nine per cent, net, should be
lowered to a rate far nearer two than nine per cent.,
and unless some considerable reduction is made, only
the very best claims can long continue to be worked
with profit. The average hydraulic claim will not
stand the present royalty on output, in addition to
what are necessarily large working expenses.THE MINING BECORD.
In comparison with the Yukon royalty the provincial tax on the yield of the gold and silver mines of
less than one per cent, net on the value of output, is
exceedingly moderate. The revenue from this source
is at present only about $60,000 a year, which is spent
in improving the means of communication and on
other necessary public works in the mining districts.
Some would have the province's levy assessed on net
profits or dividends, but this would operate too unequally and uncertainly, while such a levy would be
too easily evaded by the less scrupulous.
THE MINERAL PRODUCTION OF CANADA
FOR 1899.
(From the Report of the Geological Survey.)
Product. Quantity. Value,
(a) " (a)
Metallic— $
Copper (fine in ore &c) (b) lbs 15,078,475 2,655,319
Gold, Yukon dist.$i6,ooo,ooo
all other...    5,049,730
   21,049,730
Iron ore  . .tons        77,158 248,372
Lead (fine in ore &c) (c) lbs 21,862,436 977,250
Nickel (fine in ore &c) (d) lbs    5,744,000 2,067,840
Platinum oz              55 835
Silver (fine in ore &c) (e). .lbs    3,078,837 1,834,371
Total metallic  28,833,717
Non-Metallic—
Arsenic lbs 114,637 4,872
Asbestus and asbestic  . .tons 25,285 483,299
Chromite     " 1,980 23,760
Coal  4,565,993 9-040,058
Coke (f)     " 100,820 350,022
Felspar     " 3,000 6,000
Fire-clay ..   :     " 599 1,295
Graphite     " 1,220 16,179
Grindstones     " 4,5" 43>265
Gypsum     " 244,566 257,329
Limestone for flux     " 53>202 45,662
* Manganese ore  .......    " 308 3,96°
Mica  163,000
Mineral pigments—
Baryta tons 720 4,402
Ochres     " 3,9r9 J9>900
Mineral water  100,000
Moulding sand tons I3,724 27,430
Natural gas (g)  387>27x
Petroleum (h) Bbls 808,570 1,202,020
Phosphate (apatite)  ..   ..tons 3,000 18,000
Pyrites     " 27,687 110,748
Salt     " 57,095 234,52o
Soapstone     " 450 1,960
*Returns incomplete.
(a) Quantity or value of product marketed. The ton
used that of 2,000 lbs.
(b) Copper contents of ore, matte, etc., at 17.61 cents
per lb.
(c) Lead contents of ores, etc., at 4.47 cents per lb.
fd) Nickel contents of ore, matte, etc., at 36 cents
per lb.
(e) Silver contents of ore at 59.58 cents per oz
(f) Oven coke, all the production of Nova Scotia
and British Columbia.
(g) Gross return from sale of gas.
(h) Calculated from inspection returns at 100 galls.
crude to 42 refined oil, and computed at $1.48! per
bbl. of 35 imp. galls. The barrel of refined oil is assumed to contain 42 imp. galls.
Product.                      Quantity. Value,
(a) (a)
Structural Materials and Clay
Products. $
Cements, natural rock ..  ..bbls 131,387 119,508
Portland     "    255,366 513,983
i lagstones  7,600
Granite  90,542
Pottery  200,000
,Sewer pipe  161,546
Slate  33,406
Terra-cotta  220,258
Building material including bricks, building stone, lime, sands and gravels, and
tiles  4,250,000
Total structural   materials   and clay products        5,596,843
lotal all other non-metallic     12,544,952
Total non-metallic  18,141,795
Total metallic  28,833,717
Estimated value of mineral products not
returned  300,000
Total, 1899     47,275,512
1898, Total  38,661,010
1897 "   28,661,430
1896 "   22,584,513
1895 "   20,639,964
1894   19,931,158
1893 "   20,035,082
1892 "   16,628,417
1891 "   18,976,616
1890 "   16,763,353
1889 "   14,013,913
1888 "   12,518,894
1887 "   11,321,331
1886 "   10,221,255
(a) Quantity or value of product marketed. The ton
used is that of 2,000 lbs.
The increase in the value of the mineral production
of Canada which has been so noticeable a feature in
the figures for the previous four years is continued
during 1899. Compared with the corrected total for
1898, the preliminary figures for 1899 show an increase of over 22.2 per cent., the increases for 1898 and
1897 having been nearly 35 per cent, and nearly 27
per cent, respectively.
Of the above mentioned 22.28 per cent, 15.52 per
cent, is to be credited to the increased output of gold
from the Yukon placers, 2.92 per cent, to the increases
in the other metallic products, and 3.84 per cent, to
the growth of the non-matellic mineral industries.
The value of the mineral production of the country
per capita for 1899 would be about $8.90, having increased almost four-fold in the fourteen years since
1886, when the first figures are available.
.A study of the figures given in the table following,
shows that the metallic products contribute some 6t
per cent, to the value of the whole, and these, together
with coal, petroleum and building material, account
for all but about 9 per cent of the grand total.ii4
THE MINING RECORD.
The proportional contributions of the various products for 1898 and 1899, are shown below.
1898. 1899.
Per cent
Product. of
Total
Production.
     44
Product.
Per cent
of
Total
Production.
Gold  3563
Coal  21.27
Build'g material. 10
Silver  6
Copper  5
Nickel.
Lead	
Petroleum .
Asbestus. . .
Cement .. .
Natural gas.
Coke	
Salt	
Gypsum.. .
Pottery  . .   .
//
7i
52
m
12
75
27
03
83
74
64
60
55
Gold	
Coal	
Build'g  material
Copper  	
Nickel	
Silver	
Petroleum   ..   .
Lead	
Cement...   ..   .
Asbestus	
Natural gas. .   .
Coke	
Gypsum	
Iron ore	
Salt	
19
8
5
4
3
2
2
1
1
3.5
12
•99
62
37
88
54
°7
34
02
82
74
54
53
Product.
Metallic:—
Copper. ..
Gold ... ..
Iron ore  ..
Lead	
Nickel .. .
Silver..   ..
Quantity.
Value.
Non-Metallic :-
Asbestus  ..
Coal   . .
Coke  ..
Cement.   . .
Gypsum   . .
Natural gas
Petroleum.
In copper, ow
Inc.
Dec.
%
%
I5-04
32-25
4.10
6
9-
m
54
11.
30
43
09
57
54
6.62
31
50
30.85
.24
84
52
8l
02
56
13
5°
9
22
94
38
59
10
34
67
20
22
[3   21
Dec.
%
10.99
29.28
1.61
ring to the large advance in prices,
there was a marked increase in value notwithstanding
the decrease in the output.
The value of the gold production shows a large percentage increase, in the Yukon and Ontario especi-
The town ol Greenwood; the chiel trade centre ot the Kettle River Mining Division.
The chief points of interest brought out by the
above figures lie in the much greater prominence
assumed by gold, and the falling off in the silver and
lead, which now occupy the sixth and eighth places,
as compared with the fourth and seventh positions
formerly occupied by these materials.
The progress, etc., of the several mineral industries
in comparison with 1898, is shown below.
ally, the former having grown 60 per cent, and the
latter over 58 per cent. In the case of iron ore, the
the chief contributors to the total mineral production
of the country, lead and silver are the only two showing a considerable falling off, and that notwithstanding more favourable prices. This is due to local
causes in British Columbia, not dependent on the
value of the deposits but which have led to the restriction of operations there.THE MINING RECORD.
115
THE DETERMINATION OF HIGH TEMPERATURES.
(By A. A. Watson, B. Sc, Vernbu, B.C.)
£ HE determination of high temperatures is a sub-
J jeer of great interest in smelting operations and
in the numerous experiments carried out by scientists
upon blast furnace smelting and upon the use of various kinds of fuel a good method of accurately estimating high temperatures has been eagerly sought
after. Various methods have been used to "this end,
and to describe some of these, together with the scientific principles involved is the object of this article.
One of the first methods to be applied, and one which
would naturally occur to anybody, was that of measuring the expansion of a bar of some metal, difficult
to fuse, when placed in the furnace with one end passing through one side. The principle involved is the
same as that of the ordinary mercury thermometer.
We measure ordinary atmospheric temperatures by
the expansion of a thread of mercury, reading off the
degrees on an arbitrary scale; applying the same
principle, only using a bar of iron instead of a thread
of mercury, the temperature of any furnace could be
obtained up to the melting point of iron, in terms of
the centigrade or Fahrenheit thermometer. The iron
bar was carefully measured at a temperature of zero
centigrade and placed in that part of the furnace
where the temperature of zero was desired to be determined. One end of the bar projected through the wall
of the furnace. The increase in length was measured
and the temperature calculated from this. Theoretically this instrument should have been satisfactory, but
the difference of temperature of that part of the bar
which was in the wall of the furnace gave rise to inaccuracies. The temperature was obtained by considering the equation for determining the coefficient of
lineal expansion of iron, that is to say the fraction of
itself which iron expands for every degree of rise in
temperature.   This fraction is .000012.
For example let L be the length of an iron bar at a
given temperature. Let M be its length at o° centigrade. Let T be the temperature. Let the coefficient
of expansion of iron be .000012, then its length at any
given temperature will be the multiple of its length o°
c, and unity plus the coefficient of expansion multiplied by the given temperature.
L = AI (1 -f- .000012 T).
Suppose an iron bar measured 100 inches at o° c.
and when placed in the furnace increased to 101.107
inches, we obtain the temperature of the furnace as
follows:
101.107 = 100 (1 + .000012 T).
T = 922° c.
The barometer of the furnace then is 9220 c.
A more accurate method was found by placing an
iron and a platinum bar side by side in the furnace
with the ends projecting and measuring the difference
in the expansion of the two bars. Iron expands
about half as much again as platinum for every increase per degree centigrade. The coefficient of expansion of platinum is .0000086. The greater the temperature therefore the greater difference will there
be in the length of the rods and so by using the same
equation as before first applied to iron and then applied to platinum we can easily obtain the temperature of our furnace. Suppose our rods each measure
100 inches at zero and the difference in their lengths
in the furnace is .314 inch.
For iron L = M (1 + .0000120 T) = 100 (1 +
000012 T).
M (1 +.0000086 T) = 100 (1 +
.314 inch.
T) —100 (1-
.0000086
Platinum P
.0000086 T).
By measurement L — P =
.314 inch=ioo (1-f-.oooois
T.)
.0012 T — .00086 T = .314.
T = 923°.
The temperature is found to be 923° c.
Another method which has met with considerable
success is the calorimetric method. A platinum ball
of known weight is suspended in that portion of the
furnace of which it is desired to know the temperature and is then quickly ejected and placed in a water
calorimeter. The rise in the temperature of the water
is then noted. But first it will be necessary to explain
to the lay reader what a calorimeter is and for what
purpose it is used. A calorimeter is, as its name implies, a heat measure, that is to say, an instrument
used for the purpose of estimating quantities of heat.
The quantity of heat required to be put into a gramme
of any substance in order to raise its temperature one
degree, is called the specific heat of that substance.
The specific heat of water is that quantity of heat required to raise a gramme of water one degree centigrade and this quantity of heat being taken as unity
the specific heats of other substances are always taken
in terms of the specific heat of water. Thus the spe-.
cific heat or iron is 0.114, because the quantity of heat
required to raise the temperature of a gramme of iron
one degree centigrade is 114-1000 of the heat required
to raise a gramme of water one degree. It is in measuring the specific heats of metals that the water
calorimeter is used. It consists of a small breaker-
shaped copper or brass vessel of known weight packed inside another brass vessel, the space between the
two being lined with asbestos or more often non-conducting material to prevent the escape of heat from the
inner vessel.
Suppose, for example, it is desired to measure the
specific heat of brass. A piece of brass is weighed
and placed in boiling water to bring it to a temperature of 110° c. In the meatime, the calorimeter is filled with water and weighed so as to obtain the weight
oi water, and the temperature of the water is registered. The piece of brass is next quickly removed to
the calorimeter which is kept stirred and the rise in
temperature of the water noted. We now have all the
data for determining the specific heat of brass.
Supposing the weight of the brass to be 177.6
grammes, the initial temperature of the brass to be
ioo° c.,the final temperature 18.6 c. The fall in temperature of the brass is 81.4 c. The quantity of heat evolved by the brass in cooling is (i77.6X8i.4Xspecific
heat of brass) heat units and is by natural law equal to
the heat taken up by the calorimeter and water.
Now the weight of water in the calorimeter was 657
grammes and the amount of water equal to the instrument itself by previous determinations was it
grammes, therefore the amount of water the whole
calorimeter was equal to was 668 grammes. The initial temperature of the water was 16.6 and the final
18.60. The water therefore was raised through 2° c.
The heat taken up by the water was therefore 2X668
or 1336 units.
Now the amount of heat taken up by the calorimeter must be equal to the amount of heat given out by
the brass, for energy is never lost, therefore 177-6 X
81.4 X specific heat of brass = 1336.
Specific heat of brass = .094 heat units.
It will be readily seen that, applying the same prin-n6
THE MINING RECORD.
ciple of quantity of heat, if we know the specific heat
of the metal, all we have to do, to discover the initial
temperature of the metal, is to fill in the specific heat
in the same equation and this time leave the initial
temperature as the unknown value. Suppose the
weight of the platinum ball suspended in the furnace
to be 177.6 grammes. Call the initial temperature of
the ball fresh from the furnace T. The final temperature of the calorimeter was 23.950 c. The specific
heat of platinum is .0324. The heat evolved by the
platinum ball is 177.6 (T—23.95) (.0324) or 5.75424 T
— I37-8I4.
Supposing the heat taken up by the calorimeter to
be the product of the weight of water into the rise of
temperature, and suppose the weight of water to be
679 grammes and the factor of the calorimeter or
grammes of water the instrument is equal to in the
quantity of heat it will absorb is 11, then the amount
of heat absorbed by the calorimeter will be 690 multiplied by the rise in temperature. The initial temperature of the water was 16.60. The final temperature
was 23.95. The rise in temperature of the water was
7.35. The heat taken up by water was 690 X 7-35 =z
5071.5. Therefore the quantities of heat given out
and absorbed being equal we have—
5.75 424 T — 137.814 = 5071.5
T 1 905° c.
The advantage of the calormetric method over the
preceding ones is that the melting point of platinum
is exceedingly high and at temperatures at which iron
would instantly fuse, the platinum ball pyrometer can
be used and is found to give satisfactory results.
A rough and ready method frequently used is to
make alloys of various metals and of definite composition so that the melting point of each is known, and
place the alloy in a muffle in the furnace. Some of
them will melt and others remain solid. The lowest
melting point of those remaining solid will be approximately the temperature of the furnace.
Siemen's electrical pyrometer has been used with
much success. The principle of the instrument is
based upon the fact that the electrical resistance of a
wire is increased by an elevation of temperature. The
increase in resistance is.directly proportional to the increase in temperature. If, therefore, we take a wire
of known resistance connected with a battery and pass
it through a liquid of known temperature, say boiling
water, and measure the increased resistance for the
higher temperature, we can easily calculate an unknown temperature of the wire when a further increase of resistance is indicated. For example, suppose the increased resistance of a wire is 2 Ohms at
ioo° c, if the same wire passed through a furnace
shows a resistance of 20 Ohms, then the temperature
is 10000 c. The instrument is constructed as follows:
A double thread is cut upon a cylinder of hard pipeclay and in this are coiled two- platinum wires united
at the lower end. The wire has a diameter of .01 inch
and a resistance of about 3.6 units per yard. The clay
cylinder occupies the lower end of a platinum case
fitted with a handle. Connections are made with
leading wires at the upper end of the case. Voltame^
ter tubes are used to measure the resistance. A voltameter is simply a tube employed to collect the gas
given off from an acid solution when an electric current is passed through. The jtionger the current the
greater the quantity of gas given off in a given time,
and the greater the resistance of the wire to the current the less the quantity of gas given off. It can thus
be seen that if we have two wires of precisely similar
resistance one passing directly through a bath of sul
phuric acid and the other through the furnace and
then through another bath of sulphuric acid a comparison between the volumes of gases given off will be
a direct measure of the increased resistance of the
wife passing through the furnace and consequently
of the temperature of the furnace.
For example, suppose the amount of gas given off
in the one voltameter is 100 c. Cms. per hour for a resistance of 4 Ohms, if the volume of gas given off in
the voltameter connected with the heated wire is only
10 c. Cms., then the resistance of the wire is 40 Ohms
or ten times as much and the rise in temperature is ten
times as much as the rise in temperature of the normal wire previously experimented with. The subject of pyrometers could be enlarged upon indefinitely
so numerous have been the methods used. The foregoing methods are merely an outline of what has been
done in this direction.
NICKEL AND COBALT ASSAYING.
By M. E. D. Merry, Rossland.
A METHOD for nickel and cobalt assaying of
which I propose to give an account was invented—if I may use the term—by my father, Mr. A.
S. Merry, many years ago, and although in constant
use for upwards of fifty years has never to my- knowledge been published, and only those chemists who
have at one time or another been connected with my
family in business have heard of this particular method, which though old, is, I believe, as speedy and accurate as any yet published. And I may add that even
the electrolytic method so much in use at the present
day is no more accurate, if as much so.
In the first place nickel and cobalt metals are usually
associated with copper, especially when found in the
ore as sulphide, and arsenide, the only other form of
ore found on a commercial scale being the carbonate
found chiefly in New Caledonia, sometimes termed
silicate of nickel, which is generally free from copper
and carries, as does the Sudbury ore, only traces to
one-half per cent, of cobalt.   Iron is always present.
With regard to preliminary preparation of the ore,
your readers will be well acquainted, so we will proceed from the time the ore is dissolved and all nickel
and cobalt in solution, except perhaps in the case of a
sulphide ore low grade, say 1 or 2 per cent, nickel and
trace of cobalt, when the value of the cobalt is not
taken into consideration, in which case 500 grains—or
the equivalent in grams—is taken and melted with 10
per cent, of charcoal or finely pulverized coal dust,
and 500 grains of borax glass, and as soon as melted,
well covered with additional borax glass without taking out of the fire, allowed to remain in fire with a
fire-clay cover over the crucible until fluid, poured
into iron mould, allow to cool, resulting button of
matte can all be dissolved, or weighed and proportionate amount taken for assay. Time, about 10 to 15
minutes.
Having nickel and cobalt in solution, it is well to
evaporate nearly to dryness, all excess of hydrochloric
acid to dispel nitric acid, dilute with tepid or cold
water and pass a current of sulphuretted hydrogen
through solution, which will precipitate copper, most
of the arsenic, tin, antimony, etc., etc., adding a few
. spots (according to quantity of arsenic present) of hv-
posulphite of soda which assists the precipitation of
the arsenic in a very great degree. If much arsenic is
present this gas should be kept on for about fifteen
minutes or until solution is saturated, which can be
determined by smelling the solution, and well stirring,
if thoroughly gassed precipitate will settle quickly andTHE MINING RECORD.
117
solution appear clear. It is well to shake or stir solution more than once and warm before filtering, as
there is a point in temperature of solution, and also
quantity of H. S. at which arsenic is more readily
precipitated, and if over gassed this point is more easily obtained by allowing solution to stand on a hot slab
for some time before filtering. Even with great care,
however, if arsenic is present in excess of copper some
arsenic is likely to remain in solution, but this is gotten rid of by next operation. Filter on rapid brown or
white paper, leaving precipitated sulphides on paper
and wash thoroughly with five or six waters—hot
water hastens the operation—allowing waters to pass
into large greaker or flask with filtrate which will
contain all the nickel and cobalt and iron, together
with zinc and manganese if any present. As these two
latter metals are rarely met with in association with
nickel ores of commercial value. Although manganese is often found associated with with cobalt, we will
act as though they were not present and treat with
them later on, and proceed to separate the iron.
Boil filtrate until all Hy. S. is driven off, adding
a little chlorate of potash to bring iron to a state ||
per oxide. If arsenic be not all precipitated by the
last treatment, some will be seen to precipitate on boiling, and the balance will be precipitated with the iron
as arsenate of iron.   Proceed as follows:
Add slight excess of ammonium hydrate, precipitating all the iron, then add hydrocloric acid at first rapidly and then drop until nearly all the iron is re-dissolved, leaving solution nearly neutral with just a trace
of iron still precipitated, then add acetate of soda in
excess and bring to a boil when all iron will be precipitated; filter into large breaker, wash once and re-
dissolve iron, placing filter paper and contents in
flask with Hcl., dilute acording to amount of iron
present, and re-precipitate in same manner; filter on
another paper, test second filtrate with ammonium
sulphide, and if containing any nickel add to first filtrate (washing thoroughly), if not it can be discarded.
Where a large percentage of iron is present it is usual
to find a little nickel and cobalt in first precipitate.
Warm filtrate, which by this time has become
rather bulky, add one or two spots of ammonium hydrate, and pass strong current of Hy. S. through solution, which will precipitate nickel and cobalt as sulphide in a very short space of time, care being taken
ndt to have a large excess of Hy. S. or ammonium
sulphide, which will retain some of the nickel and cobalt in solution; allow precipitate to settle, and filter
on white Swedish paper while hot, wash with water
through which Hy. S. has been passed. This operation should be carried on quickly, keeping the nickel
sulphide covered with solution, or gassed Water until
operation is finished, otherwise if precipitate is allowed to stand and become nearly dry before operation is
finished some will pass through filter paper on adding
remainder.
We have now on the filter paper nickel and cobalt
sulphide together with zinc and manganese if any
present- dry thoroughly; remove the filter from the
funnel and burn in platinum dish, thoroughly removing all organic matter from the paper. Brush the
oxides now formed into a small breaker, add Hcl.
and one or two spots of Hnds. (to dissolve any
sulphide still remaining) cleaning out the platinum
dish by heating with Hcl., which add to the mam bulk
—cover with watch glass and heat gently when all
nickel and cobalt will be in solution. Precipitate the
whole with caustic potash, add excess of acetic acid
and then nitrate of potash; stir occasionally with glass
rod and allow to stand for eight or ten hours covered
with watch glass, when cobalt will be seen to precipitate and on addition of potassium nitrate will settle
to the bottom. Decant the major portion of nickel
off the precipitate cobalt, and filter on washed white
paper, washing with two waters as gently as possible.
Add excess caustic potash to nickel solution precipitating on the nickel, filter wash well. Now we have
the two metals as precipitates, the nickel as oxide, the
cobalt as double nitrate of cobalt and potash.
Although up to this point Fresenins and others
employ practically the same method as the foregoing,
the next operation I have never seen in print. It is
as follows:
For Nickel.—Dissolve precipitate with dilute Hcl.,
dilute slightly, add slight excess of ammonia, which
will precipitate any iron carried through mechanically
or gathered during different operations; filter and
wash thoroughly, care being taken to avoid bulky
solution as concentrated as possible; add Hcl. to
filtrate drop by drop until litmus paper is very slowly
turned from blue to red (care being taken not to have
an excess of acid which would render the next operation dangerous) and titrate with a standard solution of
cyanide of potassium about one per cent strength, that
is 1 c.c. of Kly solution—one per cent nickel, at first
quickly until solution shows alkaline on testing with
litmus paper, when a precipitate will be formed and
then slowly until all the precipitate is dissolved,
which finishes the operation.
Treat cobalt precipitate in the same manner.
The standard Key. solution used for titrating copper will do for the nickel and cobalt, the ratio being
as follows: Ni. 100, Co. o. 1053, Gu. 92.3, but it ;s
well to check by standardizing solution with pure elec-
tra deposited metallic nickel; and for cobalt using
chemically "prepared" oxide of cobalt (Co. o) not the
"black" oxide (Co. 2, O. 3).
This method of titrating is more accurate if properly
manipulated than estimating the precipitated nickel
as oxide, and check samples should not very more
than 0.01 per cent. 1-100 per cent. By this method
nickel can be made in the absence of cobalt or if estimating together as nickel, in one day; if separately, re-
cjuires a day and a-half, as cobalt must have time to
settle.
In the event of zinc being present treat by one of
the following methods:—
First—For alloy, volatilize zinc in charcoal lined
crucible until constant.
Second—If an ore of nickel containing zinc in any
quantity let the two proceed together, and a precipitating nickel with caustic potash a great deal of the
zinc will be re-dissolved and thus got rid of; wash the
nickel oxide well, dry, ignite reduce with carbon, and
melt to metallic nickel, and the remaining zinc will be
volatilized.
Third—In cases of small traces of zinc, titrate in the
usual manner as hereinbefore described, add excess of
cyanide of potassium and little ammonia, then add
sulphide of sodium or ammonium and boil. Any zinc
will be precipitated, as well as manganese.
A rich zinc ore is very unlikely to contain nickel,
and if it does the nickel contained would be of practically no commercial value, unless recovered from retort
residues after treatment of the ore for zinc.
r ■OB^
118
THE MINING RECORD.
DIRECTORS' REPORT FOR 1899.
The Consolidated Cariboo Hydraulic Mining Company, Ltd.
THE company's property is located in the Quesnelle River mining region, famous for its rich
shallow placers, its extensive system of ancient river
channels, and its immense deposits of high grade
auriferous gravels.
It is situated at Bullion, Cariboo District, British
Columbia, on the southerly side of the South Fork
of the Quesnelle River, four miles westerly from the
outlet of the great Quesnelle Lake, about one hundred
and ninety miles via the One Hundred and Fifty
Mile House and Beaver lake, and about one hundred
and seventy miles via the One Hundred and Eight-
Mile House and Horsefly by waggon road from Ashcroft, on the line of the Canadian Pacific Railway.
The property comprises thirty-four placer mining
leases aggregating two thousand five hundred and
eighty-four acres of land, and a block of pasture land
containing three hundred and twenty acres.   The min-
of this great channel can be attacked and successfully
exploited at two points, viz: First, at Blackjack Gulch,
by the extension of the main sluice tunnel that will
eventually be driven to work the bottom gravel of Pit
No. 2; second, by opening and exploiting an hydraulic pit in the channel outlet at the confluence of More-
head Creek with the main Quesnelle River.
The deposits included in the company's property
vary from four hundred to six hundred feet in depth
from surface to bottom of channel. The quantity is
estimated at five hundred millions of cubic yards of
high grade auriferous gravel that is available for future washing by hydraulic process. The average gold
tenure is moderately estimated at twenty cents per
cubic yards and the total gold contents at one hundred
millions of dollars.
The South Fork and main Quesnelle Rivers are torrential streams of great volume, and afford an ample
dump for the debris from the entire working of the
company's property.
The quantity of auriferous gravel under the com-
View showing Canal and recently installed Pipe Llne^
ing leases cover, for a distance of about ten miles,
the auriferous deposits of a system of ancient rivers.
The ancient river now being exploited lies parallel
to the course of the South Fork of the Quesnelle
River for a distance of about two miles, and has its
outlet at Dancing Bill Gulch. This channel can also
be opened and successfully exploited at Blackjack
Gulch, about one mile east, and Drop Gulch about
one and a half miles easterly from Dancing Bill Gulch.
The second ancient river covered by the company's
leases is one of stupendous proportions. It apparently
had its source east of the company's mines in the Quesnelle Lake region, passed westerly down the depression of the Little Lake Valley towards Morehead
Creek, and has its outlet at the confluence of said
Morehead Creek, with the main Quesnelle River,
about seven miles below Quesnelle Forks (see map accompanying the first annual report).    The deposits
pany's control represents about one-quarter of the
whole of the auriferous gravel remaining and available
for working by the hydraulic process in the hydraulic
mining region of Central California. (See report of
Secretary of War U. S. Engineers, 1891, Vol. II Part
V, page 3080).
,,_, Cubic Yards.
Ihe total quantity-of auriferous gravel
remaining and available for working by \
hydraulic process on   the   Yuba  and
American Rivers, is  1,508,875,000
to which is added the quantity remaining available for washing by hydraulic
process on the Feather River, Upper
j Sacramento and Southern Rivers tributary to the San Joaquin    600,000,000
Total quantity  2,108,785,.
000THE MINING RECORD.
119
The value of this quantity of auriferous gravel is
estimated by the U. S. Engineers, and others employed by the Government for making such estimates, at
five hundred and fifty-two million six hundred and
sixty-five thousand dollars. The capital invested in
the Central California hydraulic region above referred to, including the purchase cost of mining properties, water supply systems, hydraulic plant and other
equipments, amounts to one hundred millions of dollars. (See report of Secretary of War U. S. Engineers, 1891. Vol. II'., Part V., page 2990).
If the eight and seven-tenths cent gravel in the
North Bloomfield mine, in California, produced a net
profit of four hundred and eleven thousand five hundred and eighty-nine dollars and twenty-seven cents
out of a gross product of one million four hundred
and thirty-five thousand six hundred and eighty dollars and forty-seven cents (see page 134, ninth annual
report California State Mineralogist), it is certainly
safe to assume (the cost of mining being about the
same), that the twent3'-seven and three-tenths cent
gravel in the Consolidated Cariboo Hydraulic Mining
age reservoirs by the construction of substantial dams
across their outlets. These reservoirs have an aggregate capacity for storing one billion and sixteen million cubic feet of water, which is equal to four hundred and seventy thousand three hundred and seventy
miners' inches of water. This storage supply is greatly augmented by the waters of Dancing Bill Gulch
and other streams tributary to the main canals between the storage reservoirs and the mines, and ensures a supply, varying with the precipitation, of from
three to five thousand miners' inches of water
throughout the mining season of six to seven months.
The water supply system also includes two pooling
reservoirs, located on Blackjack Gulch. One of these
reservoirs is at the delivery end of the main South
Fork canal from Polleys Lake, and the other at the
delivery end of the Morehead Canal. They are utilized for pooling the early spring freshet water required for use in the hydraulic pits at the opening of the
season, and assist materially in the economical use of
water at the mine.
The camp equipment of the water supply system
Giants on Floor of Pit No. I.
Company's property can be relied upon to yield profits equal to about seventy per cent, of the gross product.
The Consolidated Cariboo Hydraulic Mining Company's water supply system, as now completed, consists" of thirty-three miles of well constructed canals,
having a capacity for delivering at the mine five thousand miners' inches of water under a head of four hundred and twenty feet. (A miner's inch is 2,160 cubic
feet, the quantity of water discharged in twenty-four
hours, under a head of seven inches, through an opening one-half inch wide by two inches high, made in a
board two inches thick). The sources of supply are
at Bootjack Lake and Polleys Lake, about nineteen
miles distant, and Morehead Lake, ten miles distant
from the company's mines at Bullion. All the above-
named lakes have been converted into efficient stor-
consists of twelve substantial cabins for the reservoir
lenders and water tenders operating along the line
of the main canals.
The company's water supply can be increased two
thousand miners' inches when desired, by utilizing
the waters of Little Lake and Long Lake, for opening
and exploiting an hydraulic pit at the outlet of the
Little Lake channel near the mouth of Morehead
Creek, and can be increased by ten thousand inches
or more, if desired, by the extension of the main canals to control additional available watershed.
The mine equipment consists of a portable hydraulic plant of four lines of thirty inch and twenty-two
inch riveted steel pipes, aggregating six thousand
feet; six No. 8 hydraulic giants, with deflecting nozzles; varying from six to ten inches in diameter ; one
steam power hoisting and pumping engine for sink-120
THE MINING RECORD.
r
ing shafts for bank blasting; one fire-proof magazine
for dynamite; one magazine for bank blasting powder;
one dynamite thawing house; one fuse-cutting and
detonator-priming house in each of the hydraulic
pits; one general blacksmithing shop for general forging, waggon work and horseshoeing; one pipe making
shop, fitted with rolls and other appliances for making
and repairing hydraulic pipes; one steam-power saw
mill, having a capacity for cutting daily about four
thousand feet of lumber. This mill is also supplied
with a planing and
matching machine,
boring and framing
machines, also emery wheel and
grindstones operated by steam power, the use of which
appliances result in
a great saving of
labour and a material reduction in
the cost of all wooden structures, as
well as the cost of
sharpening edged
tools.
The gold saving
appliances consist
of a double extended system of sluices
seven feet wide by
four feet deep, ag-
gregating two
thousand three
hundred and eighty
feet in length. This
system of sluices
is paved partially
with end-wood
sluice blocks one
foot thick, and partially with improved Ion gitudinal
steel riffles. Fixtures and longitudinal riffles are on
hand for the installation of two improved undercurrents intended for
the recovery of
flour quicksilver,
fine gold, platinum, and osmiridi-
um that cannot be
recovered in the
ordinary sluice.
The melting
plant consists of
three retorts fitted
with iron Liebig condensers for distillation of quicksilver, having a capacity for treating twelve thousand
ounces of amalgamated gold at a single charge; two
furnaces for melting, and other appliances necessary
for handling ingots of gold weighing up to twelve
thousand ounces; also a complete assay outfit for determining the value of bullion.
The injne is also supplied with a complete outfit of
&KBg!
Giant on hank in Dancing Bill Gulch.   Stream at work making a cut for Pipe Lin
mechanics' and mining tools and implements of all
kinds, sufficient for one hundred and fifty men.
The mine lighting plant consists of six Wells lights
of three thousand candle power each.
The telephone system includes three lines, aggregating thirty-five miles, with fifteen instruments, that
place the storekeeper and manager in direct communication with the reservoir tenders, canal tenders,
saw-mill foreman, general blacksmith and foreman of
the hydraulic pits.
The    company's
^^^  equipment consists
of one store build-
i&'fjli m£ I°r general
I mining supplies ;
'one tool store-
11 house ; one oil
storehouse; one
frost-proof provision storehouse ;
two frost-proof
storehouses ; on e
slaughter house;
one meat house ;
one general office
building; one manager's office building; one manager's
residence; one residence for surgeon;
one hospital building ; one dining
house; one barn
for company's
lorses, . hay and
feed ; two stables
for accommodating
freighters' teams ;
one waggon shed;
one storehouse for
miscellaneous hydraulic plant and
fixtures; one char-
coal storehouse;
one surfaced lumber shed ; one foreman's cabin ; one
house for shift bosses, and ten camp
buildings for one
hundred and twenty miners and labourers.
There are also
five work horses,
two saddle horses,
together with the
necessary waggons, sleighs,
harness and saddles.
This makes the equipment of the property
plete and efficient as that of any hydraulic
property on the Pacific Coast.
as com-
miningi
The company's property
and the high grade of its
is probably the largest,
deposits entitles it to a
place among the richest hydraulic mines in the world.THE MINING RECORD.
SECOND ANNUAL REPORT.
directors' report.
Gentlemen,—Your directors beg to submit their
report at the second annual meeting of the shareholders, together with the manager's report, balance sheet
ecember
and auditors'
31st, 1899.
report for the year ending D
W. D.
ASSETS.
MAT! HEWS,
President.
Mines, mining leases, water rights,
etc., as per balance sheet, Dec.
31st,   1898
Morehead dam and ditch—cost as
per statement, Dec. 31st, 1898..
Equipment of lower bench, as per
statement,   Dec.   31st,   1898....
Lands and leases, per statement,
Dec.  31st,  1898	
Portable hydraulic plant 	
Mine lights and hoisting engine..
$3,914,558 38
118,458 68
7,424 01
1,322 00
9.998 56
1,526 70
Inventory.    (As per Manager's Report).—
Provisions, mining supplies and
explosives   $ 26,12825
Lumber,  saw   logs  and   sluice
blocks     4,230 39
Tools and implements    10,337 60
Blacksmith's   stores     1,783 71
Horses and mules    875 00
Wagons and harness     1,788 00
Quicksilver     2,804 65
$4,053,288 33
Cash on hand, mine office	
Personal accounts receivable ..
Permanent Improvements 1898—
Drain tunnel, per balance sheet, Dec.
31st,  1898  .$ 3,533 42
Less 20% depreciation, season 1899.       706 68
-$
47,947 60
70 20
4,680 81
Riffle account per balance sheet, Dec.
31st,   1898    $11,60001
Less 10% depreciation, season 1899.    1,160 00
2,826 74
-$    10,440 01
Permanent Improvements, Season 18
Morehead    pooling    reservoir
dam   $
Morehead    ditch,    new    flumes
and additional works  	
Equipment South Fork pit....
Melting plant—new retort house
Dancing Bill Gulch—permanent
pipe ladder  .-■•■-.•
Permanent flumes and sluices in
mine  	
Dancing Bill Gulch—permanent
waste water chute  	
Installation steel riffles $6,307 64
Less    10%    depreciation         630 76
13,266 7S
10—
6,422 23
18,346 00
8,679 84
3.617 3°
1,165 96
7,096 10
462 75
-(Se
Manager's   re-
5,676 88
3,293 29
355 5<3
55,115 »5
2,527 17
46,682 04
Buildings-
port) 	
Reservoir gate  Polleys  Lake..
Balance from operating account season  1898  	
Balance from operating account season, 1899 	
LIABILITIES.
Capital authorized   $5,000,000
Capital issued     $4,000,000 00
Accounts  payable     23,389 68
Bills payable    50,20000
Bank of Montreal    ^^$4,223,578 75
Examined and found correct.
W. S. ANDREWS, Auditor.
February 12th, 1900.
GENERAL OPERATING ACCOUNT.
Season, 1899.
Dr.
To  operating expenses for season,
as per statement from mines . .$   131,178 34
To drain tunnel account, 20% written off for depreciation     706 68
To riffle account, 1898, 10% written
off for depreciation          1,160 00
To head office expenses    980 80
To interest account          8,634 °9
Cr.
By bullion received  $      92,678 93
By stores account—Profit for season
on sales to outside parties ....        3,298 94
By balance, loss on season's operations           46,682 04
    142,659 91
STATEMENT OF MINES' EXPENDITURES,
SEASON 1899.
Permanent Improvements.—
Morehead pooling reservoir dam $ 6,422 23
Morehead  ditch  repairs.        New
flumes, etc., to repair damage
by slides    18,346 00
Equipment of South Fork pit....    8,679 84
■   Melting plant—New retort house.    3,617 30
Permanent waste water flume at
Bill Gulch          462 75
Permanent sluices in mine       7,096 10
Installation of steel riffles$6,307 64
Less 10% depreciation...    630 76
     5,676 88 '
Reservoir gate at Polleys Lake..        355 50
Buildings   $ 3,293 29
Total cost permanent improvements $55,115 85
Public Account.—
Portable    hydraulic    plant,    pipe
giants, etc., out of stores....$ 9.998 56
Mine lights and hoisting engine,
out of stores      1,526 70
Total cost of plant   11,525 26
Total cost of permanent improvements
and plant   $66,641 11
MINES'  OPERATING EXPENSES
Lands and leases—Rentals   $   2,002 75
Mining—
Explosives   $38,837 02
Labour  39,068 42
  77,905 44
South Fork ditch maintenance  7,339 50
Morehead ditch.                             4,834 55
Sluices                                                6,422 11
Port.  hyd.  plant                              6,461 38
Mine light                                         1,03760
Camp                                                  3,11522
Buildings                                           1,652 44
Melting plant                                     3 35
Wagons and harness   "                240 51
Telephone                                          190 41
Roads and trails                              99 70
Fire Ins. account       "                    412 50
Transportation of miners, etc  4,649 26
Bullion expenses—Government tax and transportation   2,418 42
Postage and telegraph   134 33
Mine office expenses    2,762 07
Incidental expenses ._  35 50
Stationery and printing    202 90
Legal expenses   73 82
Management    6,436 40
Company's license   183 40
Wagons and harness account—Loss for season... 173 00
Horses and mules account                                 ... 535 00
Tools and implements—Depreciation for season.. 1,009 33
Quicksilver  account—Loss,  etc     847 45
Total cost operating accounts for season, as per
Mines' books  $131,178 34
Deduct profit on stores for season       3.298 94
$127,879 40THE MINING RECORD.
manager's report.
Bullion, B. C, December 31st, 1899.
To the President and Directors of the Consolidated
Cariboo Hydraulic   Mining   Compan)', Limited
Liability, Toronto, Canada:
Gentlemen,—In handing you this, my annual report for the season of 1899,1 am pleased to inform you
that the past season's operations resulted in completing the equipment and opening the property, so that
expense in that direction is at an end; that the mine
is now fully opened for the continuous use of the increased water supply for washing gravel of high grade
from the main bank, and is on a basis for large and
profitable production.
The season's operations were confined mainly to
the removal of the remainder of the accumulations of
tailings, boulders and sliderock left in the old Chinese
working's; the removal of the boulderclay, low grade
Construction of crib and stone dam for
Morehead pooling reservoir      6,422 23
Completion  of    retorting furnace and
melting plant         3,617 30
Installation of hydraulic plant and gold
saving appliances in South Fork pit     8,679 84
Installation of permanent sluices in pit
No.  1          7,096 10
Installation of permanent, and
additions to portable hydraulic plant, pipes, giants,
etc $9,998 56
Construction of pipe ladder
on bluff at Dancing Bill
Gulch   1,165 96
Construct'n waste water flume
down bluff at Dancing Bill
Gulch       462 75
 $ 11,627 27
Reservoir gate at Pooleys  Lake...... 355 50
Additions to mining plant, hoisting engine and well lights          1,526 70
View looking South towards Bank Blast.   Stream on Floor o£ Pit No. 1, cutting Slope for second Pipe Line.
Giant on Lower Bench washing Gravel through newly installed Sluices.
gravel and sliderock that laid on the rims of the channel south and west of the old Chinese workings; to
the permanent installation of the hydraulic plant, gold
saving appliances and other plant required to complete the equipment of the property; and to repair
the extensive breaks that occurred on the line of the
Morehead Canal.
The expenditure for the season's operations is distributed as shewn by the following statement:—
Clearing the hydraulic pits of 1,952,535
cubic yards of boulderclay, low grade
gravel, tailings, boulders and sliderock, to make room for the permanent installation of the hydraulic plant
and gold saving appliances   $127,879 40
Installation of steel riffles for sluices
and fixtures for two undercurrents..     5,676 88
Construction of necessary camp buildings      3,293 29
Construction of flumes around slides on
Morehead Canal      18,346 00
Total expenditure for the season  $194,520 51
Fig. 1 represents a plan of the hydraulic excavations
made by the early Chinese miners and the Consolidated Cariboo Hydraulic Mining Company.
Fig. 2 represents a plan of hydraulic pit No. i at the
close of the past season.
Fig. 3 represents a longitudinal section running up
the. channel from the bed of the Quesnelle River toTHE MINING RECORD.
123
the mam hydraulic bank, showing the relative positions of the two systems of sluices and the bedrock
sluice cuts being extended from the lower system of
sluices.
The condition of hydraulic pit No. 1 at the opening
of the season made it impossible to wash more than a
small portion of the high-grade gravel from the main
bank until such time as the sluices intended for the
removal of that body of gravel to the dumps were laid
down permanently on the bedrock near the east rim
and carried around the big bend of the channel, as
shewn on the plan of the workings, Fig. 2; neither
could the bottom gravel be worked to-any great extent until the sluice cuts were extended and lowered
to make grade for its removal to the lower system of
sluices and the dumps. This condition made "it necessary to remove immediately the remainder of the accumulations of tailings, boulders and sliderock from
the old Chinese workings (see Fig 1, Block 1); also
SUMMARY OF THE SEASON'S HYDRAULIC WORK.
Total time run           144 days, 8 hours
Tt tal quantity of water used  353,056 miners' inches
Total quantity of gravel, sand, clay,
tailings, boulders and slide-rock removed from both   pits during   the
season  1,952,535 cubic yards
V'alue of gold recovered during progress of the season's work  $92,678.93
The following stores are on hand at the Mine, as per inventory taken November 17th, 1899:
Provisions, mining supplies and explosives  $26,12825
Lumber, sawlogs and sluice blocks      4,230 39
Tools and implements    10,337 60
Blacksmiths' stores       1,783 71
Horses and mules           875 00
Wagons and harness       1,788 00
Quicksilver   .....    2,80465
$47,947 60
Many unexpected difficulties    were    encountered
during   the   progress  of the season's  work,  which
Giants at work in Dancing Bill Gulch.
the remainder of the low-grade gravel, boulderclay,
boulders and sliderock from the Block 3-A on the
north rim, and the Block 3-B on the west rim, to
make room for the safe and permanent installation of
the sluices and the extension of the bedrock cuts, as
shown on Fig. 2, and the cross-section, Fig. 3. The
whole of the boulderclay, sand and low-grade gravel
lying on the southwest rim, in the Block 3-C, had to
be removed to make possible the changing- of the
hydraulic plant from the bed of Dancing Bill Gulch,
and to provide a safe place on the bedrock rim for its
permanent installation and extension up the channel.
During the progress of the work 297,088 miners'
inches of water were used 116 days, 8£ hours to wash
1,600,000 cubic yards of the waste and low-grade material above referred to from Pit No. 1; 55,95s miners'
inches of spring freshet and waste water were used
27 days, 32^ hours to wash 352,535 cubic yards. °'f top
clav and sand from pit No. 2 (the South Fork pit).
added materially to the cost thereof. The time consumed in the removal of these difficulties made it impossible to wash in pit No. 1 more than 116 days, 8J
hours, out of a possible 180 days. This explains
briefly why the 110,000 miners' inches of water remaining in the reservoirs at the close of the season
could not be utilized to wash about 500,000 cubic
yards of high-grade gravel from the main bank, and
the season's product could not be brought up to what
was expected.
REVIEW OF THE HYDRAULIC WORK DONE IN
PIT NO. 1 BY THE CONSOLIDATED CARIBOO HYDRAULIC MINING COMPANY
AND ITS PREDECESSORS.
The accompanying plan (Fig. 1) represents the exterior boundaries of the hydraulic excavations made
by the Consolidated Cariboo Hydraulic Mining Company and its predecessors, including the Chinese min-124
THE MINING RECORD.
ers from whom the property was originally purchased.
Block No. i represents the ground worked up the
channel a distance of about 1,000 feet by the Chinese
companies.    This block of gravel, estimated to con-
Outiihe of-tJrDRAUuc Excavation
M CONSOLIDATED
-*'   QtrHiooHydraoJic (v)ii?e
Cariboo Dia»rictB.C.t
and tailings that were left piled up in the old workings by the several Chinese companies. All this enormous quantity of waste had to be removed, at
heavy cost, before the permanent gold saving appliances could possibly be installed.
Blocks 3-A and 3-B represent the bodies of boulderclay, low-grade gravel and sliderock lying to the west
of the Chinese workings, that had to be removed by
the Cariboo companies before the hydraulic plant and
Fia.3.
Consolidated Cariboo Hydraulic Mine.
Longitudinal Section
IS93
tain 705,759 cubic yards, produced, according to the gold saving appliances could be safely and' perman-
Chinese companies' books, about $900,000.   It was in entry installed, or the bedrock cuts could be advanced
this worked out block of ground that we encountered and lowered to afford grade for the removal of the
such enormous quantities of large boulders, sliderock bottom gravel.THE MINING RECORD.
125
The boulderclay and low-grade gravel lying- on the
southwest rim and underlying Dancing Bill Gulch
included m the block marked 3-C, had to be entirely
removed to make possible the changing of the hydraulic pipes from the bed of Dancing Bill Gulch to a
safe and permanent place on the bedrock rim.
The block of ground 3-D forms a part of the average cross section of the main bank. This block of
ground was washed near the close of the first run during the past season and produced about $15,000 as
the result of nine to
days' washing; the
gravel that shingled off the main
bank with the frost
duringthe previous
winter, between
the points E and F,
was washed at the
end of the same
run and produced
$15,000 as the result of about sixty
hours' washing,
making a total of
about $300,000,
that formed the
greater part of the
gold recovered
during the first
run.
The quantity of
gravel, boulderclay, boulders, tailings, siderock and
other waste material washed from
blocks No. 1, 3-A,
3-B, 3-C and 3-D,
amounted to
3,580,668 cubic
yards, and produced about $128,-
000, an average of
about 3 J^ cents per
cubic yard, a figure considerably
below the cost of
its removal to the
dumps.
Block No. 2 re-
presents the
ground washed
from the main
bank of the Cari-
boo companies,
commencing at the
face of the bank in
the Chinese excavation as it was
found in 1894, and extending up the channel
in new ground a distance of about 400 feet. This
block of ground contained 1,463,572 cubic yards of
top boulderclay and high-grade gravel that produced
about $400,000, an average yield of about 273.10
cents per cubic yard. This makes the total quantity
of gold recovered by the Cariboo Hydraulic Mining
Companies amount to about $528,000.
By reference to the company's books, it will be seen
Morehead Canal, replacing Dl
destroyed Ditch on the
that the total expenses up to and including the season
of 1899, is $439,026.12, which, deducted from the
$528,000, leaves a net profit of about $88,973.88, that
was produced while doing deadwork in the way of
clearing out the old workings, installing the hydraulic
plant and gold saving appliances and opening up the
hydraulic pit for continuous operation and profitable
production.
The total quantity of clay, gravel, boulders, etc.,
washed from the hydraulic excavation of pit No. i,
by the Cariboo and
—- Consolidated Cari-
b o o       Hydraulic
a Mining Companies
|j and their Chinese
$ predecessors,
|j amounts to  about
S 5,750,000   cubic
id yards ;  this quantity of gravel pro-
I duced,   so   far   as
I known, about $1,-
428,000, an   average of about 28 4-10'
cents   per   cubic
yard.    This   average will be materially increased by
the product of the
high-grade   gravel
in the lower bench,
and that of the rich
gravel on the bedrock in the bed of
the channel.
The high-grade
character of the
gravel in the main
bank has been
proven beyond a
reasonable doubt
by the practical
tests ma de by
washing 1,463,575
cubic yards o f
gravel from the
block No. 2, which
extended up the
channel beyond the
Chinese workings
a distance of about
400 feet. The
high-grade character of the lower
bench and bedrock
strata in the deep
channel has also
been proven by the
practical working
tests made in 1898
The small quan-
the   lower   strata
tch destroyed hy slides.
1 right of Photograph.
See portion of
and during the past season,
titp of gravel washed from
of the bottom bench in the deep channel produced the greater part of the gold recovered during
the past season's operations.
It is true that we encountered a large body of low-
grade gravel in the upper strata of the lower bench,
while carrying the hydraulic excavation around the
big bend of the channel, but this is a condition that is^v~
126
THE MINING RECORD.
usually encountered in the big bends of either ancient
or modern torrential rivers, where the current crosses
from one rim of the channel to the other. This body
of low-grade gravel, however, together with all other
waste and low-grade material that interfered with
profitable operations heretofore, has been entirely removed, leaving the working wholly in virgin ground
of high grade.
WATER SUPPLY.
The quantity of water available during the season
of 1899 was in excess
of the previous year,
on account of the additional supply afforded by the Morehead
system.
The precipitatio for
1898 was 28 57-100
inches. The precipitation for 2899 was
28 65-100 inches.
And exceeded that of
.1898 by only 8-100 of
an inch.
The snow fell deep
in the winter, upon
hard, frozen ground,
and melted in the early
part of the spring under very favourable
weather conditions of
warm days and nights,
which resulted in filling the Polleys Take
and Bootjack Lake reservoirs, and raised the
water in Morehead
Lake reservoir to a
height of 28 feet io^
inches. Sufficient snow
remained on the ground
to fill the Morehead
reservoir to its holding
capacity, providing the
warm weather continued, but cold weather
set in, checked the
melting of the snow,
and con tin ad until late
in the spring, so that
the remaining snow on the watershed disappeared entirely by evaporation.
Miners' Inches.
Quantity of (water used in 1898  264,880 9-10
~    Wi      I "      .    J899  353,056
guanhty  of water  remaining in  Polleys   Lake
reservoir at close of the season      10,000
Quantity of water remaining in Morehead Lake
reservoir at close of the season    100,000
Total quantity of water available for use during
season of 1899   463,056
Quantity of water afforded in excess of 1898 198,175 1-10
The time consumed in constructing 5,167 feet of
fiume and crib work to repair the extensive breaks
on the upper section of the Morehead Canal, together
with the time consumed in dealing with the difficulties
encountered at the mine, made it impossible to -open
the gates of the Morehead Lake reservoir until late in
the season, rendered the exhaustion of the reservoirs
impossible, and explains why the season closed with a
SP
-m
3€fc
SEP***'
a*&S£^2r~^.
Kock Cuts op Line of Morehead Canal.
total of 110,000 miners' inches of water remaining in
the reservoirs. This water will be added to the supply afforded by the coming season.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
The Morehead pooling reservoir has been completed by the construction of a dam 20 feet high above
solid foundation, and 4,10 feet long on the crest. The
dam is a cedar log crib, filled with rock and sheathed
on the inside with double two-inch plank, joints covered with one-inch bat-
tons, bottom sheathing
well banked with earth
and clay. This reservoir is situated at the
head of Blackjack
Gulch, above the South
Fork reservoir, only a
short distance from the
d3'draulic pits, and will
be of great value in
collecting and pooling
the early spring water
required for washing
in the hydraulic pits
at the opening of the
season, and will materially assist in the
economical use of water
at the mine by giving
an increased supply for
short intervals when
required to remove
large boulders or heavy
material from the workings to the dumps, or
pooling the water during short intervals
when necessary to
lubricate the hydraulic
giants or to repair the
hydraulic appliances
without closing the
main reservoir gate.
The great depth of
frost in the ground
caused more slides from
the inner slopes of the
old canals than in any
previous season since
their construction. On the Morehead Canal a
number of heavy slides occurred along the
line of the upper section below the reservoir dam, practically obliterating the canal and
leaving the ground in such shape as to' make it impossible to re-excavate or maintain another canal.
The flume constructed in places along the damaged
■,-ect-or. remained intact. To repair the break 990 feet
of the canal was cleared out and cribb"'! with heavy
timbers. A flume 8 feet wide, 4 feet deep and 4,172
feet long, was constructed around the breaks, making
the first section if miles below the Morehead dam
practically continuous in flume, crib and rock cuts
that are likely to remain permanent for many years to
come. Many small slides occurred on the line of the
canal where the contractors used powder to assist in
excavating cuts and heavy slopes in hardpan ground.
Settlement also occurred in the Jawbone pipe line and
some of the smaller sections of flume that were con-
°ti&THE MINING RECORD.
127
strutted in the fall after the ground became frozen
hard ihree hundred and twenty-nine thousand four
hundred and seventy-six M. B. M. feet of sawed lumber, and seven thousand running feet of eight-inch
hewed cedar timber were consumed in constructing
fcumes, crib-work, and making other repairs to the
wooden structures on the line of the canal. After
completing the repairs, the reservoir gates were opened, the water turned through the canal and was successfully delivered at the mine on August ist. The
Morehead dam, at the outlet of Morehead Lake,
showed no signs of settlement, and has proven watertight, safe and efficient. It is believed that the repairs
have been so substantially made that no more trouble
of a serious nature need be anticipated, and that both
the main canals will hereafter deliver the water to the
mine at a greatly reduced and moderate cost for maintenance.
CONDITION OF THE MINE.
Since the qupiment of the property is complete,
hydraulic pit No. i cleared of all waste and low-grade
material and fully opened for the continuous use of
the water supply for washing gravel of high grade, it
ay be considered in first class condition to produce
iarge and profitable results hereafter.
The hydraulic plant and gold saving appliance^
have been installed in pit No. 2 (the South Fork pit),
placing this pit in good condition for the use of the
spring freshet and surplus water to strip off the low-
grade deposits to bedrock, which is necessary to
place this pit on a basis for profitable production.
The time required to complete the opening of this
pit to bedrock will depend on the quantity of spring
freshet and surplus water afforded annually. The
opening, however, can be accomplished at moderate
cost, for the reason that it is expected the gold during
the progress of the work will pay a part, and perhaps the whole, of the cost of opening this pit for
profitable production.
The past season's operations demonstrated that it
was possible, under difficulties, to wash in 144 days
and eight hours, with 353,056 miners' inches of water,
T,952,535 cubic yards of gravel, boulders, broken rock,
etc., at a cost of about 6.54 cents per cubic yard; it is,
therefore, safe to assume that a full season's water
supply of say 470,000, miners' inches of water, used
during a period of 180 days, will wash, under the favourable conditions now existing, fully 2,000,000 cubic
yards of high-grade gravel from pit No. 1, at a cost
of about 6.05 cents per cubic yard.
By reference to previous reports, it-will be noted
that" the lowest result obtained from gravel washed
from the main bank, included in Block No. 2, averaged 21 cents per cubic yard. The average obtained
from the washing of 1,463,575 cubic yards of gravel
from the main bank, included in said block marked
2, on Fig. 1, was 27 3-10 cents per cubic yard. Higher
results than this have been obtained from single runs
made on virgin ground from both top and bottom of
pit No. 1.
The operating expenses will vary with the quantity
of gravel washed during the season, but assuming
that the water supply will be sufficient to wash 2,000,-
000 cubic yards of gravel, at a cost of 6.05 cents per
cubic yard, it is estimated that the operating expenses
for the ensuing vear will not exceed $121,000.00.
The washing of about 2,000,000 cubic yards of
oravel of such high grade as that now exposed in the
main bank and bottom bench, cannot fail to produce
large and profitable results for the ensuing season.
This report deals with the revenue and expenditures
attending the equipment, opening and physical operation of the mine, and does not include head office expenses.
Very respectfully yours,
J. B. HOBSON.
Manager.
VERBATIM EVIDENCE IN THE IRON MASK-
CENTRE STAR LITIGATION.
HAVING been requested by many of our readers
throughout the Province to publish in these columns a verbatim report of the evidence in the Iron
Mask-Centre Star litigation, Mr. H. F. Evans, our
Rossland correspondent, was enabled through the
kindness of Mr. J. B. Hastings to carry out our instructions to copy the official report of the proceedings and evidence taken, and which are in consequence enabled to publish in serial form.
(Continuation of   Counsel's Argument, from  last month's
issue.)
Rossland, B.C., April 18, 1899.
The Court met at 11 o'clock a.m. pursuant to adjournment of yesterday, whereupon the following proceedings were heard in the foregoing entitled cause:
Mr. Bodwell—My Lord, before your Lordship begins, I would like to mention to your Lordship, as it
seems there might possibly be a misunderstanding, if
your Lordship proposes to give judgment on the
main question.
The Court—No, I am going to confine myself to
the issue presented yesterday. I think this is settled
by the Full Court, and so settled that I have no control over it, Mr. Davis. On page 365, this is the
language of Mr. Justice. Drake, in which the Chief
iustics concurs. After reciting the different points at
issue, and what has been proved by the plaintiffs, he
says :
"In the meantime every step is disputed and every
statement denied. I therefore—that means, we do not
consider that the Centre Star are entitled to the order
asked for."
The way I view that is this: In view of the language he uses afterward where he says:
"I think it should be left to the Judge at the trial to
say whether or not actual work should be done for
the purpose of elucidating any particular point with
regard to the issues raised."
In view of his words afterwards, I regard what he
says in this light: He says in the first place, the Iron
Mask denies the right of the Centre Star in every possible shape. He says in the next place, that the Centre
Star has no apex in the ground. And in view "of the
pleadings as amended yesterday, and the sweeping
amendment made yesterday, I do not see that I can
do anything else but follow the judgment of the Full
Court by passing upon the motion as I shall do. I
will not dismiss it until I find out whether the Iron
Mask is rigfit or wrong in its contention; that is to
say, whether the Centre Star has a claim or not. That
is what it amounts to owing to the points raised yesterday, and I would like that question first disposed of.
Mr. Davis—What question, my Lord?
The Court—Mr. Bodwell's amendment of yesterday.pf^7"
128
THE MINING RECORD.
Mr. Davis—Well, that would only be disposed of
by the evidence' put in at the trial and argued. .
The Court—I cannot help you, sir.
Mr. Davis—But your Lordship does not mean that
we should apply for leave to do this work after the
trial is closed.
The Court—Oh, ho, no; during the time the trial is
going on.   This will be the first point.
Mr. Davis—As I understand, we have here to renew this application after evidence has gone in.
The Court—Yes; I think that is the spirit of this
judgment. Mr. MacNeill will recollect, and so will
Mr. Duff, that on the first hearing of this case when
Mr. Daly was in the case, I constantly said: "If I am
allowed to do so I shall follow the American judgments in the case. And I shall follow the American
judgments as far as possible now. That case of Enner
vs. Barwell almost, I thought, concluded me, but the
Full Court have thought otherwise. This recent case
of Lumb vs. Beaumont has taken a different view of it.
There are some points in the judgment that may be
discussed by and by in the judgment of one of the
Judges of the Full Court. I think it will be open for
discussion, because the}' almost decided the question,
but on a renewal of this question as to whether there
shall be leave to do any more work or not, I think I
better say nothing more. With regard to the judgment, with great respect, I do not agree with all the
Judges on the judgment.
Mr. Davis—So that, as I understand, after we have
put in evidence which we thing will entitle us to the
order, then we are at liberty to renew it again.
The Court—Yes, after you show, or they fail to
show—because it is their duty to show it—after they
fail to show what they have set out, that you have not
an apex.
Mr. Davis—But, my Lord, that can only be shown
after all the evidence is in. There are four or five
issues upon which this suit is being fought. None of
them can be decided until the trial is over. Some
evidence will go in on all of them as soon as the first
witness is put in the box.
The Court—It strikes me with all due deference,
Mr. Davis, that with respect to the amendment on Mr.
Bodwell's behalf that were allowed yesterday, if that
point comes up first, I shall be able to give a decision
on it piecemeal.
Mr. Davis—But your Lordship surely doe not propose that you will try only that part of the case and
not try the more serious—as it seems to us, the more
serious—part at all.
The Court—Really, what other course are you to
pursue ?
Mr. Davis—That your Lordship will try all the issues in the case—that is only one of them—so that the
whole case will be on the record, and all the evidence
will be on the record. There are a dozen different
points and your Lordship surely will not try the case
piecemeal.
The Court—No, but with regard to that one point,
it is, of course, a very serious point, and a portion of
the. case which I should not cut out of the other, but
how are you going to do otherwise?
Mr. Davis—Well, my Lord, I fail to see how you
can do it that way, unless your Lordship takes upon
yourself the responsibility—which you stated yesterday yoti would not do—of defending that point fin-
all}'.
The Court—Well, what do you propose?
Mr. Davis—My proposition is this, that the case
shall be tried as every other case is 011 all the issues,
that the evidence will be put in subject on that particular point to any objections we have to make, on all
the issues, so that when it comes up on appeal, as it
unquestionably will on one side or the other, everything will be before the various Courts of Appeal to
which it goes.
The Court—I understand that very well, but I am
placed in a very awkward position by the decision.
They leave something for mc; they looked at the state
of the case as it was then, and the state of the case was
such as I had to consider and as it left me. They decided practically that in that state of the case I was
right in refusing the order, and they say the order
should not be made.
Mr. Davis—At that time.
The Court—No, now.
Mr. Davis—And in the shape asked for.
The Court—Has there been any change? There
have been no new developments. You are going to
trial. And then the two Judges say practically: "The
Judge at the trial may order any work to be done to
elucidate any point that he may require."
Mr. Davis—Yes, my Lord. What significance does
your Lordship attach to that language?
The Court—What I take it to mean is this, that if
I see fit I can make this order.
Mr. Davis—Yes; that is what I merely stated a moment ago.
The Court—Then that is not trying the case piecemeal.
Mr. Davis—Oh, no; I understand the case to be
this: That after we have put in some evidence we are
then at liberty to renew this application, and your
Lordship will deal with it as you see fit.
The Court—Yes; you can renew it at such time as
you think I can deal with it. You know, Mr. Bod-
well, the absurdity of the thing appears to me to be
this: that I shall have to depend upon gentlemen's
opinions one way or the other, when a little work done
there would clear up the whole difficulty. As is
stated by Judge Baldwin in one of the American cases,
he thinks it monstrously unjust to refuse an order
of this kind. I thought that the English case bound
me. The Full Court think the English case did not
bind me, but that I was right in refusing the order at
that stage of the case.
Mr. Bodwell —I shall have something to say to your
Lordship when that question comes up, but I cannot
discuss it now very well.
The Court—I did not want to express myself so
far now; only perhaps Mr. Davis did not understand
me, or I did not make myself understood. My strongest inclination, Mr. Davis, has been all through, you
were not in the case—at first to allow this. That was
my inclniation. Mr. MacNeill knows it, because I
asked them to consent to it. You will see in the notes
of the case that I quoted the case of Queen vs. Brad-
laugh, using American decisions, and I dare say that
is where one of the Judges got it. I think it is Chief
Justice Cockburn. But if I evade the order now
which you ask for, Mr. Davis, I would be practically
disregarding a judgment of the Full Court, and I am
bound by that judgment. I will only adjourn the application sine die until such time as you choose to renew it.   Is there anything else?
Mr.  Bodwell—This  case then,   stands  adjournedTHE MINING RECORD.
129
until Tursday morning, as I understand, at eleven
o'clock.
The Court—Yes; whatever you gentlemen agree to.
Whereupon the Court adjourned until Thursday
morning at eleven o'clock, April 20, 1899.
THIRD DAY.
Rossland, B.C., April 20, 1899.
Trial resumed at eleven o'clock a.m. Present the
Court, the same counsel as before, and also Mr. Duff
For plaintiffs.
Thereupon the following proceedings were had, to
wit:
Air. Bodwell—Before we begin, my Lord, it will be
necessary, I think, for the stenographers to be sworn.
The Court—Yes.
Thereupon C. H. Sholes, C. B. Eaton and E. J.
Lake were severally duly sworn to act as stenographers in the trial of the case.
Air. Davis—It might be well, your Lordship, to
have it understood that the proceedings already taken
down shall have the same effect as if the stenographers had ben sworn at the commencement of the trial.
The Court—If you agree to it.
Mr. Bodwell—We agree to it, your Lordship.
Mr. Davis—We also.
The Court—I spoke to both gentlemen, Mr. Bodwell and Mr. Davis, about copies or extracts from the
stenographers notes. I meant them to be extracts from
the notes taken by the reporters, but it will cost no
more to give me a full copy, and I think the Court
should have a full copy.
Mr. Bodwell—That is the understanding we had,
your Lordship, that the Court will be furnished with a
fully copy.
The Court—I am very glad of it. No, Mr. Bodwell.
Mr. Bodwell—The pleadings were read the other
day, my Lord, so I will not take any time to offer. I
tender a certified copy of the record of the Iron Mask
mineral claim, dated the 23rd of July, 1890, showing
that the claim was recorded by E. S. Topping. I suppose, Mr. Registrar, these exhibits will be numbered.
The Court—I would number the exhibits.
The Registrar—This will be exhibit No. | put in
by. plaintiffs.
Mr. Bodwell—I tender next a Crown grant of the
Iron Mask mineral claim from the Crown to Patrick
Clark dated the 18th of March, 1896.
(Paper writing referred to marked by Registrar as
exhibit No. 2.)
Mr. Bodwell—I tender next certificate of the incorporation of the Iron Mask Gold Mining Company
(foreign), registered the 8th day of February, 1896.
Exhibit No. 3-
(Marked as exhibit No. 3 by the Registrar.)
Mr. Bodwell—Deed from Patrick Clark to the Iron
Mask Gold Mining Company (foreign) of the Iron
Mask mineral claim, dated the 5th of May, 1896. Exhibit No. A..
(Marked as exhibit No. 4 by the Registrar.)
Mr Bodwell—Certificate of title of the Iron Mask
mineral claim, registered as Lot No. 688 group I,
Kootenay District, dated the 29th of May, 1896, showing the title to be the Iron Mask Gold Mining Company (foreign); as exhibit No. 5.
(Marked by the Registrar as exhibit No. 5.)
Mr. Bodwell—I now read the examination of Peter
Joyce, taken before the Registrar at Rossland on the
ist day of April, 1899, pursuant to appointment, dated
the 30th day of March, 1899, and subpoena issued, Mr.
MacNeill appearing on behalf of the plaintiffs and Mr.
Gait appearing on behalf of defendants.
Peter Joyce, sworn, examined by Mr. McNeill.
Q.—You are in the employment of the Centre Star
Company, Mr. Joyce?   A.—Xot at present.
Q.—Since what time have you been in their employment?   A.—March 30th, present year.
Q.—For what length of time prior to March 30th,
1899, were you in the employment of the Centre Star
Company? A.—Three years and a half, or more; do
not know the exact date.
Q.—In what capacity were you employed? A.—
Foreman, I suppose.
Q.—Foreman of the mine?   A.—Yes.
Q.—As such foreman, I presume you had charge
of the mining operations that have been carried on in
the. Centre Star mine?
Mr. Gait—I would like to take an objection: This
witness is Mr. MacNeill's witness—the plaintiff' witness—and not liable to cross-examination. I must
object to cross-examination.
Mr. MacNeill—I can do anything I like—cross-examine him—ask him anything.
Mr. Gait—In the case of the Golden Cache Company it has been held by Mr. Justice Irving that on an
examination of this kind, it is strictly an examination
and not a cross examination.
Mr. MacNeill—It has been held by the other
Judges contrary, but you can take whatever objection
you like, any time any objectionable question is asked,
it is time enough to argue that then.
Mr. Bodwell—I do not suppose you intend to press
that objection, Mr. Davis.
"You know the cross-cut that was run by the Cen-=
tie Star Company from the main workings in a northerly direction into the Iron Mask mineral claim?"
A.   Yes.
You were foreman in charge at the time that wrs
being constructed ?   A.   Yes.
About what time was that construction? A. It
was begun m December, 1896—late in December or
January, 1896. I may be off a year in that—begun as
soon as the machinery was put in the Centre Star.
It was continued then from the north side line of the
Centre Star up to a point that was afterwards referred
to as the door at Station N?   A.   Yes.
Q.   You know the front referred to?   A.   Yes.
Q.    In the Iron Mask ground?   A.   Yes.
Q. From that front a tunnel was run westerly? A.
Yes, started westerly.
Q. And run for what distance? A. 160 feet approximately.
Q. The tunnel was stopped there—you stopped
work there? A. Yes, on the supposition that we
were in other people's ground.
Q. As a matter of fact, you were in the Iron Mask
ground then? A. We were not counting the Iron
Mask.
Q. As a matter of fact, it was in the Iron Mask
ground? A. Oh, yes, we knew that. We thought it
was the War Eagle, that is why the tunnel was stopped.
Q. At what time was that work stopped? A. That
tunnel was run in November of the following year
after we started the cross-cut you refer to. That is
the only one we ran.13°
THE MINING RECORD.
Yes
I
Q. At a front in that tunnel about some 120 icet
from the door you referred to, you encountered a
large body of ore? A. We encountered an ore body
126 feet.
Q.   From the door?   A.   Yes.
Q. That is the ore body that has been subsequently
referred to as the westerly ore body? A. I presume
so.    I do not know.
Q. You were in charge of the work at the time?
A.   Yes.
Q. How much ore was taken from that point—
from that ore body? A. Just the seam of the drift
going through it.
Q. You do not know how much ore was actually
taken; how many loads? A. I do not know exactly,
not that I am in a position to swear 10.
Q. What was done with the ore taken from that
point?   A.   Sent to the smelter, I believe.
Q.   By whom?   A.   By Mr. Durant.
Q.   For the Centre Star Company?   A.
Q.   And they got returns from it?   A.
do not know.
Q. What smelter did they sent it to A. This
question I am not absolutely able to swear to.
Q. You were in charge of the work :it ihe lime5
A. Yes, in a way. I was in charge of the workings
but not in charge of the ore. What I know about that
was told to me.
Q. Whatever ore was taken out there was taken
by the Centre Star Company from that westerly ore
body?   A.   At that time, yes.
Q. And you cannot tell us the number of car loads
of ore that was taken out? A. No—cannot positively
swear to them.
Q. 0r what the net returns were or the gross returns?   A.   Cannot swear positively to that either.
O. Mr. Durant, the manager of the Centre Star
Company, is not now in British Columbia? A. I
think not.
Q.   The Centre Star Company
cers here at the present time?   A.
of them.
Q.    But the old company?   A.    Oh, no.
Q. That is the company I am referring to, the old
company that was defendant in the action—they had
no other officers here? A. No, no other officers that
I know of here.
Deposition of Mr. Joyce, marked by the Registrar
as Exhibit No. 6.
Mr. Bodwell—We have served the other side with
notice to produce the smelter returns of the ore which
has been referred to in Mr. Joyce's evidence. Have
you these returns?
Mr. Davis—Here is a statement.
(Paper writing produced by defendant's counsel.)
Mr. Bodwell—I understand, Mr. Davis, you have
not got the smelter certificates?
Mr. Davis—No, we have not.
Mr. Bodwell—Do you expect to get them?
Mr. Davis—We are perfectly willing to produce
them later on if we can get them. The trouble is in
knowing what particular ones are the ore, but we will
get them later on and consent to your putting them in
later on as far as that goes if we can get them.
Mr. Bodwell—My friend Mr. Davis and I think
we understand each other on this part of the evidence,
•n v Lord.   He has tendered me a statement now which
have no other ofh-
Yes, a whole crowd
shows—although he has not got the smelter returns—
his figures are that the gross amount of ore raker
from the Iron Mask workings—
The Court—Taken from the Iron Mask?
Mr. Bodwell—Taken by the Centre Star where tiiey
trespassed upon our ground and took our ore.
The Court—That is your claim that that amount of
ore was taken within your boundaries?
Mr. Bodwell—Yes, well, that is the amount of ore
taken at the point in question in Mr. Joyce's evidence.
This statement refers to gross value of $6,630 and it
is understood at this stage of the case that if the
smelter returns or smelter certificates can be obtained
during the progress of the trial my friend wili produce them, and that we will have the liberty of putting
them in at that time.
The Court—I have taken a memorandum of that.
Mr. Bodwell—And if these smelter certificates are
not produced at any stage during the trial, and we
think that we are in a position to increase their value
so as to give us a greater amount of damages in case
of success that that evidence is to be given and taken
as of the same effect as if it were pu*- in at this stage
of the case.   Is that right?
.Mr. Davis—That is correct, my Lord.
The Court—That would be the rule at any event.
1 have taken it down as being ore out of the ground
in dispute.   Is that right?
Mr. Bodwell—Yes, that is right. That is our prima
facie case, my Lord.
Plaintiffs rest.
Mr. Davis—It will be necessary, my Lord, for me
to refer in my opening to this model very much, and
therefore I think possibly it would be better to give
some explanation of it to your Lordship before beginning the opening. You will see that the face of
tlie model consists of a plan of portions of the Centre
Star. In the plans the Centre Star is referred to.
This is No. 1 (indicating) and the northerly one is No.
The Court—Is this the one that runs in from the
gulch?
Mr. Davis—They both run in from the gulch. The
base of the model is a plan of a portion of the Centre
Star mineral claim, a portion of the Iron Mask mineral claim, and a portion of the War Eagle mineral
claim, and it shows all the portions of the Centre Star
and Iron Mask mines which are iu dispute in this
action. These posts show the surface of the ground.
The ground you will see is of very much greater
altitude at the west side than at the east. This (indicating) is the top of the shaft which is on War Eagle
ground, runs up to the surface, this shaft is what has
been called No. 3. The inclined shaft running up to
surface of the ground in the Centre Star—the 320-
foot shaft. This shaft to the east of it also runs down
from the surface of the ground, and is called the No.
2 shaft; it is all the way in Centre Star ground. Your
Lordship will notice that this (indicating) is the side
line between the Centre Star and Iron Mask. This
(indicating) is the westerly slope of the Iron Mask
running up nearly to the surface; this (indicating) is
the easterly stope of the Iron Mask running up to the
surface.
The Court—Was this stope commenced from below
and worked upwards?THE MINING RECORD.
Mr. Davis
the No
-Yes, my Lord.
Between the No. 3 and
2 shafts lies the apex or a portion of the apex
ot the vein which is in dispute in this case, the v;in
we allege runs down to the Iron Mask mineral claim-
it is the north fork of the War Eagle vein This
working here is brown (indicating) is the south fork
of the War Eagle vein. The War Eagle vein over
here (indicating) splits—the main War Eagle vein, or
the War Eagle vein splits into two forks; the north
fork is the one which has been called in this case the
Centre Star No. 2 vein; the south fork is this brown
level from the surface down to the red tunnel level
which is the Iron Mask War Eagle tunnel running
through here (indicating) and over to the War Eagle
from the surface of these stopes down to that is about
190 feet roughly—the surveyor, of course, will give
the exact figures. I am giving you these figures so
you will get an idea of the different levels, my Lord.
ABSTRACT OF OFFICIAL REPORTS.
-This (indicating) is sunk from the top,
The Court-
then?
Air. Davis—Yes, my Lord. The green drift, your
Lordship is referring to, goes 100 feet, and then is
sunk a winze. That is the drift and there is the winze
(indicating).
The Court—That is about 70 or 80 feet, is it?
Mr. Davis—The main drift is about 100 feet—95
feet to be exact, I think.
The Court—You are acquainted with the old plan?
I am asking this question for information. On the old
model I do not recollect that coming in from the face
there.
Mr. Davis—That really does not cut much figure
in this action, my Lord.
The Court—Perhaps that is the reason it was not
shown on the model.
Air. Davis—Yes.
The Court—I am only asking* for information. It
will make it much more complicated if I do not understand it thoroughly. '
Air. Davis—You need pay no attention to that at
all in this case.
j he Court—This is their main tunnel (indicating).
That is from the gulch that has been shown on the
other plans—the Centre Star.
Mr. Davis—Yes, but your Lordship of course understands that the main workings of the Centre Star
are over in this direction (indicating), but this is the
tunnel that they run in called the No. 2 tunnel. Here
(indicating) is what has been called the Iron Mask
winze, consisting of two portions running down in the
first place from the red level to the yellow level. Now.
that red level is the Iron Mask's east drift.
The Court—From their main tunnel there?
Mr. Davis—Xo, but from here (indicating). This
War Eagle Iron Mask tunnel is not run on ore, but
this tunnel a little to the south of the Iron Mask-War
Eagle tunnel is what is called the Iron Mask east
drift. Here is the winze (indicating) they have stoped
you see, from that drift right up to the surface. Then
there is a cross-cut that is connected with the main
War Eagle-Iron Mask tunnel by this cross-cut. This
(indicating) is their main tunnel used by both mines
under agreement—both the War Eagle and the Iron
Mask.
The Court—I understand it now.
(To be continued.)
HIE CROW'S NEST PASS COAL COMPANY,
LIMITED.
GENERAL MANAGER'S REPORT.
DURING the year it has been proved beyond a
doubt that this property contains as high a grade
of steam and cooking coal as the world produces; and
it contains sufficient to meet all the possible requirements of many future generations. It also seems
clear that your coal is the only first-class steam and
cooking coal within a reasonable distance of the vast
ore deposits of British Columbia, Montana, Idaho
and Washington. Further, you will undoubtedly be
able to place coke on the Pacific Coast as soon as you
have a surplus to spare for that market.
Rear. Admiral Palliser, of the British Navy, tested
the coal, and reported as follows on April 13th, 1899:
"We are happy to say it has been found most satisfactory, so much so, that I have written to the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty recommending its
use."
Smelters are being erected at Greenwood and
Grand Forks, and the latter smelter should be ready
to use our coke by April or May.
One special feature of the Fernie coal is, that the
engines using it, throw no sparks. This is a very
valuable property for the coal to possess, because
prairie fires are invariably started through sparks
falling on the dry grass from passing engines. This
will specially commend the coal for use on the railroad, even in sections where, owing to high freight
rates, other coal might be cheaper.
The timber area of your land is also most valuable,
as it contains sufficient timber for all future mining
requirements, and also for the requirements of 'the
neighbouring country for building purposes.
There is also a quantity of land which will be fit for
agricultural purposes, and I make this statement after
close observation during the summer and fall
months.
During the year the total output has been as follows: Coal total, 116,200 tons; coke total, 29,658
tons.
During the past year you have had to contend
with the difficulties which are always met with in the
development of a new plant. The difficulties are exceptionally great in opening up a coal mine in a
region like the Rocky Mountains, where it is impossible to take borings through the strata, or to locate
the position of a seam ahead of the working places.
The only sure and successful method of working a
mine is to keep the headings or main haulways at
least one thousand feet ahead of the working places
or rooms where the main body of the coal is being
mined. It would be still better if these headings
were at least half a mile ahead of the workings. In
this way you could lay out the workings to suit the
varying conditions of the vein. Until quite recently
it has been absolutely impossible to do this, owing
to the enormous demand for both coal and coke,
which made it necessary to push every available
working place to its full capacity; but as the mine
opens out and enlarges, you are enabled to push these
main tunnels ahead of the workings and thus locate
all changes in the general condition of the coal in ample time so that the coal can be mined to the best
possible advantage and at the least possible expense.132
THE MINING RECORD.
Owing to the unfortunate labour troubles in British
Columbia, arising from the enforcement of the eight-
jhour law, all the smelters are shut down, and we are
obliged to look for a new market for our coke in the
United States.
During a recent visit to Montana, 1 succeeded in
securing an order for three thousand tons of coke
from the Boston & Montana Company, which is the
largest consumer of coke in the State of Montana.
If we are able to sell coke at a price not exceeding
20 to 25 per cent, higher than any other Western
coke, we can always secure the order, as-pur coke is
supe'rior by far to any Western coke, and has been
proved by actual test to be 5 per cent, superior to the
celebrated Pocahontas coke of West Virginia, which
took the premium at the World's Fair in Chicago.
The present indications show that the labour troubles will soon be overcome, and you will have a very
largely increased demand for both coal and coke
throughout British Columbia, as the merits of your
product are making it a standard fuel in the West.
During the present year you should build whatever additional coke ovens may be necessary to meet
the British Columbia demands, and also have at least
100 ovens, with the product of which you can work
up a permanent business in the adjoining States.
Arrangements are now being made with the C.P.R.
to store a large supply of coal during the summer
months, which will in future greatly relieve the difficulties which were experienced last fall in securing
cars and transportation during the busy wheat season.
THE BEND 'OR MINES, LIMITED.
directors' report.
Your directors have much pleasure in laying before
you their report covering the operations of the company from the date of incorporation to the 31st day of
January, 1900.
Until the proceeds of the first clean-up supplied
the necessary funds, the management, overcame difficulties which at times seemed insurmountable, and
may now congratulate itself upon presenting the accompanying financial statement, confident in assuring
you that all indebtedness of the company will be
liquidated by the proceeds of the first three months'
milling of the approaching season.
Had it not been necessary to shut down on account of frost, from the night of the first of December last, there is no doubt that by this time the company would be out of debt. This, considering the
amount of development done since the incorporation
of the company, might well be looked upon as phenomenal. In addition to the development of the
mine, which has been pursued without a single check
since 1st October, 1898, a ten-stamp mill, water
power, gravity tramway, etc., have been installed at
a cost of approximately $30,000, without encroaching
on the treasury stock of the company except to the
extent of 4,000 shares.
Referring back to the date of incorporation of the
company, viz., ist October, 1898, it is the intention of
your retiring directors to, without going into details,
explain the operations of the company during the
period they were looking after your interests.
As you are all aware from the prospectus, the property of the company was purchased from the Bend
'Or Syndicate for the sum of three hundred and fifty
thousand dollars, fifty thousand dollars in cash and
the balance in shares at par. This cash payment was
to be supplied by the sale of 100,000 shares (called the
first issue) at 50 cents. Owing to the bad state of the
local stock market, only 33,900 of these shares were
disposed of and the syndicate offering to.accept the
remaining 66,100 shares in lieu of cash, they were
handed them in full settlement of their claim. The
treasury stock, viz., 100,000 shares, was placed on the
English market at par, and it was confidently expected that a large number would be disposed of at
once. The result, however, was disappointing, although several large sales were on the eve of consummation, they were rendered abortive in more than
one instance by adverse reports from unreliable local
sources.
However, the development work never ceased, and
a contract was entered into with the William Hamilton Manufacturing Company, of Peterboro, Ontario,
for the furnishing and installation of a modern ten-
stamp mill, water power sufficient to develop 100
horse power, and gravity tramway from mine to mill,
for the sum of $26,157. The fulfilment of this contract was considered almost an impossible undertaking, owing to the fact that your property being situated in a very inaccessible district, the only communication being mountain trails. However, thanks to
the indefatigable energy of the contractors this feat
was accomplished without the loss or breaking of a
single piece of machinery. The total weight of machinery packed a distance of about 70 miles from Lillooet was in the neighbourhood of 700,000 pounds.
The installation was completed in accordance with
the contract, and the stamps were dropped for the
first time on the 24th August, 1899. Everything
worked smoothly, and the power developed was
found to be much in excess of our present requirements; in fact, the water wheel, with quarter gate
opening, developed sufficient power to operate the
mill and crusher, consequently we have ample power
for an additional ten-stamp and a five-drill air compressor should the occasion arise.
The first clean-up took place on the 16th September, after crushing 460 tons, which produced 383.04
ounces of gold, realizing $6,358.00.
The second clean-up occurred on the 6th October,
the result of which was, viz.: Tons crushed, 316; result, 462.84 ounces of gold, realizing $7,692.40.
The third clean-up was on the 31st October, after
crushing 366 tons, producing 433.94 ounces, value
S7.191.38.
On the 30th November the fourth clean-up \vas
made, 455 tons having been crushed during the
month, giving 271.74 ounces, value $4,423.92.
The ore put through on this last run was taken
from the large new ledge which was encountered on
the 30th October, and which, owing to its size and
position, admitted of easy mining. Having no appliances at the time for assaying, it was not discovered
until towards the end of the month that the new ledge
did not carry the high values of the old, only averaging about 12 dwts. to the ton.
This, as a test of the new reef, was very satisfactory,
but as money was required, ft was unfortunate, as the
results could easily have been made larger than the
previous outputs, had the ore been taken from the old
reef.
On the night of the first of December (owing toTHE MINING RECORD.
i33
heavy frosts) the water in the service pipe leading
from the flume to the mill froze and operations had to
be discontinued. This difficulty we hope to remedy
next season.
The fifth and last clean-up of the season was for a
run of one day on the 1st of December before the
water was frozen, when 20 tons were crushed, producing 19.74 ounces, which realized $288.82.
RECAPITULATION.
Mill ran 70 days, ij hours, crushing     1 557 tons
Producing gold  Ij57i.3 ozs.
}'a «»e  $25,954.62
Value per ton of total crushings  16.66
Value per ton of crushings from main reef 19-54
Total cost of mining and milling per ton,
after charging up 10 per cent, of the
total cost of development to date  5.47
WATER.
The company has applied for and obtained from the
Government a lease for sufficient water at an annual
rental of $7.00. This puts the cost for power per
stamp per annum at 70 cents. (Steam power costs in
the neighbourhood of $700 per stamp per annum.)
PROPERTY.
In addition to the original mineral claims of the
company, which have since been Grown granted, it
was decided to purchase the Mabel Fraction, which
you will see by reference to the plan was very advisable, owing to its proximity to the lower workings.
This was acquired on the 16th October, for a consideration of $2,550.00 cash, and a Crown grant has been
applied for. At the same time it was decided to take
a bond on the Alhambra group for $20,000, one thousand dollars cash. In fact, this was one of the conditions of the purchase of the Mabel Fraction (the owners being identical). Unfortunately the survey of the
Alhambra took away so much of the property that it
was not considered worth while going further in the
matter. We might state that the lowest price previously obtainable on the Alabel was $3,500.00, so that
the company really acquired it at its lowest market
value, leaving out of consideration altogether the possibility of the Alhambra, and your directors feel justified in charging the whole amount to property account.
DEVELOPMENT WORK ON NO.   I  TUNNEL.
Work on this tunnel has been continued without
interruption, and the tunnel has been driven 530 feet
on the ledge. Three hundred feet in stoping was commenced. A parallel ledge was encountered 60 feet up
in the stope, which after merging into the old ledge
gave a width of fully five feet. An upraise from that
point to the surface proves that the ledge carries its
full width all the way, and furnished the company with
a splendid reserve of ore. We are now opening a new
stope, and the manager reports that at 20 feet up he
had encountered a splendid body of ore, giving an
average value of $38.00 per ton in free gold, and has
since raised an additional 25 feet, the ledge holding
its width and value.
A cross-cut has been run in a westerly direction
from No. 1 tunnel to strike the new ledge at that
level. This was encountered at a distance of 32 feet,
and some 15 feet of drifting on the ledge was done in
each direction.
NO.   2   LEVEL,   LOWER   TUNNEL.
A cross-cut was run in to tap the ledge at a depth of
76 feet below the upper tunnel, and we are pleased
to report that the reef was encountered at a distance
. of 236 feet in. Since then we have driven on the ledge
a distance of 142 feet without encountering a break or
fault of any kind, the reef at no point being less than
12 inches in width and showing free gold quite freely. Samples taken across the ledge from time to time
give the following results: $64, $62, $87, $38, etc., and
an average sample taken all over this drive of intervals
of every five feet after all visible gold has been carefully picked out, gave the splendid average of $20.60
per ton, and an amalgamation test made by Air. Pellew-Harvey shows that it goes ioo per cent, free milling.
We are now raising to connect both levels at a point
indicated on the plan, and no doubt this work has
been completed.
The last report from your manager states that he
has both levels connected all but 14 feet. This will
facilitate the handling of ore from the upper level,
thereby saving the company considerable time and
money, which are the economical factors in managing
a mine.
We now estimate that there is at the present 8,000
tons of ore blocked out in the mine (without taking
into consideration the large body of ore of the lower
grade shown up in the new reef) which can be safely
counted on running $20.00 to the ton.
All preliminary expenses have been written off during the period ending 31st January, 1900, and also
several expenses which might have been treated either
as capital and expenditure or spread over several
years, but which your directors decided to write off.
ATHABASCA GOLD MINES, LIMITED.
This company assumed control of the property on
April 13th, 1898, and as this is the first annual report
which it has devolved upon me to make, I have included the financial statements and in the detailed
engineering report the whole period from that date
until January ist, 1900.
The period (from April 13th, 1898, to January ist,
1900) has been one of active development of the mine.
At the commencement of the year the mine was not
in a condition to furnish a sufficient supply of first
class ore to the mill, and we were forced to be content
with a mixed grade of ore which gave fairly satisfactory results, but which afforded no indication of what
could be accomplished if sufficient ground had been
open to enable an adequate supply of first class ore
to be mined. The figures of the statistical tables show
the steadily improving results which were obtained
by this vigorously and persistently maintained policy
of development.
These figures show that a steady improvement has
been maintained, and are an encouragement to proceed
along these lines with increased energy. Fortunately
the completion of our air compressor will enable us to
carry out this policy effectually, and I am convinced
that the rapid work which two or three drills will be
able to do during the next few months, will, later,
result in an increase of produce.
'AimF~
'34
THE MINING RECORD.
The operations of the year have been marred by
only one unfortunate feature, the scarcity of labour
which was experienced after the dislocation of the
labour situation by the precipitate enactment of the
eight-hour law for underground workers in metalliferous mines. The introduction of this measure is a
matter of history and does not come within the scope
of this report; but the situation created was one which
caused grave anxiety to all who were responsible for
the proper conduct of the company's affairs, and called
for patience and forbearance in carrying out the measures which were deemed advisable for the protection
of its interests, and for the maintenance of harmonious relations with the men. As is usual under such
circumstances, a compromise was arrived at; reasonable concessions were offered by the company, and
equally reasonable concessions were required of the
men; and the result was, that after a few weeks' hesitation, the men cheerfully recognized the justice of
the company's position and work has been carried on
. without any further delay. The months of June and
July (as will be seen in the various tables submitted
herewith) reflect the situation with clearness: but the
success of the policy adopted is evidenced by Table
IL, which shows that the number of men employed
underground never fell in any one month below an
average of thirty-five per diem, and also that the
month of August found matters practically re-established along normal lines.
With these facts in mind, the operations of the year
may be reviewed with satisfaction: for a profit of
$31,504.55 has been realized on working expenses
under conditions which may be described as unfavourable. Not only has this profit been realized on the
books, but the property has experienced an improvement (not so easily shown but equally important) liy
the superior efficiency in which all the departments
are now found. Development can be' made more effective, and the production and reduction of the ore
can be more effectively carried on, with the result that
a better produce will follow.
MINE.
During the year 1,275 feet of development work has
been done, as follows: 720 feet of drifts, 360 feet of
• crosscuts, 165 feet of raises, and 30 feet of winzes.
5,^50 tons of ore have been mined and sent to the
mill, 200,000 tons of waste have been mined and
thrown over the dumps, and a further large quantity
of waste has been holed in the stopes from which the
ore has been removed. This work has been carried
on entirely by hand labour in hard ground. Altogether about 40,000 tons of ore and waste have been
handled at a total cost of $74,824.35, including all cost
of labour, material, supervision, and sundries; or at
a cost of $1.87 per ton.
The character of the vein is unusual. The strike
of the vein on the surface is approximately at right
angles to the strike of the vein in the main tunnel, and
the explanation of this unusual feature seems to be
connected in some manner not yet fully understood
with the numerous faults which cause frequent dis-
displacements of the vein. If it is possible to conceive
of these faults having a greater and greater throw as
they proceed farther from some central p'.int, an a-
planation would be obtained of the situation which
seems to prevail.
The vein dips at a very shallow angle from the horizontal. The angle of dip varies from "horizontal" to
30 degrees from the horizontal.   The definition of the
limits of the ore chute proper has been confused by
the peculiar system of faulting, and this problem lias
not yet been completely solved. Having regard only
to certain points of information, it appears to be dipping along the line of strike at an angle of about 10
degrees from the horizontal; but it is quite possible
that this theory will require to be reconsidered when a
fuller knowledge of the faulting system is attained.
It is likely that as depth is gained the character of the
ground will be less broken, and indications are not
wanting that below the present main tunnel this will
be the case, and also that the pitch of the vein will
be greater than hitherto. Improvements in these two
respects will be of the greatest importance, as the
cost of mining the ore and of handling the ore after
mining will be materially decreased. A further decrease in mining cost can be looked fpr from the installation of the compressor plant, whereby the development and exploratory work can be kept well in advance. ,   j   |_|
The high values obtained from the preliminary
shipments to the smelter, of sorted ore, and fr im the
assays made during development, raised hopes of high
figures being obtained in the mine, and in this respect our hopes had not been disappointed. Owing
to the proper development of the mine at the commencement of the year, and the interruptions caused
by the scarcity of miners during the summer, we have
been able to only partially demonstrate .he values of
the ore in practice; but the months of November and
December are indications of what can be done under
more favourable conditions; during these months
values of $29.86 and $30.25 (respectively) were recovered in the mill.
It is of the utmost importance that development
work should be pushed beyond the confines of the
present ore zone; indications of a special and of a
general character are sufficiently encouraging to warrant extensive work of an exploratory character, both
in drifting and in cross-cutting, and I urge that these
should be carried out independently of the development of the ore body as already known.
It has been found necessary to use greater caution
in timbering than heretofore. The formation lies in
parallel bands of ground which is dry and tight and
easy to hold up, and of ground which is exactly the
reverse. Nothing but stulls is used, and the waste is
kept filled in the stopes as close as possible to the
working faces.
It is satisfactory to record the fact that the year has
passed without an accident of any kind, either in or
outside the mine.
GRAVITY TRAMMING.
This important factor in handling the ore has proved entirely satisfactory. Great care has been exercised in watching the details and keeping the track in
proper condition, wtih the result that no accidents
have occurred and no repairs except to running gear
have been necessary.
5,350 tons have been handled on this tramway at a
cost of $1,090.40, or at the rate of 20J cents per ton,
which figures include all cost of supervision. Besides
handling the ore this tramway also transports all the
supplies, provisions and lumber required at the mine,
the cost of which is included in the above figures.
REDUCTION.
The 10-stamp mill has worked during the year 353
days and 6 hours and has been idle during the year 11THE MINING RECORD.
'35
days and 18 hours.   The causes of delays were as fol-
lows.
t7„_   i„ Days.    Hours,
ror clean-ups  7
Owing to freezing of water supply in
February  x 22
Dominion Day, holiday  I2
Owing to break in flume on December
F28*;  08
r or other causes  02
It will be seen that for causes connected with the
mill there have been only two hours delay from the
beginning to the end of the year and including all
sources of delay, except clean-ups, only three days
and twenty hours delay. This is a record for which
thpse who are responsible for the cate of the mill are
entitled to credit. The figures submitted on Table T.
are full, and from them the history of the year's working can be studied in detail.
From the commencement of the year a steady improvement was effected all along the line until June,
when a drop took place owing to causes recited above;
from this time until the end of the year there was a
steady upward movement, the best results being obtained in November, when 388 tons were milled, producing $11,592.50 or at the rate of $29.86; if this
month can be compared with December, it will be
seen $30.25 were recovered in the latter month, but
only 344 tons were milled; from a consideration of
these figures it will be seen that it is only necessary
by development to bring a sufficient quantity of ore
to the mill to ensure satisfactory results.
The average fineness of the bullion for the first five
months is 696 parts fine gold in every thousand parts
of bullion, and the average fineness of the bullion during the last five months is 733 in one thousand; the
value of the bullion during the first named period is
$14.38 per ounce, and during the second named
period is $15.15 per ounce.
The percentage of recovery in the mill has been, on
the whole, satisfactory considering the character of the
ore treated, and if the ore under consideration were of
a low grade character, it would not be necessary to do
more than improve, where possible, the concentrating
plant. When ore of forty or fifty dollars per ton, however, is under consideration, the loss of 25 per cent,
of these values is serious. Preliminary steps were
promptly taken with a view to ascertaining whether
the cyanide process could be adapted to our needs
and the results of these were so satisfatcory that a
small experimental cyanide plant was erected in the
mill where the process could be observed under our
own care. In the meantime a substantial dam has
been built in a convenient location and the tailings are
being accumulated for subsequent treatment.
ASSAYS.
A convenient assay office has been furnished in
which are made daily the following assays of the previous day's run:
1. Sample of ore prior to milling.
2. Sample of pulp after amalgamation.
3. Sample of tailings.
4. Sample of concentrates.
The samples are taken hourly with great care and
the results harmonize closely with the results attained in practice, and the system affords much help to
the successful operation of the mill.
Frequent assays are also made of samples from the
niiue, especially from the points of development.
Check assays are made of the shipments of ore and
concentrates to the smelter, and numerous other
assays which occur in the course of special work
which may be undertaken from time to time.
CYANIDE TESTS.
A rough cyanide plant has been erected of a sufficient size to furnish tests on a working scale and sufficiently numerous to be conclusive in their results.
These experiments have been carried on under the
direction of Mr. E. A. Paterson, who has had many
years' experience in the cyanide plants of the Transvaal. Reference is made to Table V., where the results of the four last experiments made as shown.
Experiments VI., VII., VIII are especially satisfactory'; the percentage of recovery is high and the quantity of cyanide consumed is small. In order to carry
the experiments through to the end, a zinc box was
arranged and the gold precipitated in it; after which
a clean-up was made resulting in a recovery of bullion
which corresponded closely with the assay figures.
Regarding the proportion of slimes which we cannot
treat with the tailings, our figures are not complete,
but from an observation of the catch boxes it would
appear that it will not be necessary to allow more than
10 to 15 per cent, of the slimes to escape to obtain
as good results as those shown in the table. Whether
the quantity of slimes thus allowed to escape will be
worth catching and treating in a separate slimes plant
will depend upon the quantity of ore being treated in
the mill.
The conclusions to be drawn from the above remarks are that the cyanide process is especially adapted to our tailings, and that these tailings should yield
a net profit over and above all expenses of not less
than $5-00 per ton.
An admirable site exists below our mill, and T
strongly urge that plans should be immediately prepared for the erection of this plant, so that its completion may be insured before the capacity of the dam
is exhausted.
The treatment of the concentrates by this method
is a matter for later consideration, but it is not improbable that the process can be adapted to this purpose
and thereby effect an important economy.
COMPRESSOR.
The machinery for this plant arrived at the end of
the year, and at this date is now running. The full
decription of this plant will be found in Mr. Mussen's
report, and it is too soon yet to discuss the performance of the machinery. I have great hopes that the
introduction of the machine drills will be the means of
solving many of our difficulties, and that after they
have been in operation for a few months the development of the mine will justify the addition to the mill
of another battery of ten stamps.
The entire work of engineering, general management, purchase of supplies, correspondence, office and
book-keeping at the mine and the mill site, is carried
on by one engineer (or general manager) one assistant, and one time-keeper; when the number of men
employed is considered* the varied character of the
work and the area over which it is scattered, it will be
seen that strong effort has been made to reduce the
number of non-producers to the lowest possible limit.
The vein has fully answered our hopes in values,
even if the breaks have rendered its extraction more«^»fv
136
THE MINING RECORD.
costly than was expected. With increased depth and
with mechanical appliances for mining, the mine
ought to be within six months in a condition to supply
a second battery of ten stamps; under which circumstances the net recovery from the cyanide plant alone
would be sufficient to pay a substantial dividend.
It is satisfactory to be able to point to results achieved as confirming the faith reposed in the mine when
developments were more scanty, and these results are
a justification for making such provision as may be
necessary to increase the capacity and resources of the
property, so that its possibilities may be fully realized.
I have referred to the erection of ten more stamps,
but I do not assign that as the limit of extension.
Natural conditions encourage us to believe that by
exploratory development work the resources of the
mine may be many times increased, and this view is
held by eminent visiting geologists. This work can
only be carried on, in our case, under-ground, and
I strongly recommend that it be energetically undertaken.
In conclusion I wish to record my appreciation of
the zeal and energy shown by all the employees of the
. company in executing the various duties assigned to
them. The thanks of the company are especially due
to Mr. H. Mussen, in the engineering department;
Mr. F. Vans Agnew, in the assay office; Mr. A. Con-
stans, in the mill and Air. A. Hackshaw in the mine.
E. NELSON FELL, A.R.S.M.
TEN-STAMP  MILL.
The ore in the bin at the foot of the three-rail gravity tramway is run into a car and weighed. It is then
trammed into the mill and dumped over a 4'xio'
Grizzly, with tapered section bars 2" apart. The material refused by this passes a 7"xio" Blake crusher,
running at 250 revolutions, and joins the fine ore in
the 50-ton bin below. From this bin it passes into the
hoppers of two automatic Challenge feeders, and is
delivered to the stamps at any speed desired.
The battery frame is of the front.knee type with 12"
X24" battery posts. The mortar blocks are constructed of 2" planks, 12' long, set on end. These are
dressed and accurately fitted, and are spiked together
with wire nails. They rest on a foundation of cement,
and have sand rammed tightly around them to the
surface.
The mortars are of the Homestake pattern, without
liners and weigh 6,000 lbs each. Between the mortars
and the mortar blocks is a piece of |- inch rubber.
The guides are of maple and are sectional. The
front half of guide is separately bolted through the
back, to the guide rail with two bolts held by spring
steel nuts. The upper guides are 13! inches long and
the lower are 15! inches long.
The stems are of steel,- and weigh 395 lbs.
The tappets are three keyed, of cast steel, and weigh
95 lbs.
The bosses or stamp heads are of cast iron, and
weigh 265 lbs.
The shoes are of forged steel, and weigh 175 lbs.
Crushing weight of stamps,* 930 lbs.
The cams are of cast steel, and are of the Blanton
pattern.
The camshaft is of hammered iron, 6 inches in diameter. It turns in open boxes, and is placed in front
of the battery posts. The camshaft pulley is of wood
and is belted to a friction clutch pulley, so that the rest
of the machinery in the mill may be run without turning the camshaft.
The screens used are of the diagonal slot type, of
punched Russian iron.
Running over the battery on a track, is a crawl
which supports a one-ton differential pulley by which
means the stamps can be quickly and easily lifted for
setting tappets, etc.
All the copper plates are electroplated with 1.5 oz.
silver per square foot. There are two plates inside the
mortars, a back plate 52^x11 inches and a chuck
block plate 51x4 inches. Both these are 3-16 of an
inch thick. Outside the mortars is a lip plate 5ix8x
3-16 of an inch thick. The front plates or aprons are
65x120x^ of an ihch thick.
After leaving the aprons, the pulp passes through
two mercury traps placed beneath the floor and thence
to the Brown hydrometer sizers. There are three of
these, made of vitrified clay; the product of each and
the overflow from the last going to four vanners. The
. waterfeed for the sizers and vanners comes from an
overflow tank placed outside the mill on the level of
the camshaft floor.
The vanners are of the Frue type, and consist of
three plain 6-foot belts for the finer grades of pulp,
and a Morse corrugated 4-foot belt for the coarse
material.
A 30-inch clean-up pan is placed on the main floor,
and is found invaluable for grinding the sand taken
from around the dies at clean-up.
The vanner room, which is the coldest part of the
building, has been lined and the walls now consist of
three inches of wood, one thickness of building paper,
and 8 inches of sawdust. In winter the mill is heated
by steam supplied by a 15 h.p upright boiler. The
steam is conducted through the building in 1 inch
and i-J- inch pipes, with coils placed at intervals.
The mill is constructed entirely of wood, the retaining walls being of masonry.
The power is supplied by two Tutthill impact water-
wheels working under a head of 398 feet.
The smaller wheel is 12 inches in diameter and,
with 17^ cubic feet of water per minute, is capable of
developing 11J h.p., making 1,500 revolutions per
minute. It runs only the vanners, thus giving them a
motion independent of the rest of the mill. When the
mill is shut down for clean-up this wheel runs the
clean-up pan which is belted to the vanner line shaft.
The larger wheel is 24 inches in diameter and, with
a consumption of 93 cubic feet per minute, can develop 5&J h.p., running at the rate of 765 revolutions
per minute.   It runs the rest of the mill.
The water is supplied to the nozzels by offsets from
a 16" receiver which forms the end of the pipe line.
This pipe is 850 feet long and 10 inches in diameter.
It is made of riveted sheet steel, is asphalt dipped and
is put together with slip joints. The water enters it
from a 6x6x12 foot pressure box which is fitted with
submerged screen, overflow and sand trap.
Tlie flume, which is 24x20 inches iflside, is 2,350
feet long and is built on a 0.2 per cent, grade. Its
capacity is about 725 cubic feet per minute. It is built
of dressed cedar with tarred joints. The 3x4-inch
cross ties rest on stringers and mudsills of split cedar.
This understructure is filled with earth to the bottom
boards in order to inseure against cold. Two sets of
waste-gates are placed along the line, one near each
end.THE MINING RECORD.
nfTwM? fi.,ntfrS-tie flume from a dam constructed
of cribbing filled with rock and clay, with two thick-
nefses of sheet piling driven into the clay on the upper
side. Ihe distance from the lowest mudsill to the
crest of the weir, which is 18 feet long, is 8 feet The
length of the dam from wing to wing is about 50 feet
Ai the machinery in the mill, with the exception of
the water wheels and boiler, was supplied by Messrs
hraser & Chalmers, of Chicago. The water wheels
were supplied by the Oakland Iron Works, of Oakland. California, and the boiler was supplied by the
Jenckes Machine Co., of Sherbrooke, Quebec.
AIR COMPRESSOR.
In order to use for power the water running to
waste from the mill wheels, the compressor was placed
about 1,000 feet down the gulch.
The plant consists of one half of a Rand Duplex
class D compressor, with the Dodge system of rope
power-transmission from the water wheel. The compressor is mounted on a good concrete foundation,
with bolts set for the other half. The cylinder is 14x22
inches, and the fly wheel, which is also the driving
wheel, is 10 feet in diameter. The distance between
the centres of the fly wheel and the pulley on the water
wheel shaft is about 60 feet, and the difference in elevation about 20 feet. The transmission rope is 4-
strand Manilla, and passes eight times round the pulleys in V grooves which prevent slipping. It also
passes over a winder pulley and a tightener.
The water wheel is a four-foot Pelton and works
under a head of 300 feet. The water is conveyed to it
from the flume in a 10-inch sheet steel spiral riveted
pipe, with flanged joints. The length of the pipe is
about 750 feet. The pressure box at the head of the
pipe is 6x6x8 feet, and contains sand-trap, submerged
screen and overflow. The flume, which extends from
this point to the mill, is about 1,100 feet long. It is
built on a 0.4 per cent, grade and has a capacity of
about 500 cubic feet per minute. It is built of dressed
cedar. The sides are held tightly against the edges of
the bottom boards by wedges which can be tightened
if necessary. The understructure is the same as that
of the mill flume. A set of waste gates is placed in a
convenient gulley near the pressure box.
At the upper end of the flume is a box 4x2x6 feet.
This box receives the water from the mill wheels as
well as the water from a small flume 500 feet long,
which collects water from the main creek and from
small streams along the way. The flume is built of
rough 1 inch boards, on a 2.0 per cent, grade, and has
a capacity of about 400 cubic feet per minute.
" The air as it comes from the compressor, is discharged into a receiver 10 feet long and 42 inches in
diameter, which is placed in the back part of the building. From this it is conveyed to the mine in 3,500 feet
of 5-inch pipe of the kind known as casing. This pipe
is thin steel, and has a brass thread instead of the
usual standard. Its chief advantages are that it is
cheaper and much lighter to haul than standard pipe,
and, where it is used for a permanent line, it is quite
satisfactory. The line is fitted with flanged joints at
frequent intervals, and has two expansion joints
along it.
' The compressor and receiver are housed in a two-
storey building, 20x30 feet. The upper storey has living rooms for the engineer in charge. The rope drive
is well protected by a building six feet wide, and the
water wheel shaft is enclosed in a building 12x16 feet.
This plant was supplied by the Canadian Rand Drill
Company, of Sherbrooke, Quebec.
TRAMWAY.
The ore is brought from the mine to the mill on a
three-rail gravity tramway. The cable is § of an inch
in diameter, and is of crucible steel, by Roebling &
Sons, and has a breaking strain of 13 tons. The cars
are of a nominal capacity of two tons each. The
bodies are of hardwood, lined with heavy sheet steel,
and reinforced outside with heavy bands of wrought
iron. The wheels and axles are of the Anaconda type,
and run very smoothly. At the head of the tramway
is a 50-ton ore-bin. Placed directly under this is the
brake which is of the usual three-wheeled type, with
rubber lined sheaves and two wood shod band brakes.
The rails weigh 12 lbs. to the yard, and are spiked
directly to the hewed surface of the three stringers
which run from bent to bent. The bents, which are
composed of a mud-sill, two posts, and a cap, average
about 12 feet apart, and are of a minimum height of
four feet and a maximum of about 10 feet. They are
securely cross-braced and braced to one another and
to stumps near by, with poles. The timbers used in
the bents and stringers are of a minimum thickness of
10 inches.
At the bottom of the tram is a 150-ton bin into
which the cars dump automatically. The bin at the
head of the tramway is fitted with balanced gates,
operated with a lever. This bin is filled by a chute
into which the mine cars dump directly.
At the lower end of the tramway is about 200 feet
of light snow shed, but other than this, no such protection is required.
The length of the tramway is 2,150 feet, and the difference in elevation between the top and the bottom
is 1,120 feet. The grades on the line are such as to
not only permit of a load of 1,000 lbs. being hauled up
without any undue loading of the descending car, but
also to make any speeding of the cars above the ordinary rate unnecessary at any part of the line.
The lower end of the tramway requires no attention
other than to load freight. The work of maintenance
is performed by the man in charge of the brake. This,
however, only takes a few hours of his time per week,
and consists chiefly in replacing the wooden rollers
which support the rope along the line.
Judging from its performance under present conditions, we estimate that without unduly taxing its capacity, this tramway will lower 75 tons per ten-hour
shift, or 150 tons per day, when running steadily. At
this duty, allowing $7.00 per diem for service and
$3.00 per diem for repairs, cost of rope and general
maintenance, the cost of ore handled would be 6§
cents per ton.
TAILINGS DAM.
This is situated below the mill. It consists of two
parallel walls of logs about 7 feet apart, and measures
128 feet along the front and 29 feet on each wing.
As originally built, the front wall had an average
height of 12 feet, and at this height the capacity when
levelled off, is about 1,000 tons of tailings. Several
small additions have been made, however, so that the
capacity is now about 1,500 tons, and others will be
made as the occasion demands, until the present capacity is at least doubled.
TELEPHONES.
Three separate lines are maintained, one from the>*■>
138
THE MINING RECORD.
general office to Nelson, which is owned and kept in
repair by the Telephone Company, one from the general office to the office at the mine, and one from the
lower ore-bin to the ore-bin at the head of the tramway. Both of these lines are the property of this
company.
ROADS AND TRAILS.
A waggon road 21,000 feet long, built on a uniform
5 per cent, grade, extends from a point on the Hall
Mines road, about || miles from Nelson, to the mill.
This road was built in the spring of 1898, according to
Government specifications, and was accepted by the
Government engineer.
A sleigh road on a steep grade connects the main
waggon road and the mine. In the spring of 1898 this
was straightened and repaired. At the present time,
however, this road is little used, as all freight is taken
up to the mine in the tramway.
A road about 500 feet long, built on a 10 per cent,
grade, runs from the vanner room to the main road
above. Over this all the concentrates are hauled away
direct to the smelter.
Blacksmith shop, 22x16 feet, built of lumber.
Shaft house, 25x16 feet, built of lumber. This encloses the gallows frame and the boiler and hoist.
Powder magazine, 10x15 feet inside. It is built of
logs, with earth and rock piled over walls and roof.
The stores of powder are kept here.
Powder Thawer: This is a light log building, 8'xio'
and is situated on the waste dump near the mouth of
the main tunnel. In it is thawed the powder for immediate use.
Timber Shed: This is an open structure, about 55X
25 feet, and serves the double purpose of a shed for
framing timbers and a snow shed to protect the tracks
and switches at the entrance to the main tunnel.
Also the following additions and improvements
have been made:
To Boarding House—This was practically rebuilt,
as it was double roofed and walled with lumber, and
additions made as follows: At south end a 16x16 foot
addition for wash room; at north a 16x12 foot addition
for cook and waiter's quarters; at west side an addi-
REDUCTION REPORT FOR PERIOD, JAN. 1st, 1899, TO JAN. 1st, 1900.
Days and hours working .
"'    idle for clean up   ...
"    idle for other cause .
Tons milled	
Ozs. Amalaram recovered
Ozs. melted bullion	
Fineness of bullion 	
Jan.
Feb.
March.   April.
May.
30d 07b 29d llh 30d 09h
Value at mint	
Vnlue of bullion per ton of
ore milled	
Tons of concentrates   	
Peroent'ge of concentrates recovered per ton of ore milled
Gross value of concentrates,
gold and silver only	
Value of concentrates per ton
of oremilled	
Total values recovered   	
Total values recovered per
ton of ore milled 	
Value of tailings   	
Percentage of recovery	
30d 07h 25d 08h ..
Od 17b I Od 18h   Od 17h Ort I3h
Od OOh   ld 22b   Od OOh Od 00b
713         422           465 412
1872 3     2240.7     2364.0 2364.3
304.70     466.80   552.70 557.90
709.0 I    713.5     698.0   J    656.5
267 0 |    257.0    256.0 307.0
$4487 70 $6909 63 $8006 92 $7627 42
June.
July.
Aug.
6 28
28.25
16 37
33.50
7.9
17 22'
46.75
$1052 34 $1545 08|$2125 65
t 47
5540 04
7 76
3 00
72.0
3 6C        4 57
8454 7110132 57
20 03      21 79
8 20       7 27
71.0    '   75.0
18 51
46.00
11.1
$2215 52
5
9842 94
23 89
7 14
77.0
dd 13h
Od 02h
404
2726.4
604.10
707.0 I
250.0 I
17
21 93
41.25
10.2
$2190 10
542
11050 27
27 35
8 06
77.2
29d 08h 29d 21h
Od 16h Od 15h
Od OOh   Od 12h
609
114-.7
256.50
692.0
S55.0
6 06
29.25
14 $3394 91
8 70
'   25.00
$1468 56
2 41
5158 70
390
979.5
234.30
698.5
245.0
fOd 12h
Od 12h
0d OOh
430
2113.2
452.00
738.0
233.0
$6918 4
16 07
38.50
29d lib 30d 13h
6.4 8.9
$1412 35 $2077 33
3 62 4 82
4807 26 8995 80
12 32 20 89
4 68 8 02
72.5   I     72.3
Sept.
Oct.
Od 13h
Od OOh
416
2256.8
503.40
713.5
256.0
$7453 55
17 88
39.75
9.5
$2185 27
5 24
9638 82
23 17
8 S
74.0
0d llh
Od OOh
357
2303.0
482.00
746.5
256.0
29d 03h
0d 21h
Od OOh
388
2812.8
591.51
750.0
228.0
Dec.
28d 16h
ld OOh
ld 08h
344
2415 3
525.81
720 0
238.0
$7460 93 $9203 03|$7852 66
11.6
$2553 89
.7 42
10406 55
20 86
33.25
23 72|
43.00
9.3
11.1
$1905 77
$2389 47
5 32
9366 70
6 14
11592 50
26 18
29 86
353 days 6 hrs.
7 days 22 brs.
3 davs 20 hrs.
5350
25897.0
J5581.-72
712.0
251.0
$81,865 53
15 30
444.50
7 f
76.8
I 741
75.4
13 87
$23,121 33
4 32
104,986 86
19 62
7 45
Summary  of Produce  from  Sept.   i,   1898, to January  t,   1900.
Bullion recovered during 1898  $13,744 26
*'              "              "       1899  81,865 53    $95,609 79
Concentrates recovered during 1898  2,>-96 58
"                    "          ."        1899  23,12133     26.U7 91
Value of crude ore shipped during 1898  2,063 64
I                     "                     a       1899  298 61       2,362 25
Total value of produce from all sources	
Nelson, B. C, Jan. 15,1900.
A steep "skid" road was built in the spring of 1899
from the waggon road to the compressor. This road
is about 800 feet long, and was used for hauling machinery and lumber to the compressor.
MINE  BUILDINGS.
The buildings at the mine on May ist, 1898, comprised the following:
Office, 10x15 feet, built of logs.
Bunk house, 16x24 feet, built of logs.
Boarding house, 16x24 feet, built of logs.
Ore sorting house, 15x15 feet, built of logs.
Between that date and January 1st, 1900, the following have been added to the list:
New office, 15x20 feet, built of logs.
Foreman's house, 17x25 feet, built of logs.
Bunk house, 62x24 feet. This building is of lumber
and is situated on a flat bench a short distance below
the mine. It contains 11 sleeping rooms and a sitting
room. Each sleeping room accommodates four men,
and has a separate entrance from the six-foot verandah
which runs along both sides of the building. This enables miners coming off shift to go to their rooms
without disturbing those sleeping.
$124,089 95
E. NELSON FELL,
A. R. S. M.
tion   12x38   feet   for   kitchen.   Close   at   hand,  a
root-house 10x12 feet, was built in the side hill.
To blacksmith1 shop an addition 14x24 feet was
built, to hold a forge for sharpening steel for machine
drills, and a work bench for repairing the same.
Ore-sorting House: This was fitted up as a bunk
house, and accommodates about 15 men.
Shaft House: As No. 1 vein is not being worked
at the present time, part of this building, 30x16 feet,
has been lined and fitted up as a clothes drying room.
In it the miners change clothes on coming off shift.
MACHINERY AT MINE.
This consists of the following: One sixteen horsepower hoist; one sixteen horse-power boiler; two 3+
Rand machine drills; one 2f Rand machine drill.
The water used at the mine for boiler and domestic
purposes is supplied by a one-inch pipe, 2,250 feet
long, which runs on a 3 per cent: grade to a small
creek to the west. This pipe can supply about five
gallons per minute. The company owns a water right
on this creek, which is ample for such purposes.THE MINING RECORD.
139
BUILDINGS AT THE MILL.
The following buildings have been erected near the
mill since May 1st, 1898:
Office building, 42x38 feet, with a six foot verandah
at one end. This building contains the general office,
a draughting and balance room, a furnace room and
chemical laboratory, a crushing room, two sleeping
rooms, and a store room.
Manager's house, 40x30 feet, containing a storey
and a half.
Amalgamator's house, 22x24 feet.
Boarding house, 25x18 feet, two storeys high, with
sleeping rooms in second storey. It has also a six
foot verandah in front, and a 14x18 foot kitchen at the
back.
State room and ore-bin shed, 30x33 feet, with
freight platform.
Stable, 16x22 feet, built of logs, with feed room, 16
X17 feet, attached.
Athabasca Mine, Nelson, B.C., Jan. 15th, 1900.
H. W. MUSSEN.
DETAILS OF COST OF WAR EAGLE MINE
OPERATIONS.
(FROM GENERAL MANAGER'S REPORT.)
The figures show in detail: (a) The product of the
mine for year ending September 30th, '99, as well as
for October, November and December of last year;
(b) Table showing width of stopes and percentage of
pay area in main ore shoot December 31st, '99; (c)
Table showing production and grade of ore from each,
level up to December 31st, '99, from main ore shoot
only; (d) Comparative statement of work done and
TABI.E OF MINE  COSTS FOR TWELVE M
Developm
Cost
its cost per foot or ton from January 20th, '97, to' December 31st, '99; (e) Table of mine costs for twelve
months ending September 30th, '99.
TaBLE showing production a^d grade of ore from
each level up^to december 3ist, 1899.
From Main Ore Shoot Only.
Net Smelter's
Tonnage Gross.
Portion of Ore Shoot.              Pro- Assay
duced. Value,
Tons. Per Ton.
Block above level No. i    19,601 $24 52
Block above level No. 2  36,299 26 69
Block above level No. 3  31A32 16 67
Block above level No. 4    15,066 14 12
Block above level No. 5    15,004 15 68
Block above level No. 6     5>279 T7 19
Totals 122,681       $20 48
PRODUCT OF THE MINE FOR YEAR ENDING SEPTEMBER
30TII,   1899.
Tonnage  51,243
Smelter's gross assay value $834,882 92
Smelter's net value 508,562 03
Smelter's gross value per ton  16 28
Smelter's net value per ton  9 92
To this may be added figures showing product and
values for three months—October, November and
December of 1899:
Tonnage  22,693
Smelter's gross assay value $401,873 55
Smelter's net value 265.711 50
Smelter's gross value per ton  17 71
Smelter's net value per ton  n 71
ONTHS ENDING SEPTEMBER 30TH,   1899.
ent Work. Ore Extraction.
Per Foot Cost Per Ton
Sinki
Total number of feet	
Tons of ore stoped	
Drilling $
Tramming and shovelling	
Timbering	
Hoisting	
Smithing	
Ore sorting	
General labour	
Air  .  • -	
Candles and illuminating oil < • •
Lubricating oils and waste	
Explosives	
Drills and fittings	
Mine supplies	
Lumber expense	
Stable and teaming	
Assaying	
Surveying. .	
Electric lighting	
Salaries	
Office expense	
General expense -
ng Main
Shaft.
122*
Sinking Smal
Winzes. •
/
Raising.
417
4 22
9 72
S 18
74
10 04
7 32
95
75
5 25
1 71
1 61
74
1 19
54
90
74
4 07
38
1 10
Totals ;•  •• -;  *32 f
Ore stoped, 45,818 tons; met in development, 1
$21 00
5 00
4 86
1 10
2 11
3 10
2 44
54
19
3 49
83
46
38
45
80
09
■ I 35
42
38
$49 99
,671 tons; from
$14 01
4 06
3 16
15
1 88.
14
3 36
2 76
40
22
3 22
52
49
45
42
40
28
40
. 1 70
14
56
Drifting.
.18843
$ 8 45
3 10
07
20
1 21
2 39
1 55
27
14
1 87
26
35
32
•   28
19
18
28
1 21 .
08
38
Stoping.
45,8io
$i-53
$38 78 $22 78
dumps, 3,762 tons; total,
$3 95
51,243 tons.140
THE MINING RECORD.
A COMPARATIVE STATEMENT OF WORK DONE AND ITS COST PER FOOT OR TON TO DECEMBER 31ST, "99.
Jan. 20. '97, to
Sept. 30, '97.
Oct. 1, '97, to
Sept. 30. '98.
Oct. 1, '98, to
Sept. 30, '99.
Oct. 1, '99, to
Dec. 81, '99.
0," CO
M u
O   ■
O
0
11
Oh
cTco
15
CO
0
0
*3
0
P.O
CO 0   1
0 0
Ope,
i
a a
00
gjjy.
417
CO
O
O
O
a
0
3 (-
P.O
-*> -^
CO 0
00
00
»- O
10
0
O
a
0
<v u
P.O
to O
O O
Oil
Development Work.
General work, stations, retimbering, etc	
Drifting	
Raising	
Sinking—small shafts or winzes	
Sinking—main shaft	
...Feet.
...Feet
Feet.
...Feet.
' 2,303
421
$ 3,770 18
46,313 33
12,768 93
$20 11
30 33
1
...     $18,219 34
3,480    74,958 25
451 - 13,726 95
$21'54
30 33
$11,830 26
42,927 28
16,169 89
349 95
$22 78
38 77
49 99
'' 837
253
42
1,897 27
21,850 64
8,495 12
1,826 93
$26 10
33 51
43 50
175
16,150 3i
92 29
180 iijiai m
96 26
1221   16,283 05 132 92
70     6,897 51
98 54
Total development work	
Oee Extraction.
Ore from development work	
Ore from dumps, storage, eic	
. .Feet.
Tons.
2,899
2,596
$79,002 75
4,116 $124,743 54
2,430
1,670
$87,560 43
1,202 $40,967 47
1,894	
721 $    563 29
20,079.   77,074 18
22,694 $77,637 47
	
3.763
X .2.252 26 $ 0 60
$ 0 78
4 Sin
£15.634 94
$ 3 24
2 11
34
$10 67
2 11
12 78
26,559 $86,070 10
$ 8 24
2 98
$ 4 32
2 98
7 30
46.810  181.22* Oil   3 95
3 84
...Tons
51,243
51,243
51,243
51,243
1
3 58
$ 1 71
3 58
6 29
Total ore sold	
7,406
7,406
7,406
1 7'406
$15,634 94
$79,002 75
15,631 94
94,637 69
28.8751 $86,070 10
$183,476 27
$ 87,560 43
, 183,476 27
| 217,086 7C
3 42
StJMMARY.
Cost of development per ton of
Cost of ore extraction per ton of
Total cost of mining per ton of
ore sold,
ore sold
ore sold.
28,875
28,875
28.875
$124,743 53
1   86,070 10
210,813 63
22.694 $ 40,967 47
22,694    77,637 47
22,694  11B.604 94
$ 1 80
3 42
5 22
TABLE SHOWING WIDTH OF STOPES
AND PERCENTAGES
OF PAY AREA IN MAIN ORE SHOOT DECEMBER
3 ist
1899.
Area
Stoped
Avei age
of
Area in
Width
Portion of Ore Shoot.
Stopes
Percentag
e       of
Square
of Shoot
Stopes,
Feet.
Area.
Feet.
Block above level No. i.
•  37,850
78
5-2
Block above level No. 2.
.  45,000
66
8.1
Block above level No. 3.
■  38,480
56
8-3
Block above level No. 4.
-   17-500
42
8.9
Block above level No. 5.
.   12,270
37
13.2
Block above level No. 6.
.    9,280
J9
10.0
Note.—On levels 5 and 6 the stopes are still being
extended. The first four levels are about worked out.
so the percentages given below show the total pay
area. The stoped area in percentage of shoot area is
an approximation.
THE VAN ANDA COPPER AND GOLD CO.
In the general statement Mr. H. W. Treat, president and general manager of the company, reports:—
It was just one year ago when our enter-prise really
began in earnest. Being convinced that we had the
material for one or more mines, we proceeded, as far
as possible, to open the ground to make it productive.
We installed a machine drill at the Copper Queen,
piping the air three, quarters of a mile to the Cornell
to operate drills there as well. We purchased and
built a smelting and sampling plant complete which
began operation July 15, and has run continuously
except fifteen days which have been consumed from
time to time in repairs.
While pushing the development work on our various mines, we have created a town which already has
over one hundred buildings, housing a population of
over 400 people, have constructed or established good
dock and warehouses, saw-mill, logging camps and
lumber yard, general store and offices, post office,
school house and church, hospital, trestles, railway
tracks, roads, levels and appliances for the economic
handling of ores, products and materials; permanent
buildings at the mines, with machine, blacksmith and
carpenter shops; a printing office with plant. The installation of these necessary expensive permanent improvements has consumed more than our available
capital. The consequent floating liabilities are $195,"
643.95. Our profits will begin on lanuary.ist, 1900.
Ore reserves are increasing daily and our entire enterprise is now prosperous. In the meantime, in order
to prepare the company financially to withstand any
possible strike or accident to the smelter or mines, or
meet any demand from creditors or labourers, we
recommend that stockholders make another issue of
debenture bonds for the use and protection of the
treasury, if necessary.
The smelter returns from July to December, 1899,
are as follows:—
Total ore smelted July to December, 4,133 tons,
yielding 442,005 lbs. fine copper, 9,523 oz. fine silver,
1,440 oz. gold. Total value smelter products,
$99,484.03.
Deducting contents of 595 tons of ore purchased,
containing 82,563 lbs. copper, 224,682 oz. silver, 170,-
557 oz gold.   Value, $13,694.33.
Shows contents of 3,538 tons of Van Anda ores,
containing 359,442 lbs. copper, 7,276 oz. silver, 1,270
oz. gold.   Value, $85,789.70.
A value of $24.24 per ton of ore, containing 6.32
per cent, copper, 2.06 oz. silver, .486 oz. of gold.
This is a pretty good value for ore ordinarily, but
low for our ores, because of not producing sufficient
tonnage of first-class we were obliged to make up
amounts by adding second-class ores which brought
the average down.
At the annual meeting the shareholders voted to
issue 225 $1,000 6 per cent. 10-year gold bonds dated
February ist, interest payable annually, at the Bank
of B. N. A., Vancouver, B. C. Privilege reserved to
issue as few as practicable and to redeem any or all
bonds issued, on the first day of any month by payment of principal and interest to date. This $225,000
is in addition to $75,000 bonds already in existence.
The mine development work to February 20th,
1900, consists of, on Copper Queen:THE MINING RECORD.
141
teet with 250 feet of drifting on 100-foot level and connecting with the No. 2 shaft
No 2 Shaft—A double compartment vertical shaft
sunk to a depth of 418 feet, with levels run off as fol-
180-Foot Level—Developed by a drift west 43 feet
and east 20 feet. The faces of these drifts are in 3good
ore, which however, is not of the high value of the
lower levels. Development work on this and the 200
will be continued.
200-Foot Level.—East drift has been run out ^8
feet from the shaft and an upraise made to the 180-foot
level above. The face of this drift is in good ore and
continues m the face. The west drift has been'run
30 feet on the lime and felsyte contact, an upraise has
been made and this also is in good ore of a similar
grade to that in the east drift. In all 103 feet of drifting has been done on this level.
300-Foot Level.—This level has been developed by
a drift west 108 feet, a drift east 106 feet, a cross-cut
south 81 feet and a cross-cut north 88 feet. It is also
connected with the 200-foot level by a rise on the
vein, from which stopes are being run. The ore on
this level is a high grade bornite carrying high values
in copper, silver and gold, half stoped to the 200-foot
level, a distance of 75 feet.
400-Foot Level.—This level has been developed by
drifts west 127 feet and east 54 feet. An upraise is
being put up to the 300-foot level. The vein on the
level is strong and well defined, of high grade bornite
ore of great promise.
It is proposed to extend the drifts on the 200, 300
and 400-foot levels and to sink the vertical shaft to
a depth of 600 feet during the coming year, thus adding to the ore in sight and at the same time taking out
sufficient ore to supply the present furnace.
Ore shipments for 1899 to the smelter to January
ist, 2,020 tons.
Ore in Sight, Copper Queen.—Taking the ore chute
as being 100 feet long, 5 feet wide and 300 feet deep,
we have 16,600 tons at an estimated profit above all
expenses of mining, treating and marketing, at present prices of copper—16,500 tons at $15.00 per ton
net, $247,500.
The Cornell is developed with three tunnels and two
shafts:—
No. 1 Tunnel.—With 475 feet of drifts, bottom of
old workings in 20 feet of ore width, which will be extracted through' the No. 3 tunnel which has tapped
this ore body at a depth 30 feet lower.
Shaft No. 1.—Fifty-four feet deep in ore.
Tunnel No. 2.—With 400 feet of drifts in ore for
75 feet of an average width of eight feet.
Shaft No. 2.—Down 50 feet in ore, on the vein.
TUnhel No. 3.—With 468 feet of drifts; struck the
ore at 100 feet where it is 10 feet wide of high grade
ore, have drifted 90 feet in solid ore and upraised 40
at which point the ore is of the same grade and continuing up, an upraise has also been put through to
the No. 2 shaft. This shaft will be continued down to
the 200-foot level or deeper as may be deemed necessary during the year. The ore of this vein is for the
most part yellow copper pyrites in a contact between
felsyte and lime.
The surface improvements at the Cornell mine consist of blacksmith shop, timber shed, ore sorting
sheds, ore bins, ore screens, air receiver and air pipe
line, vertical boiler and pump supplying water to Cop
per Queen and Cornell, derrick and whim at No. 2
shaft and all the workings fully equipped with ore
cars and rails.
Cornell ore shipments to the smelter to January ist,
1,618 tons.
ORE IN SIGHT,  CORNELL.
Note.—In statement, March ist, 1899, we misled
ourselves because of believing that 1 and 2 workings
were both on the one ore chute continuing between
the shafts. Subsequent development has proved that
1 and 2 are on separate chutes not connected by ore,
which cuts down this year's estimates very considerably.
Ore body exposed by No. 1 shaft and No. 3 tunnel
is 30x10x100 feet, equals 3,333 tons.
(This does not include ore encountered in bottom
of No. 1 shaft because not developed.)
Ore body exposed by No. 2 shaft, No. 2 tunnel and
No. 3 tunnel 90x10x100 feet equals 10,000 tons.
Total exposed 13,333 tons. Figured at value net
profit above cost of mining, hauling, smelting and
marketing $15.00 per ton, equals $199,995.00 profit.
The Security property has been developed by 200
feet of open cuts, uncovering a strong magnetite iron,
carrying copper and gold traceable through the Florence, Yellow Jacket and Emily, a distance of one mile
into the Cornell. Also developed by a shaft 50 feet
deep, sunk on the vein and a small amount of drifting. The magnetite ore from this mine has been used
at the smelter for fluxing purposes. The mine is equipped with windlass, blacksmith shop, bunk house and
ore sorting benches and a good road to town. Considerable surface cross-cutting is being done on this
claim to locate the contracts running through this
section of the property with good results.
The Emily is prospected by an open cut run in on
the vein a distance of 60 feet; the ore is a galena, about
one foot wide. Eighteen tons were shipped to the
smelter.
The Little Billy property has been further developed during the year by the sinking of the shaft 95 feet
in depth. This is a contact vein between felsyte and
granite, the granite forming the foot wall. The vein
at the bottom of the shaft is seven feet wide, well mineralized with copper carrying some silver and gold,
of a concentrating grade. The ore occurring on "the
contact between the granite and felsyte is a high grade
chalcopyrite, but much scattered at present.
Little Billy ore shipments to smelter to January ist,
50 tons, carrying 16 per cent, copper.
The balance sheet and accounts, to which we have
referred elsewhere are appended:
BALANCE SHEET TO DECEMBER 3IST,  1899.
Receipts:—
Stock sales $54,667 18
Ore sales, previous to erection of smelter .. 13,650 79
Commission  4°9 T7
Transfer fees, etc  433 58
Boarding house profits  2,068 34
Rentals  226 69
Town lots sales  10,12850
Contract  3,000 00
Bonds  75.000 00
Bills payable  33,207 61
Unpaid Acounts:—
Due for labour     9,595 52
Sundry personal credits     4,79^ 04142
THE MINING RECORD.
Cash advanced by H. W. Treat  57,6o7 05
Merchandise accounts  7,018 33
Mine supplies  4,474 89
Logs  2,259 54
Legal expense accounts  536 05
Freight  i,377 41
Insurance, etc  371  51
Sawmill receipts 13,916 30
Merchandise receipts 39,953 2°
Advances on matte shipments 85,277 80
Profit and Loss 11,21736
$430>592 92
Disbursements:—
Furniture and fixtures $    528 65
Prospecting, roads, general and office expenses, freight, postage and telegraphing,
advertising, printing office, interest and
exchange, damage and legal expenses.. 32,417 63
Labour  162,038 97
Smelter and sampling works  48,905 23
Mine supplies and explosives  18,445 48
Buildings  8,232 92
Surveying  1,874 70
Poll tax (loss)  15 00
Horses (19)  2,055 00
Harness, etc  459 15
Treatment of ore previous to erection of
smelter   ..  . 8,600 71
Revenue Stamps  85 35
Bills receivable  3>°57 T4
Timber  571 50
Due on lots and buildings  17,645 06
Due on supplies  2,355 08
Advance on ore purchases  6,064 56
Open accounts  9,405 59
Discount on bond sales  9,670 00
Mining Machinery, equipment, tools, etc. . 23,995 76
Telephone  no 70
Maggie Lee mineral claim  961 93
Cordwobd  2,046 31
Sawmill plant, material and logs on hand. 17,918 30
Merchandise accounts and stock on hand. . 47,900 31
Cash on hand  .. 5.231 89
$430,592 92
Note.—(The above figures cover the receipts and
expenditures from April 1896, to December 31st,
1899. Such of these figures as can be will be consolidated into a profit and loss account. The balance will
be carried forward to separate the expenses for 1900.)
GENERAL STATEMENT, MARCH  IST,  I9OO.
(Approximate.)
Liabilities:—
Capital stock ; $5,000,000 00
Bonds, 1, 2, and 3 years  75'000 °°
Bonds, 10 years  225,000 00
Bills payable  40,000 00
Labour acounts  20,000 00
H. W. Treat, advanced  57,ooo 00
Merchandise and open accounts  10,000 00
Assets in excess of liabilities  360,500 00
$5,787,500 00
Assets:—
Mineral claims and lands $5,000,000 00
Smelter value        50,000 00
Townsite value  50,000 00
Sawmill cost, $5,000, deferred payment, s
$2,000      3,000 00
Machinery and tools  15,000 00
Buildings  io.oqp 00
Horses (19), waggons (7) and harness.. 2,000 00
Office furniture, safes, etc  5°° 00
Goods, material and stocks on hand . . 20,000 00
Timber,     estimated,    40,000,000    feet.,
special   license   subject   to   Government stumpage  2,000 00
Bonds, 225 at $1,000 each at 80  180,000 00
Net value of exposed ore in Cornell mine 200,000 00
Net value of exposed ore in the Copper
Queen mine  250.00000
Cash or hand  5,000.00
$5,787,500 00
The management announce that the present production of thirty tons of ore daily is sufficient "to carry
the expenses of the mines, smelter and development in
advance," and that "every additional ton of ore produced up to fifty tons per day will yield the company
a net profit of approximately $20 per ton." A production of fifty tons per diem is expected to be reached within six months.
COMPANY MEETINGS.
BRITISH   AMERICA   CORPORATION,   LIMITED.
HP HE first annual greneral meeting of the sharehold-
I ers of the British America Corporation. Limited,
was *held on Tuesday, at Winchester House. Old
Broad Street, E.C., the Most Hon. the Marouis of
Dufferin and Ava. K.P., G. C. B., G.C.M.G. (the
chairman) presiding".
Mr. W. B. Mitchell (secretary pro fan.) read the
notice convening the meeting.
The Chairman said: Ladies and Gentlemen:—You
are all well aware that this corporation Mas establish-
er as a pioneer or exploration companv to operate in
a recently discovered gold-bearing territory in the
neighbourhood of the Western coasts of the Dominion of Canada. It is no doubt within the knowledge
of all present that many successful gold mining enterprises have been for some years carried on in South
Africa, Western Australia, and elsewhere by companies whose character and obiects are similar to our
own. When, therefore, on the formation oif this
corporation I was requested to act as chairman, I accepted that responsible position for two reasons—first,
because from the inquiries I instituted I came to the
conclusion that British Columbia offered a promising
and remunerative field for the gold mining industries
in which we proposed to ensrap-e, and further inducement was the hope that, at the same time that we
should be inaugurating- a profitable business for our
shareholders, our exertions would also prove a
source of prosperity, not only to the Dominion generally, but to a province to which I had become attached bv peculiar and especial ties dnrinp- mv term
of office in Canada (Hear, hear.) Nor in alluding to
Canada even on the occasion of such an tinny-antic
meeting as the present can T refrain from adding- mv
tribute of admiration to the soirit of loval devotion.
which has induced that great country to despatch
across the Atlantic those noble battalions of gallantTHE MINING RECORD.
143
soldiers who are risking their lives and shedding their
blood,    as    some    of   them   have   already    done,
in the cause of their Queen and in defence of the integrity of our common Empire.    (Loud applause.)
Nor can I refrain from congratulating ourselves and
all those present on the satisfactory news which has
reached this country this morning of the surrender of
General Cronje—(applause)—and all his munitions of
war, his guns and his appurtenances.    (Applause.)
And it is a singular coincidence that this remarkable
event should have occurred on the anniversary of Ma-
juba, 19 years ago.   (Applause.)   To return, however,
to the business immediately before us, I am happy to
say that, though we are but a young company, our
initial efforts have been crowned with a fair degree cf
success, and we have reached a dividend-paying stage
in our career at an earlier date than is generally the
case in pioneer companies such as ours.   As I explained to you at our statutory meeting, our operations
were intended to be carried on in two distinct areas—
one situated in the territory of the Yukon, and the
other in Rossland and its neighbourhood, in the province of British Columbia.   As you will have gathered
from the report, however, our trading undertakings
in the Yukon have not been satisfactory.    On the
other hand, the result of our operations in British
Columbia have proved of a very gratifying character,
and more than make up for the disappointment we
have experienced in the Yukon.    It will be in the
recollection of many of those who are now present
that I impressed upon the shareholders at our statutory meeting that this corporation did not depend for
its future, to any predominant degree, on the outcome
of the Yukon territory, rich as it was reported to be,
and that all our contracts relating to any of the Yukon
mining properties which were being offered to us
would  be taken  subject to the  condition  that  we
should have the right to examine and test them by
our representatives before taking them over.   Warned
by the doubtful character of our initial efforts, we
thought it advisable to proceed with extreme caution,
and in this way we have escaped being entangled in
any very considerable expenditure either by the acquisition of disappointing options or by the initiation
of expensive works and establishments.    The same
cautious policy presided over the trading portion of
our business, for we found that, owing to the nomadic
character of the population, the severity of the climate
and the difficulties of transport and of communication with our agents, it would be inadvisable to risk,
prematurely, any considerable amount of your capital
in what   might prove   a   less promising    enterprise
than we had anticipated.    As time went on and as
opportunities were afforded us of testing—I will not
say the resources of the country, for they are   undoubtedly very considerable—but the prospect of deriving any substantial benefit from their development,
we began to entertain doubts as to whether the Yukon was, after all, the best field that could be selected
for the employment of your capital, and when eventually these doubts resulted in the conviction that the
further prosecution of the enterprise we had initiated
might prove disadvantageous, we decided to abandon
the Yukon as a locality for the application of our
energiis.    As is always the case, the closing of our
business in that part of the world has not been effected Sout a considerable loss.    This, together with
the estimated depreciation on our steamers and other
property, has amounted to very nearly £30,000.   The
whole of this sum has been written off, at the same
time that a reserve of £20,000 has been set aside to
provide for any further loss which may occur in such
of our Yukon assets as have not yet been realized.
There is, however, one redeeming feature in connection with this branch of the subject, and that is our
acquisition of certain copper properties, in respect of
which we have received very encouraging reports.
These properties are not situated in what may be called the Yukon proper, but are much further to the
south and nearer to the British Columbia boundary.
Including the claims we own and those on which we
have options for one year, payable in shares, the total
area of this copper property is,  roughly speaking,
more than five square miles, or considerably over
3,000 acres, and comprises 21 concessions.   Our manager on the spot considers it an undertaking of great
magnitude and promise, and he reports that native.
copper has been found in large quantities.   If his expectations    are realized, the property   in    question
should prove a source of great value to this corporation.   To turn, however, to that part of the subject
with which we are more particularly concerned at the
present meeting—namely, our operations in British
Columbia—I am happy to be able to state that the
expectations we held out to you  at our statutory
meeting have been satisfactorily realized.    We have
already begun to develop, and have formed into several groups a large number of properties at Rossland.
which, in the opinion of our experts, in whose scientific knowledge and experience we have every confidence, are amongst the most valuable in the whole of
that neighbourhood.    It would only weary you  to
describe the thousands of feet of development work
that have been carried on in various directions, and
the large amount of machinery that has been erected
to operate the mines in question.   Suffice it to say that
these mines will soon speak for themselves in the extent of their output and profit.   Since the formation of
the corporation we have acquired and formed into a
separate company the well-known Le Roi mine; and,
as many of you are probably shareholders in that
property, I may state that it is developing in a very
satisfactory manner, and gives every promise of continuing to pay substantial dividends for a long time
to come.   Since the formation of the Le Roi Company special attention has been given to placing the
mine in a sound position by retimbering, sinking new
shafts, erecting powerful machinery, and generally
preparing for a much larger output.   This was rendered all the more necessary in consequence of its
previous owners having pursued a very unscientific
and reckless method of distributing and dealing with
its workings.    But valuable as is the Le Roi mine,
you will be pleased to learn that, according to the
last accounts we have received, it would appear that
we own a mine which may probably prove more valuable even than the Le Roi, and a third mine of, perhaps, equal worth, and should further explorations
continue to confirm the sanguine views of our representatives on the spot, none of us need, I think, regret
having chosen British Columbia as a field for our
exertions.    (Applause.)    In regard   to the   balance
sheet, it is so clear that I do not see that the separate
items require much comment at my hands.   I have,
however, the satisfaction of drawing your attention to
the fact that the entire sum of £250,000 paid in options, concessions, etc., at the inception of the corporation, together with a sum of £16,451 3s. 2d., consti-144
THE MINING RECORD.
tuting the preliminary expenses of establishing the
company, have been written off in full, instead of being spread over a term of years as is usual in companies of this character. (Applause.) But for this the
profits would have assumed larger proportions. As it
is, the balance to the credit of the profit and loss account is £225,994 4s. id., which I hope you will consider a not unsatisfactory announcement. (Applause.)
Out of the available profits to be dealt with at the
present time, your directors recommend that a dividend of 10 per cent., free of income tax, be declared,
payable on the 27th proximo, to shareholders on the
register this day. This dividend will absorb a sum of
£150,000, leaving a balance of £75,994, 4s. id., which
we propose to carry forward to the next account. In
conclusion, I think I may congratulate the shareholders on the position thus far achieved; and I hope that
in future we shall always be able to give an equally
good account of our stewardship. I have pleasure
in proposing that the report and accounts be received
and adopted, and that the dividend recommended be
and is hereby declared.   (Applause.)
Mr. Whitaker Wright—I have much pleasure in
seconding the motion, and if any shareholder desires
to ask me any questions in my capacity as managing
director, I shall be pleased to answer them before the
chairman puts the motion to the meeting.
Mr. Lionel Harris said he would like to ask what
shares were included in the sum of £1,382,503 mentioned in the balance sheet. He thought a little more
information might have been vouchsafed with regard
to the development of the properties in Rossland, and
also the copper properties.
Mr. Whitaker Wright—In the report you wi-llfind
that there is a clause referring to the most satisfactory development of the properties in the Rossland
district, and it is quite possible that in the near future
we may have to call you together again as to what we
shall have to do with regard to those properties, because they are opening up beyond our most sanguine
expectations. We have had one or two experts out
there, and our consulting engineer, recently came to
London to report to us in detail and he assured us
that one of our mines there exceeds the value of the
Le Roi, and we have yet another, equal to the Le Roi,
in addition to our copper properties and other claims.
We will send to the shareholders in due course a
printed report in regard to all these properties. It is
not expedient to say at this moment how we propose
to aggregate those mines, and if you are called together, you may expect that you will receive satisfactory profits on the par value of the shares in the company which you hold at the present moment. As to
the Le Roi, the last telegram we had from the manager states that developments have taken place in an
entirely new direction towards the Black Bear tunnel.
On the 500-foot level, we have opened up a large body
of high grade ore, all samples giving an average of
one ounce of gold and upwards per ton of 2,000 lbs.,
and 4-J per cent, of copper. All the returns we have
had from the Le Roi have been half an ounce of gold
per ton, so that telegram is very satisfactory. The
other properties to which we have referred are opening in the same gratifying manner, and we have good
reason to be thoroughly satisfied with the soundness
of our position there.
The resolution that the reports and accounts be
received and adopted was carried unanimously.
The Right Hon. Lord Loch, G.C.B., G.C.M.G.—I
have great pleasure in proposing the re-election of
Lord Dufferin as a director of this company. (Applause.) It requires, I am sure, no words from me to
ensure the unanimous voice of this meeting as to his
re-election. He devotes much time, much care and
ability, as we all know, to the work which you have
entrusted to his charge.    (Applause.)
Dr. Dugdale—It affords me equal pleasure to second this resolution. We all know that the name of the
Marquis of Dufferin is a tower of strength to this
important and successful organization.    (Hear, hear.)
The resolution was then put and carried unanimously.
The Chairman—I am deeply sensible to the honour
you have conferred upon me in allowing me still to
continue a member of your board of directors, and
can assure you that I shall always do my very best to
promote your interests in every way in my power.
I cannot sit down without thanking the seconder of
the proposition for the kind and sympathetic terms in
which he has alluded to the loss which has been recently sustained by Lady Dufferin and myself. (Applause.)
Mr. A. J. Harrison then proposed the re-appointment of the auditors, Messrs. Ford, Rhodes and Ford,
at the same fee as before.
Mr. Hampton seconded the motion, which was
agreed to, and the proceedings terminated with a vote
of thanks to the chairman and directors.
I BAUXITE " OR " BEAUXITE."
(By W. P. Best.)
"T HIS interesting mineral, which is used almost ex-
1 clusively in the manufacture of the metal aluminum, desires its name from the town of Beaux or Baux
near Aries in France. The mineral found at that
point is in the form of small rounded granules, disseminated through limestone.
There are a number of other districts where this
mineral is found in considerable quantity, notably in
the vicinity of Toulon, France in general and in Virginia and other parts of the Southern States. It generally exists in the form of concoetionary grains about
the size of "duck shot" sprinkled" through limestone
or clay. Sometimes Bauxite is earthy or clay like,
and its color varied from grayish to yellow and sometimes brown or reddish. The light colored varieties
are generally free from gran, and most suitable for the
manufacture of aluminum.
The chemical composition varies from alumina 50,
iesqui-oxide of gran 25, water 25, to alumina 75, and
water 25.
The increasing economical importance of the metal
aluminum has directed the attention of miners and
others to Bauxite, and the United States deposits are
being extensively developed.
Most of the Virginia Bauxite is sent to Niagara
Falls, where an extensive plant for the manufacture
of aluminum has been established. British Columbia
miners should be on the lookout for this mineral.THE MINING RECORD.
i45
A ROSSLAND PROMOTER.
r\ NE of the mining promoters in British Columbia
v^ who has brought to bear on his work perseverance as well as experience is Mr. S. Thornton Langley
of Rossland, whose photograph is reproduced this
month. 'In his line of business, Mr. Langley occupies a prominent position. Born in Belfast, Ireland,
in the sixties. Mr. Langley received his early education there, where he also obtained his business training, which was supplemented by subsequent business
experience in Liverpool, England. Mr. Langley left
the latter city in 1888 and went to San Francisco,
California, to 1 epresent the interests of his Liverpool
firm. There he became interested in
gold mining which
in the Golden
State has for years
occupied a large
share of attention
with all classes.
In March, 1S95,
Mr. Langley came
to Rossland, since
which time he has
been actively engaged in promoting mining enterprises, one of his
most recent undertakings being" the
the Okanagan Free
Gold Mines, which
paid a d i | •-
dend of five per
cent on the capital
stock in October
last.
Mr. Langley resigned his position
as director of the
Okanagan in October, 1899, for the
purpose of engaging more actively
in the management of the Kettle
River Mines, Ltd.,
which owns a
promising property near the Pathfinder Mines in
Grand Forks mining division.
Associated with
him in this enter-
MR. S. THORNTON LANGLEY.
prise are Mr. Frank D. Howe, a mining engineer of
ability and wide experience in the West, and some
other gentlemen who are pioneers in Trail Creek .
Mr. Langley, though he entered the mining field of
Trail Creek with a limited amount of capital, has done
much in the promotion of legitimate enterprises in
this field.
T
THE MONTH'S MINING.
CAMP M'KINNEY.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
HE Cariboo, of Camp McKinney, still holds its
own as the most consistent gold producer in the
province.   Since April, 1894, or for nearly six years,
this mine and mill have been continuously working,
producing over $100,000 a year, and to-day at the 400-
foot level, is to be seen one of the finest bodies of ore
ever uncovered in the mine, and as one
a good     of the management remarked, the old
outlook.    Cariboo never looked better than at the
present time.    The work is now more
particularly confined to the eastern end of the company's property, on the Okanagan claim, where the
vein is over four feet wide and remarkably well mineralized.
On the Sailor claim, some 2,000 feet west of the
Cariboo on the
same vein, a rich
body of ore, identical with Cariboo ore, was
struck in the 75-
foot level, the vein
being 51^ feet wide
with 30 inches of
pay ore. This strike
has caused quite a
ripple of excitement in camp,
proving the value
and continuity of
the Cariboo vein
west of that company's property,
and giving
. assurance of future
prosperity.
Like the Cariboo, the Sailor is
owned principally
in Toronto, and it
is most gratifying
that the Toronto
people should meet
with success in our
camp, for they
have invested their
money freely,
equipping the properties with the
latest improved
machinery and
sparing no expense in making a
thorough investigation.
The Waterloo
mill is not running
at the time of
writing, though the development of the mine continues, the west drift being pushed towards the Fontenoy at the 60-foot level, where some good ore has
been encountered. There is a rumour in camp that
the Fontenoy and Waterloo are about to consolidate,
when the Waterloo mill will be increased to ten
stamps and the main shaft sunk another 100 feet.
The Minne-ha-ha has temporarily suspended operations, pending an examination to determine the further development of the property.
The Gold Standard (Lemon & Co., Omaha,; will
have its mill running in a few days, the very fine146
THE MINING RECORD.
weather having permitted work to proceed uninterruptedly during the winter.
The big bond on the Dayton, where the rich surface strike was made this winter, has fallen through,
but the owners, nothing discouraged, have continued
sinking the inclined shaft, and with the most encouraging results, so much so, that it is doubtful if the
former terms would be accepted. This property is
situated between the forks of Rock Creek, some four
miles east of the Cariboo in a rich mineral section,
and where there are quite a number of locations with
good showings.
The sale by the sheriff of the Camp McKinney
Gold Mining Company's properties, the Granite and
Banner, should in no way affect the prosperity of the
camp, as the operations of the company have been
lcoked 'upon with more or less suspicion ever since
the work commenced, not a dollar's \,orth of the
stock being held in the camp. There are still conflicting opinions as to the value of the properties, but
only one opinion as to the management.
Quite a building boom has started in the camp,
encouraged by ! the bright prospects and bright
weather. On Cariboo Avenue, Messrs. Rose & Mc-
Auley are erecting a very handsome and commodious
hotel, a very desirable addition to the camp. On the
same avenue is Dr. White's residence, a restaurant
and chop house, and a billiard hall. On Sailor Avenue, in addition to Major Megraw s residence, the
Sailor hotel, and several private houses, a spacious
entertainment hall with club room attached has been
just completed.
FAIRVIEW  CAMP.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
The Dominion Consolidated Mines, Ltd., is steadily pushing development work on the centre ledge
which runs through the entire length of the company's three claims. Some time ago a six-drill compressor plant was installed on this property and is
now in full working order. The ledge runs up a fairly
steep mountain side and consequently gives exceptionally good facilities for economical tunnel development. The tunnel has been started
the dominion near the lower .boundary of the
consolidated. Flora claim and is now in about
290 feet, giving a depth from the
surface of a little more than 100 feet. As this tunnel
is being run along the ledge no dead work is necessary in the development of the claims and the further the work is pushed the better the values seem to
be. From the time of commencing the tunnel to the
present the average value of sampLs taken across the
face of the drift has been from six to ten dollars per
ton and samples across the ledge recently taken by
the representative of some prospective English investors realized the average value of $9.28 per ton at
a width of eight feet. As this is a free milling proposition susceptible of such economical development
and in control of water power more than sufficient for
all the mechanical requirements of the mine, it
would appear that there is a splendid future before
this company, at least this is your correspondent's
opinion.
boundary creek.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
Mining matters in  the Boundary   Creek   district,
though not nearly so active as it was anticipated they
would be following the opening of the' railway, are
still exhibiting progress on the whole. There is,
however, a decided general dullness in business in the towns notwithstanding the
the        assertions to the contrary of those who
outlook, are whistling to keep their courage up.
There is but little ore going out of the
district apart from the 1,500 to 2,000 tons the B. C.
mine is reported to have shipped to date. Possibly
there will be an improvement in this direction after
the completion of the several spur lines to mines. On
the other hand there appears to be a growing feeling
that mine owners will more and more favour local
treatment in preference to shipping to a distant
smelter.
The Old Ironsides, Knob Hill and Victoria group
are still doing most work in Phoenix Camp. The Winnipeg is idle in Wellington Camp, but its neighbour,
the Golden Crown, is proceeding with development
so as to later be in shape to maintain a regular output.
Work is being resumed on the Athelstan, also in Wellington Camp. The B. C. and Oro Denoro are both
at work in Summit Camp. The former has lately
received additional plant and the stockholders in the
company owning the latter are to be asked on April
5th to authorize the borrowing of $15,000 for the purchase of more plant. The Jewel, in Long Lake Camp,
has received a compressor plant and information is being sought relative to the most suitable reduction process for its gold ore. The big plant for the Sunset in
Deadwood Camp, consisting of two 80- horse-power
boilers, half of a' 20-drill compressor, an 80-horse-
power hoist, and a Northey station pump, is now in
working order. The equipment also includes a full
equipment of ore cars, a water heater, two large receivers and an ample supply of air fittings. The
Buckhorn, in the same camp, is still prospecting its
ground down to the 200-foot level. The City of Paris,
in Central Camp, is now sending out ore by waggon
to the Granby smelter at Grand Forks. There are
numbers of other claims upon which development
work is being done, but the foregoing summary takes
in a majority of the most prominent mining properties
now being operated in the district.
The Mother Lode, in Deadwood Camp, is again
compelling attention.
On March 9th the British Columbia Copper Co.
signed at its head office, New York, a contract to purchase from the Jas. Cooper Manufacturing Co., Ltd.,
of Montreal, Que., the largest compressor, boiler and
drilling plant yet ordered for the Boundary country.
The further statement has been made
a big order that there is none larger now in oper-
for        ation in Canada, but whether this he
machinery, true or not there is no doubt that the
directors of the British Columbia Copper Co. have, in ordering this additional plant after
nearly four years' systematic prospecting of their
Mother Lode property, given practical proof of their
conviction that the company owns a mine that is full
of promise for permanent and profitable operation. It
is nearly two years since the company purchased from
the Jas. Cooper Manufacturing Co. the following
plant and equipment: Two 60-horse-power boilers,
with feed water heater, pumps, etc., one 10-drill In-
gersoll-Sergeant air compressor, with complement of
machine drills, hose, etc., station, and sinking pumps,
and pump for water supply, an Edison electric light
plant, a Lidgerwood hoisting engine, 30-inch drum, aTHE MINING RECORD.
M7
IS"r?"ie °r mu°re °f pipes> and a11 requisite cars, buckets, rails, machine and hand tools, etc    Later two aux-
Co^and ouhr6 °btifnCd fr°m the SSE IIS
Co., and quite recently a cage, supplied by the Wm
Hamilton Manufacturing Co., wis received. Wift
the foregoing plant the mine has been opened up by a
two-compartment vertical shaft sunk to a depth of
325 feet and by about 2,000 feet of underground work-
in drifts, cross-cuts, stations, winzes and upraise Adding the cross-cutting, etc., done prior to the purchase
of the power plant, the underground work done totals
about 2,710 feet.
With this much work to its credit and with results
in ore bodies exposed that appear to amply warrant
the preparation for operations on a much larger scale
the  following   Ingersoll-Sergeant   condensing plant
has been ordered: A cross compound Corliss condensing air compressor,  with compounded air end and
receiver mtercooler, the high and low-pressure steam
cylinders to be 22-inch and 40-inch diameter respectively, the air cylinders to be of the piston inlet type,
high and low pressure, 19^ inch and 32^ inch respectively and 48 inch stroke, the machine to have a capacity of 30 to 40 drills, and to weigh 166,000 lbs; two
66x16 horizontal return    tubular boilers, each  100-
horse-power for 125 lbs, working pressure, and to have
horizontal smoke connection and one stack; a 54x12
air receiver; a feed water heater of sufficient capacitv
for 350-horse-power    boilers;    ten E 24 drills; two
double-screw and ten single-screw columns with arm
and clamp; two iron safety platform cages with safety
device and shield roof; two six-foot sheave wheels;
1,500 feet of 1 j inch wire rope, and six steel ore cars
with McCaskell wheels and axles.    Delivery of this
plant is contracted to be made within three months.
It may be here remarked that the compressor is to
be fitted with every device known to mechanical engineering for the economical production of power.
A new hoist is also to be obtained of a capacity sufficient to work the mine down to a depth of 1,500 feet.
This has not yet been ordered, but will be shortly.
Meanwhile a site for it north of the shaft is being
blasted out so that there need be no delay in putting
it in position after it shall have been received.    The
site chosen for the new compressor plant is on Mother
Lode Creek about 150 feet below the level of that on
which the machinery now in use stands.    Economic
considerations have influenced the choice of this lower
site, the adoption of which will render it unnecessary
to so enlarge the main shaft down to the 200-foot
level as to provide room for a third compartment in
which to place compressed air and steam pipes.   As
both existing compartments will ere long be required
for the two cages that are to be installed it has been
decided to run a tunnel from the present 200-foot level
of the mine out to the creek, a distance of about 500
feet.    A cross-cut has already been driven 100 feet
towards the creek, so this can be extended and be
made to serve the purpose.    As the rock formation
will in about 150 feet farther give place to wash ihe
tunnel will cost far less than would the work of enlarging the main shaft.    Then there are additional
advantages   in that   the tunnel   will drain   the mine
workings down to the 200-foot level and so obviate
pumping above that level, and give increased ventilation, as well as provide a passage way for compressed air and steam pipes to the 200-foot level.
As to work now in progress in the mine—the cage
is now about ready for work, so with better hoisting
facilities available drifting and cross-cutting at the 200-
foot level has been resumed. The face of the drift is
600 feet north of the shaft. There are several crosscuts, the latest vein being 154 feet from end to end
passing through an ore body 95 feet in width, 80 feet
being good ore. Cross-cutting at intervals along this
north drift, whcih has been in ore—much of it of good
grade all the way from the shaft, will give a number of
faces and stopes from which to mine ore for the
Mother Lode smelter, now in course of construction.
Drifting north at the 300 foot level is also to be undertaken and when this drift shall have been advanced
about 300 feet an upraise to the 200-foot level will be
made for ventilation. Later the main shaft will be
deepened to the 400-foot level, but this work will not
be undertaken until after that mentioned above shall
have been got well in hand.
rossland.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
The mining situation here during the suspension of
operations is gradually undergoing the process of evolution, if not revolution. A new system of work will,
in all probability, succeed the one which has not been
able to prevail. A change has been asked for and it is
coming along the lines of the central system.
It is much to be regretted that here as elsewhere
those that are pretending to be the workingman's
friend are the most indiscreet and are carrying their
likes and dislikes too far. A new element has entered
into politics—the Canadian populist is here posing as
the friend of the workingman and the enemy to capital. In spite of this matters are shaping themselves
in the direction of industrial effort and order will
shortly be evolved out of chaos.
In a period of depression and gloomy forebodings
it may be worth knowing that the preparations for an
out-turn of ore continues to be made on an extensive
scale.   The new War Eagle hoist which was manufactured in Akron, Ohio, by the Webster, Camp &
Lane Co. is  now installed.    The old  electric hoist
about which there has been so much trouble is discarded, and remains where it was
placed until, I suppose, the litigation concerning it is settled.    The
new hoist is to be worked by steam.
It is 200 h. p. with" a double drum,
latest post brakes and bond friction and is so constructed that if the skip were to break away it would be
stopped by automatic brakes which would be put into
action by the unusual speed of the skip.   The new ore
cars have a capacity of two and a-half tons each and
the hoist running for the full twenty-four hours a day
could give a daily output of 720 tons, but this quantity
represents the maximum.   No doubt 500 tons per day
can be easily obtained.   In other directions there are
many evidences of what is to be done in the near future.   A mine may be compared with a great ocean
steamer that must occasionally be overhauled for repairs.
On the surface of the War Eagle and Centre Star
the preparations for the future best indicates what is
coming. Thus the folly of expecting a long discontinuance of work is made apparent.
So far the output of the mines, say for the first three
months of the present year amount to about 32,000
tons, valued at about $575,000 gross.
The other morning at the 460-foot level while cutting out a station a body of high grade ore was en-
preparations
for future
activity.148
THE MINING RECORD.
countered which is said on good authority to assay
ij unces of gold to the ton and about 7 per cent, copper. Some large pieces of this ore have been brought
up from the mine, and altogether about ten tons have
been placed on the dump. The ore is evidently from
one of the main veins of the camp, a vein which runs
southeast and northwest. This is evident enough
judging from the size and quantity of the pieces
abstracted from the ledge. So far there have been cut
two and a-half feet of this solid ore and I am credibly
informed that the point where this was cut is the
lowest in the camp measured from the surface. Mr.
William S. Harkens is the superintendent, and there
is much satisfaction in the division on this account.
Mr. Harkens is one of the best liked, and most efficient
superintendents in the country. The strike itself is the
best ever made in the Nickel Plate, which is the property of the British America Corporation.
The Le Roi so far has shipped about 12,400 tons,
the War Eagle 10,600, Centre Star 7,000, Iron Mask
1,434, Evening Star 189, I. X. L. 273 and Monte
Cristo 40.
The announcement of a further dividend of $750,000
by the Le Roi management in England has come
opportunely. Spring is now. here and the present
mining situation has begun to show material improvement, so that when my next report is made I hope to
be able to show the facts and figures of a general and
substantial advance.
SLOCAN.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
The one item of the month which naturally overshadows all else is the joyous and far-reaching statement that the labour difficulty is at an end—permanently we venture to hope—and that a general resumption of work underground has taken place. Little remains to be said on this score that cannot readily be
conjectured by the intelligent reader, for unfailing
signs of coming prosperity are everywhere commencing to put in an appearance. Mines long deserted
and idle are resuming their wonted
A attitude of energy   and   bustle,  and
resumption buildings which have lain silent and
of work, unoccupied for many moons resound
once more to the unharmonious
clanging of the blacksmith's hammer and the welcome
noise of ore-sorters at their work. Altogether the old
French proverb "apres la pluie, le beau temps" bids
fair to be exemplified once more. True, the minds of
the populace have been occupied to some extent with
the news of the "relief of Ladysmith," the gallant doings of Canadian contingents and other items from
the seat of war, and incidentally we have indulged in a
mild excitement of our own derived from a more or
less exaggerated small-pox scare, but to the professional, business and working man alike these—notwithstanding their evident importance—appear as
mere side issues, absolutely nothing sufficing to ruffle
the complacence with which he has learned in the last
few weeks to view the world, save perhaps the ominous clouds on the political horizon. In the ■ lightness
of his heart even these are not taken seriously, and the
fact that minor (no joke intended) troubles of a like
nature are being experienced in the district arouiidj
Nelson, Rossland and Boundary, serves only to increase his thankfulness for the period of activity attained at last.   I voice the unanimous sentiment of the
miners, mine operators and business men generally in
expressing the hope that a lasting and final settlement
has been reached which will allow the district to progress at its worth, and that it will be long are a disaster of this character again threatens. The effect of
mutual forbearance and concession is seen in the fact
that no ill-feeling has been engendered, each of the
contestants recognizing" that the other necessarily had
rights as well as wrongs in the matter of a struggle
thus thrust upon them. Like two nations who have
expended their resources in the futile art of war, we
in the Slocan long now, one and all, for peace accompanied by its glorious economic and industrial conquests. That the strike is at an end would be self-
evident to the most casual visitor, but it is perhaps
more markedly displayed in a statistical way as shown
in the columns of the newspapers. While the ore
shipments in the latter half of 1899 totalled only 4,300
tons, over half of that amount has left the district in
the first month of the resumption of operations. This
might in some quarters be regarded as the result of
accumulation, but there is evidence to show that shipments in the ensuing months will likely exceed this
figure to a considerable extent. The majority of the
mines were not in condition to employ forces on the
start, and in addition, the season when the roads are
breaking up is obviously very unfavourable for getting
down ore. The list of shippers so far includes only
fifteen names and several of these figure almost for
the first time, so that many of the best known mines
are yet to be heard from. The Payne, apparently unwilling to relinquish its hold to the title of the richest
mine in the district has started off well, being" credited
with over half the production to date, consequently
we are not surprised to see the stock of this company
in the ascendant. None of the other mines have made
any conspicuous move as yet, and are hardlv expected
to, of course, until the roads are in better condition.
On account of the early spring we are anticipating a
good season for prospectors, the annual exodus this
year being billed in advance for the Kettle River district situate between Arrow Lake and Vernon. Reports of rich finds, though conflicting and subject to
a liberal discount, are still good enough to warrant
investigation at least, and many are waiting only for
the snow to vanish before venturing there on business.
Lists of casualties are not confined to South Africa
by any means, the yearly recurrence of snow and mud
slides attended with fatal consequences reminding us
of the precarious nature of the miners' calling. It
would appear also from the accident which occurred at Sandon through part of the bank above the
town giving way, that the danger is shared to some
extent by all who live in the mountains.. Two men
killed by the Noble Five slide, and one killed and
several injured as a result of the Sandon catastrophe
is the record for the past week, added to which a solitary worker at the Silver Bell, Kaslo Creek, lost his
life through a fall of rock doubtless occasioned by the
thaw, and a miner from the Enterprise lies dead from
the effects of an unexpected explosion.
It is gratifying to record that most of the ore leaving
the Slocan is now consigned to Trail in place of the
American smelters. So long as the management continues to give satisfaction it is matter for mutual congratulation, for at present they certainly appear to
have the advantage over their competitors in being
able.to pay on the London price with certain.deductions, thereby netting more for the shippers on theTHE MINING RECORD.
149
lead contents of the ore than could he done on the
nitherto existing arrangement.
Zinc ore comparatively free from lead, mined at the
.Bosun, continues to find a profitable market in Belgium, and so well known has this become that other
mine owners are contemplating following suit. The
new concentrator at the Wakefield which was run
successfully for a few days not long since and will
soon be in continuous operation is especially adapted
for saving this product which will no doubt prove a
source of considerable revenue.
The signs of an all-round revival in interest in this
section are numerous and varied. But few vacant
houses are now to be seen, and judging from the number of applications for naturalization papers which are
being received, many evidently find it to their advantage to settle here permanently. Bonds and options
are again spoken of, in whispers, of course, the Mollie
Hughes, Lost Tiger, Monitor and Mountain Chief
being each in receipt of attention from prospective
purchasers. That old familiar cry of waggon roads,
as indicating the necessity for their construction is
again being heard with respect to the properties on
Silver Mountain, and there is every likelihood of its
being constructed during the coming summer.
PRODUCING MINES.
TEXADA island.
THE following returns of smelter operations are
published in the annual report of the Van Anda
Copper and Gold Company:—
JANUARY.
Receipts—
Matte sales $18,637 61
Store     5,904 17
Lot        236 00
Wharf         55 00
Rentals        102 75
Total  $24,929 53
Disbursements—
Labour $12,874 75
Material and Repairs     4,980 99
Freights     2,50000
Interest and discount        55° °°
Total  $20,905 74
Profit for month •' • • • •    4,023 79
January ore hauled to smelter 619 tons
FEBRUARY  (ROUGHLY.)
Receipts—
Matte sales $17-285 64
Store     5-241 93
L0ts         200 00
Wharf  50 00
Rentals        I02 75      00
Total  $22'88o 32
Disbursements—
Labour $12,375 36
Materials and repairs     4,841 85
Freights     2,10000
Interest and discount  ..   .. 7°° °°^
Total  ?2°'^7 21
Profit for month     2>8b3 «
February ore hauled to the smelter 749 tons
Note—March will get credit for a ton of bullion
accumulated during January and February and really
belonging to the credits of those months although
shipped in March, value about $2,500.00.
NELSON.
The following are the results of the operations of the
Hall Mines smelter during January:
Copper smelting 8 days 11 hours, 1,803 tons of Silver King ore from the company's mine and 700 tons of
purchased ore were smelted, containing (approximately)—Silver King ore, 30 tons copper, 17,403.
ounces silver; purchased ore, 9 tons copper, 5,770
ounces silver, 34 ounces gold. Lead smelting, 29
days 1 hour, 741 tons of purchased ore were smelted,
together with 128 tons of Silver King ore from the
company's mine, from which were produced 164 tons
of bullion, containing (approximately) from Silver
King ore, 1,700 ounces silver; from purchased ore,
etc., 159 tons lead, 25,820 oz. silver and 146 oz. gold.
The returns of the Athabasca mill for February are
appended:
Mill run, 27 days and 14 hours.
Number of tons crushed, 347.
Value of bullion recovered, $9,544.59.
Gross value of concentrates recovered, $1,767.50.
Total values recovered, $11,312.09.
Total values recovered per ton of ore crushed,
$32.60.
The mine exports for the month of February from
the port of Nelson were as follows: Lead bullion,
$20,304; gold bullion, $39,776; other exports, $1,160;
making a total of $61,240.
ROSSLAND.
Our Rossland correspondent telegraphs that the
mines are preparing for the early resumption of operations. The production this month has been insignificant. The total shipments to the end of February
are given at 31,972 tons, as shown in the annexed
table:
Le Roi   9,198 3,245-5       12,443-5
War Eagle  8,221.5       2,381.5        10,603
Centre Star   5,638-5        i>379 7>°I7-5
Iron Mask      976.5 363.5 1,340
I- X. L       48 105.5 153-5
Evening Star        30 69.5 99.5
Monte Christo        273   273
Giant        42   42
Total tons     24,427.5       7,544-5       3i>972
SLOCAN.
During the month of February 794,000 pounds of
ore was produced in this district.
COAL EXPORTATIONS.
FOREIGN SHIPMENTS.
February. Tons.
New Vancouver Coal Co  38,832
Union  17,811
Oyster Harbour (Extension)    18,897
MARCH.
The New Vancouver Coal Company's shipments for
the three weeks ending March 20th were as follows:
Date. Vessel. Destination. Tons.
ist—SS. New England.. .Alaska        52
5th—SS. San Mateo Port Los Angeles:. 4,321
§th—SS. R. Adamson.... San Francisco ....
8th—SS. Mineola San Francisco	
10th—SS. Manauense .Mahukona, H. I....
nth—SS.NewEngland.. .Alaska	
14th—SS. Titania Port Los Angeles..
18th—SS. New England... Alaska	
4,431
3,196
1,446
54
5,78i
Total   19,343
m150
THE MINING RECORD.
A NEW BALANCE.
THE accompanying illustration is of a new precision balance with five-inch beam recently placed
upon the market by Wm. Ainsworth & Sons, balance
makers, of Denver, Colo., U.S.A.
The counterpoised sliding door has been removed
to better illustrate the instrument.
This balance is of the latest approved construction,
with "fall away" pan rests and yokes, having agaye
contacts throughout there being no metal contact
points with the beam or hangers.
A plate glass sub-base covers the entire base and
all metal work is gold plated. The case is of mahogany, French polished, with two drawers in base and
counterpoised sliding door.
The beam, which is made of a new palladium alloy
having a tensile strength of from 80,000 to 90,000
pounds, is divided into fifty parts each side of the
centre for the use of half a milligramme or one milligramme rider and there being no obstruction on the
top, the rider may be placed at any point from the
centre to the last division on either end.
Cylindrical reading glasses are provided for reading
the beam and the index and the latest improved rider
apparatus with rod locks is furnished.
This balance has been designed for especially accurate weighings such as "control" and "umpire" assays
and for the most accurate work in scientific and
chemical laboratories, balances of this general construction having been furnished sensitive to 1.1000
milligramme.
The Simplest, Most Economical
and
Most Effective Concentrator
Known.
• Descriptive Catalogue sent post free on application.
TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESSES. -"Wrathless.  London."
The Wilfley ©re Concentrator
Syndicate, Limited.
32 OLD JEWRY, E.C. LONDON.
Beg" to call the attention of Mining Engineers, Mine Superintendents and Managers, Machinery Dealers, and all connected
with the Mining1 Industry to
THE    "WILFLEY"   TABLE
The following strong claims are put forward for the "WILFLEY," and will be found more than fully substantiated in
actual working :
1. Simplicity of construction. No expensive wearing parts.
No belt renewals. Nothing to get out of order. Practically no
repairs.
2. Facility of adjustment to all ores treated. Once adjusted
it needs but a minimum of attention.
3. Its wonderful capacity. Will handle three to five times as
much material as any_ belt table made.
4. Reduction of maintenance charges. No skilled labour required. Reduction in initial outlay, as smaller number of
tables are needed.
5. The ore particles being separated into distinct streaks a
complete separation of the different minerals contained is effected.
The " WILFLEY" has only been on the market some
eighteen months, yet in that time nearly 800 have been soldj
and are in use in 200 mines, which speaks volumes for the rapid
and favorable recognition it has been accorded.
The most flattering Testimonials  have been received.
The "WILFLEY" can be seen in operation by appointment at
the offices of the Syndicate, 32 Old Jewry, London, E.C.
Samples of Ore, 50 lb. to 1 cwt., tested free of charge.
Correspondence Invited.
The Huntington
Centrifugal Roller
Quartz Mill.
The Huntington Mill is so well and favorably known among mining men throughout the world that any description of it would seem superfluous. They are in use in the
United States, Canada, Mexico, Central and South America, Australia, China, Japan, and
South Africa. In fact, wherever mines exist, and have given the best satisfaction of all
quartz crushing mills.
The construction of this mill has lately been much improved and we claim it to be the
Cheapest, Most Efficient, Simplest and Most Durable Mill upon the Market.
F. A.   HUNTINGTON, manufacturer of Centrifugal Roller Quartz Mills.
Mining Machinery of Every Description.   Steam Engines.   Shingle Machines.
Room 1, 3rd Floor, Mills Building, - SAN FRANCISCO, CAL.THE MINING RECORD.
151
THE METAL MARKET—MARCH.
THE market has been generally steady and very few
changes are reported. Silver has advanced slightly, the price during the month ranging from 59I to
60c. The average price of this metal last month was
59.76. Copper is firm and active in view of an increased demand.    Manufacturers    are
exceedingly
busy and refiners experience difficulty in meeting
their obligations. The latest quotations are Lake,
16J.; electrolytic in cakes wirebars and ingots, 16J to
i6|c, in cathodes at 16 to i6£c, and casting copper at
i6jc. There is little change in lead, which is quoted
at 4.56 to 4.70. Spelter is fairly active, but- at unchanged prices, 4.60 to 4.62^ being quoted from New
York and 4.45 St. Louis.
WHITE, ROGERS & COMPANY,
Constructing Engineers and Millwrights
306 Pine St., San Francisco, Cal.
Sole Pacific Coast Agents and Builders of the Celebrated
Wilfley Concentrator, Price $450 f.o.b. San Francisco.
One of these machines will take the place of Two or Three
Belt concentrators of any .make and do very much better work.
We furnish superior Machinery and erect Stamp Mills, Hoisting
and Pumping Works operated by Steam or Water Motors. Complete Concentrating and Smelting Plants foi the concentration and
recovery of gold, silver, copper and lead. Improved Power Drills
and Air Compressors.   Wire Rope Tramways, etc.
The Wilfley Table Is covered by V.S. Patents Nos. 580,338 and
590,675.   Infringements will be prosecuted to the
full extent of the law.
These   Machines   are   Kept   in   Stock   ready   for
Immediate   Shipment.
ROBINS BELT CONVEYORS
Handle Ore and Tailings.
Most economical and
Insure Against Shutdowns.
Cut shows Belt Conveyor handling 250 tons culm per hour at Pittson, Pa.
For illustrated catalogue address
ROBINS   CONVEYING   BELT   CO'Y,
Park   Row   Building,    New   York.
E. H. HEAPS & CO.,
Machinery, Mining and Investment
BROKERS.
506 Cordova St.    VANCOUVER, B.C.
MANUFACTURERS' AGENTS AND DEALERS IN
New and Second-Hand ' MTachinery, Diamond Drills, Canning and
Saw Mill Machinery, etc- etc., etc.
Representing—Cowan & Co., A. R. Williams, M. C. Bollock Manufacturing Company, Clayton Air Compressor Works, and other
first-class manufacturers.    . . .
SITDHTIONS   WaNTEO.
Theodor Lexow,
Assayer and Analytical Chemist
Twelve years experience ; first-class local and English testimonials, desires
suitable engagement.   Apply " 2 " B. C. Mining Recobd.
Position as Superintendent (or assistant to) of
an-electoio-raalway, mining or lighting plant
by a graduate of a leading American technical
college, who is also a practical mechanic. Ten
years very practical experience wf th various electripal systems for lighting
and power, inelu<Jing three yeajS; in charge of a plant foc'thia leading steel
Sjajanfactaring company of America and three years in charge of a3-phase
plant for a representative Colorado mine. Thoroughly reliable. Address
' Engineer," care of British Columbia Mining Record.
WANTED.
Nos. 12 to 16 John St..
near Broadway,
J NEW   YORK,
IMPORTER  OF
CARBONS  (Black Diamonds.)
For   Diamond   Drills   and   all   Mechancial   Purposes.
HENRY    DEMMERT.
THE HOWELL'S  MINING DRILL COMPANY,
PLYMOUTH,   PA.,
Manufacturers of MINING DRILLS of every known description.
Catalogue sent upon request.
JEFFREY
ELEVATING MACHINERY
FOR MILLS, FACTORIES, POWER PLANTS.
Designed for Handling Material of all feindi. j
,',   SEND FOR CATALOGUE.
THE JEFFREY MFG.C0. Columbus.O.
WANTED.
An experienced miner to Join partv going into the Cariboo country.  Must
nave practical experience in hydraulic mining.   Apply by letter to P. H1jtf1
SV110Q
DIAMOND DRILL
MINING MACHINES
i«iiii<vimcT«*THE MINING RECORD.
Mining Stocks.
Prepared by A. W. Mora & Co., Stock Brokers, Victoria, B.C., Mar. 28,1900-
TRAIL CREEK.
Alberta	
Big Three..'.	
Bruce	
Butte	
Caledonia Con	
Centre Star	
Commander	
Deer Park	
Enterprise        }'™'ff
 '' f*-"....*. rrrif..      600,000
$1,000,000
3,600,000
1.000,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
3,600,000
600,000
1,000,000
Evening Star-
Georgia	
Gertrude	
Golden Drip	
Gopher .-.,4.	
Hattie Brown	
High Ore	
Homestake...... -	
Iron Horse	
Iron Mask	
I.X.L	
Iron Colt...	
Jumbo	
LeEoi	
Lilly May	
Mabel	
Mayflower	
Monita	
Monte Crlsto	
Nest Egg-Firefly	
Northern Belle	
Novelty	
Palo Alto	
Poorman	
E. E.Lee	
Red Mountain View	
Rossland, Red Mountain..
.St. Elmo	
Silverine .
Silver Bell Con	
Victory Triumph	
Virginia	
War Eagle Consolidated!-
White Bear	
AINSWOBTH, NJBIJSON AND SLOCAN.
American Boy	
Arlington	
Argo	
Athabasca	
Black Hills	
Buffalo of Slocan	
Channe	
Dundee	
Dardanelles	
Dellie	
Exchequer	
Fern Gold	
Goodenough	
Gibson	
Hall Mines	
Lerwick	
Leviathan	
London	
Miller Creek	
Molly Gibson	
Minnesota	
Nelson-Poorman	
Noble Five Con	
Ottawa and Ivanhoe.
Payne	
Rambler Con	
Reco..
Slocau-Reciprocity.
Slocan Starf	
Santa Marie.........
Silver Band	
Slocan Queen	
Star.
St. Keverne..
Sunshine	
Tamarac	
Two Friends.
Washington..
Wonderful...
Lardeau Goldsmith  .i
Consolidated Sable Creek Mining Co.
Lardo-Duucan	
TEXADA ISLAND.
Gold Bar	
Raven	
Texada Proprietary ...
Texada Kirk Lake	
Treasury Mines — !
Van Anda.	
Viotoria-Texada	
VANCOUVER ISLAND.
Alberni Mountain Rose	
Consolidated Alberni..	
Mineral Creek	
Mineral Hill......	
Ui-ir
500,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
500,000
1,000,000!
1,000,000
500,000
1,000,000
1,000,000|
500,0001
£1,000,000
f 1,000,000
1,000,000
1,000,000'
760.000;
2,500,000
1,000,0001
1,000,000
1,000.000
1,000,000
500,000
2,000,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
600,000
500,000
1,000,000
100J.OOO
2,000,000
2,000,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
100,000
1,000,000
100,000
150,000
250 000
1,000,000
1,509000
7j0,000
1,000,000
200,000
800,000
660,000
£300.0001
$1 500,000
2,000,000
150,000
1,000,000
2,000,000
1,000.0001
250,000j
12,000,
1.000,000:
3,600,000
1,000,000!
1,000,000
1,000,000!
500,000.
l,000,000i
250,000!
1.000,000
1,000,000!
1,000,000
'500,000
1,000 000.
240,000
1,000,000'
1,000,000
*1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
5
1
i
£5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1'
1
1
1
%   «A
8
10
02
VA
1 40
10
2
20
15
mi
of
05
WA
41
37
13
ioh
26
£5 5s.
$0 20
15
10
10
4
02
4
4
03
14
3
3
10
6
6
3
5
6Ji
1 40
1
1
0 10
1
0 10
025
0 25
1
1
1
1
0 25
1
1
£1
?1
1
25
1
1
1
026
lc. par
1
1 oo I
1
1
1
60
*1
026 I
1
1
1
10
1
30
1
1
200000 1
1,500,000 1
1,500,000      1
Mount Sicker & B.C. Development Co.
100,000
1,000,000
250.000
600,000:
260,000
5,000,000
150,000;
260,000
600,000
500,0001
750,0001
500,000
10
1
0 25
1
25
1
0 25
1
1
1
1
1
£125,0C0    £1
6M
10
32
10
03
SK
9
12
12
6
11
VPA
10
3
25
08
35
66
20
8
12*
1 33
65
1 00
1 26
05
12J.2
10
07
5
06
25
4
04
6
05
10
6
25
1 00
2
02
0OJJ
6
05^
05
06
CARIBOO.
Cariboo Gold Fields Ld	
Cariboo Hydraulic Consolidated.
Cariboo M. & D. Co	
Golden River Quesnelle	
Horsefly Hydraulic	
Waid-Horsefly	
Viotoria Hydraulic	
LILLOOET DISTRICT.
Alpha Bell	
Cayoosh Creek Mines	
Excelsior	
Golden Cache	
Lillooet Gold Reefs	
FAIRVIEW  CAMP.
Smuggler	
Fairview Corporation .r..ff.u
Boundary creek.
Boundary Creek M. M. Co	
Brandon and Golden Crown	
Dominion Copper Co.	
Kins
£100,000
{5,000,000 $5
300,000 1
£350,000. £1
$200,000
500,000 t 1
300,000 1
600,000 1
?1 10
26
Knob Hill   	
Morrison	
Old Ironsides	
Pathfinder	
Pay Ore	
Ka thmullen	
Winnipeg	
CAMP MCKINNEY.
Camp McKinney Development Co.
Camp McKinney Mines Co	
Carl boot	
Minnehaha	
Waterloo	
Fontenoy	
O'Shea	
Waterloo No. 2	
Mammoth  —
Little Cariboo	
Shannon	
Sailor	
Silver Bell, Consolidated	
REVELSTOKE
Carnes Creek Consolidated	
EAST KOOTENAY.
Canadian Gold Fields  	
. Crow's Nest Pass Coal Co	
North Star	
Sullivan	
600,000
600,000
1
1
500,000
1
200,000
25
1,000,000
1
0H$
1,000,000
25
04Ji
l,500,000i
1
10
1,500.000
1
25
5,000,000 i
1
75
1500,0001
1
1,500,000
1
85
1,000,000
1
3%
1,000.000
1
80
1,000,00 j
1
11
1,000,000
1
07Jj£
2,500,000
1
4
1,000,00(1
1
15
600,000
1
23
600,000
1
10K
1,250,000
1
75
1.00O.000
1
100,000
10
6
1,000,000
1
IO.?
;o,oo>;
10
01
50,000
10
01
50,000
10
01
100,000
10
01
60,000
5
03
1,950,000
1
iO
500,000
25
1
2%
1,000.000
1,000,000
10
08
2,000,000
25
$39 00
1,500,000
1
1 25*
1,000,000
1
11
V. Y. T. Co.,
LAKE BENNETT, B.e.
OPERATING THE ONLY
Saw and Planing Mills
At the head of Navigation to to the
YUKON and HTLIN GOLD FIELDS
Builders of^-^^
Boats, Barges and Scows.
The safest and most economical way of freighting
from Bennett to Dawson, having wharf and warehouse
on arrival at destination.
Manufacturers of Lumber of all description, Sash
Doors, etc.
Provisions and Supplies....
We also carry a large stock of General Merchandise
at posts all along the river, consisting of Feed, Groceries, Provisions, Dry Goods, Tinware, Enamelled Ware,
Window Glass, Hardware, etc.
Call on or write us before sending to the Coast for
your supplies.
Information cheerfully given by applying to
The Victoria Yukon Trading Co., Ld.,
LAKE BENNETT, B. C.
Head Office, VICTORI1, B.C.
J  HOLLAND, Man. Director
WT>     "DAILEY & CO.,—ASHOROBT, B.O.,
*   J-*.   J—*        Storage and Forwarding Agents.
Goods receired, stored and forwarded with despatch to any point In
Cariboo reached hy wagon or pack train.   Consign goods to our care and
we will settle railway charges aud ship to destination with least possible|
delay.THE MINING RECORD.
W^
-S^~-
The Vancouver Agency, l
Head Office, 49-57, The Albany, Liverpool, Eng.
WHOLESALE DRY GOODS MERCHANTS.
imited.
Shipping and Commission Agents.
cii»irN^L~^L^TL^^UowiaS rough goods on hand, viz:   CALCUTTA ORE SACKS.   COTTON WASTE.    FIREBRICKS.,
FIRE CLAY.    SMITHY COAL.    LIVERPOOL DAIRY SALT.
605 Granville St.,   Vancouver, B e.
Write for lowest prices to
THE   VANCOUVER   AGENCY,   Ltd.
^^f
.S^—
NOME,  CAPE YORK and ST. MICH>ELS.
THE   Al   IRON  STEAMER
ALPHA
The last steamer that sailed from Nome last fall, positively the first to arrive at Nome next spring,
SAILING    FROM    VICTORIA    ABOUT    APRIL    FIRST,    1900.
The ALPHA has been thoroughly overhauled and additional accommodations added. Electric Lighted, Steam Heated,
Hot Baths, Excellent Table prepared to cater to the most fastidious. In fact A LUXURIOUS HOME AT SEA. Secure
passage and freight rates at once.
O. W. SHOOP, Capt. J. D. WARREN,
Agent,  36 Fort St.,  VIOTORIA. Manager.
The Hendrie & Bolthoff Mfg. and Supply Co'y
Original Designers, Manufacturers and Jobbers.
Hoisting
Machinery
and
Milling
Specialties.
Write for our special Hoisting Machinery Catalogue.
Our line  of patterns are the most complete in  the world.
The Hendrie | Bolthoff Mfg. and Supply Co'y,
1601-1617 Seventeenth St.
DENVER, - COLORADO.
JXIV.
THE MINING RECORD.
E. G. Prior & So., Ltd.
Established 1SS8.
Headquarters   YieT0Rm.
MILL, MINING AND FARM MACHINERY. ^ ^ **
BAR AND SHEET IRON AND STEEL. ** ^ ^ <m *m
BUILDERS' HARDWARE and MECHANICS'   TOOLS.
Branch Stores: VANCOUVER and KHML00PS, B. &.
*Tor
The Amur has been thoroughly overhauled and specially fitted up for
this sfiSsrice, and is providedjwith
accommodation for passengers and
freight of an exceptionally suitable character.
The Canadian Pacific Navigation Co'y, Limited, will despatch Their
staunch iron
AMUR
>
i
Cape Nome.
St.
Al double bottomed, for
Michael© arid Cape Nome
ON   MAY   1,   1900.
For rates  and particular  information   apply at company's office,
Wharf street, Victoria.
G. A. CARLETON,
Gen. Freight Agt.
C. S.   BAXTER,
Gen. Pass. Agt.
BEATTY & SONS,
WELLAND, ONTARIO,
Dredges, Ditchers and Steam Shovels,
For Dredging^ Bitching, Dyking, Gold Mining, Etc.
Of various styles and sizes to suit any woiST*^
Mine Hoists, Hoisting Engines, Stone Derricks,Tllorsepower
Ho.sters,   Suspension   Cable ways,   Submarine   Rock
Drilling MachHne-ry, Gang Stone Saws, Centrifugal Pumps for Drainage Works, Pump,
ing Sand, Gold Mining, Etc.
We also furnish WIRE ROPE at Lowest Prices.
BENNETT   FUSE!
REGlSTEHErajN   CANADA.
Crown
TRADE
Brand.
MARK.
Supplied under contralto British Admiralty.
WJVI. BENNETT, SONS & CO., Manufacturers, ^n Jjs&fisfc &":»sra"p.«...j I
***~ " '     j     ■ ■■ -Tj   o Within '        ••■*H*S"'w  01.,
Is guaranteed alafflutely waterproof. It is Gutta-Percha.'mtf neither' crack "nor break. Costs no more than tar-tace fusts A =ir
your dealet facfttJ Qv& it a trial. We manufacture the fc^omng fuses for Canada: No. 6-REDhse for ivSnTwn «o_
WH ITE countered fuse, waterproof.    No. 36-gLU E.doubleJayed damp-proof.    Samples^Ss on SS' Np0p^
Miner's £afety]^ato^ J&wer's Safety Coupler. p
ROWLAND MACHIN,
Gen.  Agent
for Canada.
No. 3 Yates St., Victoria, B.C.n«l ■   (—~___.^I—-
THE MINING RECORD.
BRITISH   COLUMBIA   WHOLESALE   SUPPLY  HODSES.
Office Furniture
We have in stock or made to order
ROLLER CURTAIN DESKS,
FLAT TOP DESKS.
Office and Library Tables,
Typewriter Tables.
OFFICE   FURNITURE of
EVERY DESCRIPTION.
WEILER  BROS.,
Inlaid Linoleums,   Plain  and   Printed    Linoleum,   Cork Carpet.
For anything in House Furnishing write to us.    We are headquarters.
vieT©Rm, B.e.
LENZ <& LEISER, 9 & 11 yates street.
 IMPORTERS   OF	
GENERAL   DRY   GOODS.
-MANUFACTURERS   OF	
CLOTHING, SHIRTS AND UNDERWEAR.
A Large Supply of Goods Suitable for trje KpoteQay and KJondik;e Trades.
ONLY WHITE LABOR EMPLOYED.
Special attention given to packing Goods for the Klondike Trade and other Mining Camps.
You riust
THE   CELEBRATED
have "CROWN BRAND" Pure
W 'RICKSHAW <%!
on
TEA
For sale only by
Java and Mocha i Thomas Ea;£
If you will hare THE  BEST.
Put up ground and whole roasted 1 to 50 pound tins.
Pioneer Steam Coffee and Spice Mills.
STEMLER & EARLE,
VICTORIA,  B.C. Proprietors.
w
w
IMPORTER,   WHOLESALE  GROCER
and COMMISSION nERCHANT.
I Teas and Coffees a Specialty.
-*&•■ 92, 94, 91 Wharf St., VICTORIA, B. C.
TURNER,  BE ETON & CO.
Victoria, Vancouver, and Nelson, B.C.
 AND AT	
H. C. Beeton & Co., 33 Finsbury Circus, London, Eng.
WHOLESALE      •      MERCHANTS.
Dry Good®, Liquor®, Cigar®, Flour, Etc.       goods indented from all parts
Manufacturer® of Clothing, Etc. -of the world...
 TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESSES	
"TURNER," Victoria.      "BEETON," London.       "TORBEET," Vancouver and  Nelson.THE MINING RECORD.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Robt.Ward&eoM
Temple Building, VICTORIA, B.C.
Metropolitan Building, Vancouver, B.C.
70  Baslnghall St., London, E.C.
Ltd.
Commission Merchants and Importers.
Shipping, Insurance and  Financial Agents.
Royal Belgian Consulate.
GENERAL AGENTS for The Royal Insurance Co. The London & Lancashire Fire Insurance Oo. The Northern Assurance Co.
The Standard Life Assurance Co., The London and Provincial Marine Assurance Co., The Western Assurance Co. (Marine.) The London Assurance
Corporation (Marine).   La Foifdier Campagnie d'Assurances.   Swiss Marine Insurance Companies.
SOLE AGENTS (or Curtis' & Harvey's Sporting and Blasting Powder and "Amberite" (Smokeless Powder.)
CANNERY AGENCIES.—Ewen & Co.—Lion and Bonnie Dundee Brands.    Bon Accord Fishery Co.—Consul and Bon Accord Brands.
Canadian Pacific Packing Co.—Flagship Brand.   West Coast Packing Co    Currie, McWillia'ms & Fowler,   Imperial Cannery.
Managers and Agents for
The  British Columbia Corporation,   Limited,
Mortgages, Debentures, Trusts, Estates
Managed and Rents Collected.
Importers of Oilmen's Stores, Tin Plates, Portland Cement, Pig Iron and
General Merchandise.
Managers and Agents for the Moodyville Sawmills.
Charters Effected and  Indents Executed  for every Description  of British
and Foreign Merchandise.
Tug Boat Agents.
MERCHANTS BANK of HALIFAX
INCORPORATED   1869.
CAPITAL AUTHORIZED,  $2,000,000,00,
CAPITAL PAID UP,  $1,985,070.00.
REST,  $1,700,000.00
r. E. KENNY,   President.
HEAD   OFFICE     HALIFAX,  N.S.
BRANCHES   IN   CANADA:
Antigonish, N.S.
Atlin, B. C.
BathurstpN. B.
Bennett, B. C.
Bridgewater, N. S.
Charlottetown, P. I
Dorchester, N.B.
Fredericton, N.B.
Gnysboro, N. S.
Grand Porks, B. C.
Halifax, N.S.
Kingston, N.B.
Londonderry, N. S.
Louisburg, N. S.
Lunenburg, N.S.
Maiiland, N.S.
Moncton, N. B.
Montreal, P. Q.
Montreal (West End).
Montreal (Westmount).
Nanaimo, B. C.
Nelson, B.C.
Newcastle. N.B.
Ottawa, Ont.
Pictou, N S.
Port Hawkesbury,
Rossland, B.C.
Sadkrille, N.B.
, N. S.
EDSON L. PEASE,   General Manage..
St. John, N. D.
Shubenacadie, N S.
Snmmersldefi*. E. I.
Sydney, N7S.   '•'
Truro, N. S.
Vancouver, B. C.
Vancouver, (East End)
Victoria,B. c.
Weymouth, N. S.
Woodstock, N. B.
Branches in Newfoundland.—St. Johns.
Branches in United States.—Havana, Cuba.   New York.   Republic, Wash.
A GENERAL BANKING BUSINESS TRANSACTED.
Drafts and Letters of
Credit Issued.
GOLD DUST ASSAYED AND PURCHASED
The Bank of British Columbia.
(Incorporated by Royal Charter, 1862).
CAPITAL (with power to increase)  £600,000      $2,920,000
RESERVE    £100,000      $    486,666
Head Office—60 Lombard Street, London, England.
AGENTS AND  CORRESPONDENTS:
branches:
In British Columbia—Victoria, Vancouver, New Westminster,
Nanaimo, Kamloops, Nelson, Sandon, Rossland.
In the United States—San Francisco and Portland.
In Canada— Canadian Bank of Commerce, Merchants' Bank of
Canada, The Molson's Bank, Imperial Bank of Canada, Bank of
Nova Scotia and Union Bank of Canada.     In United States	
Canadian Bank of Commerce (Agency), New York ; Merchant's
Bank of Canada, New York; Bank of Nova Scotia, Chicago. In
Australia and New Zealand— Bank of Australasia. In
Honolulu—Bishop & Co.
YUKON   AND ATLIN   GOLD   FIELDS
Drafts, Letters of Credit, etc., issued direct on Dawson City, Atlin City and Skagway.
SAVINGS   BANK   DEPARTM ENT.—Deposits received from f 1 upwards, and interest allowed thereon.
Gold Dust purchased and every description of Banking Business transacted.
GEORGE   GILLESPIE, Manager.
PLATINUM  REFINERS
BAKER
New York Office—
121   LIBERTY STREET.
I      t      I      l
W
E are always in the market for     :    :    :
:    :    :   CRUDE OR NATIVE  PLATINUM.
&    CO.,
—NEWARK,   N. J.THE MINING RECORD.
Z^®£?S^^aL^aOY^TlSEMBNTS.
xvu.
W. JONES       The City
Auction Mart,
(Established 1885.)
AUCTIONEER,
APPRAISER.
ESTATE AGENT, Etc.
73 and 73% Yates St.,
VICTORIA,       -        .       B. c.
Auc:ion sales of every description conducted at our spacious rooms, or at
Vendor's own premises, highest prices obtained, satisfaction guaranteed
before disposing of your goods. You will find it greatly to your interest to
consult us.
Highest of Reference* from past and present clients.
Houses, etc., to ront and for sale in all parts
List your properties with us, good clients always waiting.
All business entrusted to us   eceives strict and personal attention.
Money to Loan in Large or Small Amounts
OPEN EVENINGS. TELEPHONE 294.
George   Purgold,
Stock and Share Broker.
Rossland, B.C
Wallace Building,
Columbia Avenue,
P. 0. Box 73.    Cable Address: Purgold.
Codes : A.B.C., Fourth edition Moreing and Neals, Cloughs and Bedford
McNeals.
R. W. GRIGOR,
MINES-
ROSSLAND,   B.C.
Operating in East and "West Kootenay with special knowledge
of Windermere division and Fort Steele, of East Kootenay, Trail
Oreek, Nelson, Slocan, Lardeau, Boundary, Similkameen and
Okanagan in "West Kootenay District.
Personal knowledge of mining properties in all the above-
named subdivisions.
Special attention given to the Windermere division at present.
Cable Addeess : GRIGOR.
Use Bedford McNeil and Moreing and Neal's codes.
J-  Fortescue Foulkes.
N. B. Van derGucht.
J. F. Foulkes & Co.,
Mining and Stock Brokers
VICTORIA,   B.C.
35 Fort Street.
Cable address
'Fouvan."   All codes used.
K M. SANDILANDS,
General Agent,
Fire Insurance and Mining ISroker.
Slocan Mines. SANDON,  B. C.
A. W. MORE & CO.   %
MINING and STOCK BROKERS.
Codes used:    Bedford-McNeill's, Moreing &
Neal'a, Clough's, and A.B.C., Fourth Edition.
86 Government Street,
VICTORIA, B.C.
F. J. L. TYTLER,
CONSULTING ENGINEER,
Notary Public in and for B. C, Commissioner of Oaths.
Office, 23 Mackinnon Block, Granville St., Von^AiurA*
P.O. Box 3p.  Telephone 750. Vd-IlCUUVer-
ABC Code, Bedford McNeill Code.
Student of Glasgow University.
Pupil of Messrs. Hawkes Crawshay, Gateshead-on-Tyne.
Late CiviF'Engineer, Oude & Rohflkund Railway, India.
Late Civil Engineer, Department of Public Works, India.
Late Manager Sirmoor Iron Works.
Late Inspector of Dykes, British Columbia.
For several years Consultinjg"Engineer to the Government of B. C.
All business with mines transacted, reports made, assays supplied. Plans
estimates and specifications for general  engineering ~"
works managed and supervised.
purposes made and
The Referendum Free Gold Mining and Milling Co'y, Ltd.
NON-PERSONAL LIABILITY.
CAPITAL   STOCK $500,000, in 2,000,000 shares of 25c. each.
Rossland, B.C., May 19, 1899
We submit to the public as a safe and profitable investment the; second issue of 100,000 shares in the Referendum Free Gold JMinine
and Milling Company, Limited, non-personal liability, just   organized and   registered during the  first week of July.   The capital stock of the Comnanv
will be $500,000 in shares of 25 cents per value.   Of these 800,000 shares are set aside to be sold to develop further the property and operate the mine
The Company's property is situated on Forty-Nine Creek, about 8 miles from the City of Nelson, B.C., and in the well-known free-gold belt in which are
also the Athabasca and Poorman mines, which have yielded excellent profits to their owners. Two shafts 35 feet deep have been sunk on one vein and nn
merous cuttings have been made, showing the continuity of the ore body for one thousand feet. Assays from ore from these works are astfollows •' $80 $87
$246, $360, S412. Dr. P. Langhammer, mining engineer, estimates this vein to average $431 in value and 20 inches in width. _.-ihi>.showing has enabled the'
Company to conclude arrangements for a plant to treat the ore, to be installed before snowfall. The gold being free and capable of extraction on the ground
the expensive charges of transportation and smelting are obviated, and the profits will be correspondingly larger than from a base ore of equal assav value
The Company has thus Its property proven and arrangements made to mine profitably from its inception and to pay dividendsmt an early date.
The Company recently purchased a 5-stamp mill, boiler and engine with cyanide and chlorinafton plant. This plan will be operated within 90 davs
from August 10. A stage of progress has been reached when the mine can be worked throughout the winter. The iilan of operatioS includes the addition
of five more stamps iffthe spring and running a tunnel to the boundary of the Referendum claim which is expected to cross-cut five more leads yffiieh now
Bhow on the surface. . .   .
All that was oattined in our circular of May 15 has been carried out. ....
Applications for stock and remittance for first payment of two cents per share may be made through any chartered bank or direct to the undersigned.
E. N. OUIMETTE 4. CO.,
Bankers for the Company : Mebchants Bank of Halifax, ROSSLAND, B.C. Brokers for the Company, ROSSLAND, B. C.XV1U.
THE MINING REC0ED.
PROFESSIONAL  ADVERTISEMENTS.
T. H. GORE.
H. BURNET.
j, h. McGregor.
GORE, BURNET & CO.,
Provincial and  Dominion Land  Surveyors
AND    CIVIL    ENGINEERS.
Five Sisters Block. VICTORIA and NELSON.
A. H. BROMLY, M. I. Mech. E,
M. Inst. M. E. M. Amer. I. M. E.
Mining and Consulting Engineer.
Code:—Bedford McNeill.
Eldon Street,
LONDON, E.C.
' OhriBtopher, London."
P. O. Box 308,
VANCOUVER, B.C.
(" Bromly, Vancouver.")
B. THOMAS, C. E. & M. E.,
VANCOUVER,   B. C.
Reports.
Surveys.
Management.
MINES
Contract Prospecting and Devi opment Work.
Best References.
HOWARD WEST   mining engineer
(Associate of Royal School of Mines, London, Eng.)
Five Year's Residence In Wes.t Kootenay.
Reports on Slocan Properties.
New Denver, B.C.
Makes a specialty of supplying
reliable information and
Telegraph Codes used: Bedford McNeill's,,
A.B.C. fourth edition and Moreing & Neal's
flRGHBOLD   &  PEARSON,
MINING   ENGINEERS
ASSAYERS-
Cable Address : Archpear, Nelson.
Cedes: Bedford McNeil, A.B.C.
P.O. Box 583,
NELSON,
British Columbia.
A. R HOLDICH,
ANALYTICAL    CHEMIST
and METALLURGIST.
Royal School of Mines, London.
Seven years at Morfa Works, Swansea.
Seventeen years chief chemist to Wigan Coal & Iron Co.
Late chief chemist Hall Mines Co., Ltd.
Assays and Analyses made on all varitles of mineral and
many organic substances.
Special experience in Smelting—both Swansea and American process.
REVELSTOKE,  B.C.	
F. W. GR0YES,
CIVIL and MINING ENGINEER,
PROVINCIAL LAND SURVEYOR.
Mineral Claims Crown Granted ajid reported upon.
Bank of British North America Bldg., GREENWOOD, B. C.
H. E. D. MERRY,
Consulting, Metallurgical and  Mining Engineer.
Late assistant manager to H. H. Vivian & Co., Ld., Swansea.
Late mining expert to the British American Corporation.
Mines examined and reports made.    Estimates ol costs of plant and treatment of all classes of ore given.
Development of properties, erection of smelting, concentrating and cyanide plants and practical working of same undertaken.
Address P. 0. Box 882, ROSSLAND,   B.C.
W.   PELLEW-HARVEY,   F.C.S.
(Mem. Fed. Inst. M. and M.E.)
KSSAYER and MINING   ENGINEER.
Established 1890.
The Vancouver Public Ore Testingand Sampling Works.
Purchaser of COPPER, SILVER, GOLD and LEAD ORES and
MATTE for the following houses whom he represents :
VIVIAN & SONS, Swansea.    ELLIOTT'S METAL CO..  LTD.,
Burry Port.    Smelters, Refiners, Desilverizers and Manufacturers.   Also agent for the Cassell Gold Extracting Co., Ltd.. Glasgow,  (Cyanide process).
Works and Office—17-719 Pender St., VA   CCTJVER,
15 Broad St., VICTORIA, B.C.
RELIABLE ASSAYS.
Gold.
Lead .
? 50
50
Gold and silver $ 75
Gold, silver, copper  1.50
John Redmond,
Mining and Mechanical Engineer.
Otjthett,
Chemist and Metallurgist.
REDflAN & OUTHETT,
Mining Engineers and Mettallurgists,
Kamloops, B. C.
Mining properties managed, examined and reported npon.    Assays and An -
alyses guaranteod accurate.    Write for intending information about
Kamloops and North Yale mining proper! ies.
Wm. II. BREWER, MINING ENGINEER.
MEM. N. of ENG. INST. MINING & MECH. ENG.
and AM. INST., M.E.
Molson's Bank Building,        - - VANCOUVER,  B. C.
W. M. MHeKINNON.
Assoc. M. Inst. 6. E.
Civil Engineer.
Specialty :    Hydraulic    Engineering.
Water power j Water Supply for Mines and Towns; Gold Dredging; Bridges;
Structural Iron work, etc.
P.O.  Box 262.
MACKINNON BUILDING,
Granville St.,
VANCOUVER   B.C.
A CARD
From SELBY BROTHERS of SAN FRANCISCO, CAL.
Assayers and Mining Experts.
To the Mining Pobwc of the North West.
We beg to advise you that we have opened a branch of our
business at 205^ Washington St., Portland, Oregon, to
accommodate our numerous clients in the North West. As our
name for prompt and reliable work in the past is known to every
mining man west of the Rockies, it will guarantee our future
success. Our Certificates are' invariably accepted by Banks and
Mining Corporations as final. Numerous investors waiting for
sound mining property.
We are now ready for work. Send in your Samples with letter
of instructions and charges, and we will give you prompt returns.
Our charges are: Gold and Silver, ft.50. Gold, Silver and
Copper, $3.00.    Coal, Soils and other Minerals, $3.00 each.
Hand power stamp mills for tests for sale.
SELBY BROTHERS,
Assayers and Mining Experts.
205^ WASHINGTON STREET,   -   PORTLAND, OREGON
Samples by mail receive prompt attention.   Rich Ores and Bullion.
Bought,
0GDEN  aSSaY e©.,  1429-16th St.. DENVER, Colo.THE MINING RECORD.
xix.
PROFESSIONAL  AND   BROKERS.
Mining and Surveying Instruments.
Light Mountain Transits and Transit-Theodolites
Scott's Mine Tachymeter.
I   ., .M??t improved constructions.    Best workmanship.
Send for list. *
P.  A  R.  WITTSTOCK,   Berlin S. 59   GERMANY
J. B. TVRKBLI, M.A., P.G.S.
T. D. GREEK, C.E., D.L.S.
TYRRELL & GREEN,
Mining and Civil Engineers
Dominion Land Surveyors.
^Mining properties valued and reported upon.      Surveys made.     Money
invested^ etc., etc.
DAWSON,   Y. T.
JOHN    HAWLEY,
MINING BROKER.
British Columbia Mines Bought ard Sold.
Only First-Class Properties Handled.
Bedford-Neal,     j 611 Hastings St.,
VANCOUVER, B. C
Codes-j Moreing-Neill,
(.Clough's.
One of the Oldest Established Firms  in Rossland
Mining Properties Developed.
S. THORNTON LANGLEY & 00.
Confidential Reports on Mines
5
Mine and Share Brokers.
Partially developed Mines for sale
Brokers and Financial Agents for The Okanagan Free Gold Mines, Limited.
Cable Address: "Langley."
Codes: Clough's and Moreing & Neal's.
P.oBoxm   ROSSLAND, BRITISH COLUMBIA.
ERNEST A. CLEVELAND,
Dominion and Provincial Land Surveyor.
Surveys of Mines and Mineral Claims.
519Hastin9S fcSisdai.s) VANCOUVER, B.C.
Fergusson & Crofts
eivil  and  Mechanical W"*^ i^
eonsoiti^Eng ineers
Valuations, Arbitrations, Surveys, Reports, Estimates and Specifications.
Existing Plants Inspected.  New Work In Progress Supervised
Machinery Plants of all kinds supplied and erected.
Agents for
I BOOTH'S HOISTS.
The "Risdon" Gold Dredger.   The Hallidie Ropeway.
The " Champion" Vertical Air Compressor and Drills.
The " Campbell" Gas and Oil Engine, etc.
Flexible  Metallic  Tubing and  WIRE  ROPE
supplied'from stock.
VANCOUVER, NELSON,
P. O. Box 423.
Codes—Moreing & Neal, A.B.C.
P.O. Box676.
W. a. S3DEK, D.L.S..P.L.S. H. S. HSHeROFT, D.L.S..PX.S.
611 Hastings St., Vancouver. Greenwood, B.C
BflU^R & HSHeROFT,
Dominion & Provincial Land Surveyors
Surveys of Mines, Mineral Claims and Crown Lands.
VANCOUVER and GREENWOOD.
HENRY NICHOLSON,
NOTARY PUBLIC, MINING AGENT,
MINING NEGOTIATIONS TRANSACTED.
OPFICB:   CA.VIF McKINNEY, B.C.
N B.—Some valuable mining properties in Camp McKinney and vicinity for
disposal.   Correspondence solicited.
PEMBERTON St SON
7USINING    BROK9HS,
Real Estate, Financial and Insurance Agents.    Mining Properties for sale.    Agents
for the Townsite of Alberni.    Farming Lands for sale in all parts of the Province.
FORT str e ex,
.Victoria, B.C.
Cable address:
"Cortez," Vancouver.
Codes : Brownhall's.
Moreing & Neill.
:fl ONLY FIRST-CLASS PROPERTIES HANDLED
MINES BOUGHT AND SOLD ~~5|
For authentic and thorough information, call or address :
J. M. MACKINNON, Mackinnon Building, Granville Street, VANCOUVER, B.C.XX.
THE MINING RECORD.
MINING   PDBLieHTI©NS, &&.
THE MINING  JOURNAL,
RAILWAY   AND    COMMERCIAL   GAZETTE.
Established 1835.
Circulates all over the world amongst
Miners, Engineers, Manufacturers and Capitalists.
ADVERTISEMENT AND EDITORIAL OFFICES:
46 Queen  Victoria Street,      - -     London, E.C.
PUBLISHING  OFFICES :
3 Dorset Buildings, - Salisbury Square, E.C.
EVERY SATURDAY, PRICE SIXPENCE.
The subscription to The Minin& Journal, including postage, is for :—
12 moi tbs.      6 months.      8 mouths
Canada s   28s. 14s. 7s.
Payable in advance.
NGRSVINGS!
PORTRaiTSI
BUILDINGS !
SCENERY!
Fitc-Similes of Signatures, Letters and Engravings of
all kinds for Book and Newspaper Printing. Map
Engraving from tracings. Also Reproductions from
Photographs, Brush Drawings and Prints. Fine
Book and Catalogue Illustrations. Good Work at
Low Prices.
SPIKE BROS,' CO., Tacoma, Wash.
B. C. POTTERY C|>., limited.
VICTORIA, B.C.
Manufacturers of . . .
Fire Bricks, Pressed Bricks, Sewer Pipe and
Fittings, Chimney Pine, Flower Pots, etc.
Edwards Bros.,
534 Cordova St.,
 VANCOUVER, B. C.
DEALERS IN
Pliotoraplii6 Stock
Agents for the Rochester Opti-   I
cal Co , and the Eastman
Kodak Co.
LARGE STOCK OF	
Film and Plate Cameras
 ON HAND.
PRICES SENT OH APPLICATION
PREflO B. $15.
M. R. SMITH I CO. •
ESTABLISHED   1858.
MANUFACTURERS     OK
HIGH CLASS BISCUITS & CONFECTIONERY
Gold Medals awarded at Royal Agricultural Exhi-
tion, '95-'96-'97-'98. Medal and Diploma awarded
at Colonial and Indian Exhibitions. Silver Medals
at Provincial Exhibitions, 1886.
430
BRANCH
Cordova    Street,
VICTORIA, B.C.
H. W. TREST,
Pres., Treas. and Gen. Manager.
THOS. KIDDIE,
Smelter Manager.
Van Anda
COPPER HND GOLD &@,
Purchasers and Smelters of eopper*eoId Ores.
Rates on Application.      Cash paid on settlement of assays.
Works at Van Anda, Texada Island, B.C.
ft. Van Der Naillens'
School of Practical, Civil, Mining, •>•
Electrical Mechanical Engineering.
Surveying, Architecture, Drawing and Assaying, Cyanide, Chlorination,
Metallurgy, Assaying of Ores, $25; Bullion and Chlorination Assay, $25; Blow
pipe Assay, $10j Full course of Assaying, $50. Established 1864. Open all year
Send for Circular.
933 Market St., San Francisco, Cal
A.  A.  WATSON,
B. Sc. F. I. C.
Assayer and Metallurgist.
VERNON, B.C.
Honours Graduate in Chemistry, Victoria University, England; Fellow 6
the Institute of Chemistry of Great Britain and Ireland.
Six years experience in Australia, South America, England and British
Columbia.
MJG~ Special attention to Samples by mail.
MICHIGAN    COLLEGE   OF   MINES.
A State Technical School. Practical work. Elective System. Summer
term. College year, 45 weeks. For catalogues, giving employment of
graduates, address MES. F. H. SCOTT, Sec'y, Houghton, Mioluni
THE MINERAL INDUSTRY, ITS STATISTICS, TECHNOLOGY AND
TRADE, VOL. VII. 1898.
Among the many valuable technical treatises incorporated in this notable
volume are the following, with the number of pages assigned to each particular article; a page of the Mineral Industry is equivalent to about two of a
treatise  of ordinary  size.—Recovery of Ammonium  Sulphate  from  Gas
Liquor, by H. A. Fra<ch, (20 pp^j Asphaltum Edging, ,by H. A. Frasch,
(12 pp.); The Hydraulic Cement Industrv in the Ui ited Slates, by F. HTLew5,-J
(6 pp,); The Principles of Fire Brick Manufacture, by Charles Ferry. (6 pp ) ;
The Manufacture and Use of Paving Brick in the Middle Westfby K Foster
Bain, (13 pp.); Kaolin, Its Occurrence, Technology and Trade, by T. C. Hopkins (13 pp.); Coal Mining Methods and their Economic Beaiing, by W. S
Gresley, (19 pp.); The Occurrence and Utilization of Peat, by Earnest A.
Sjosteat, (8. pp.); The  Electrolysis and ReBning of Copper, by Edward
Keller, (32 pp.); Feldspar, Its Occurrence, Mining and Uses, byT. C. Hopkins,
(7 pp.); The Identification of Gems, by Leopold Claremont, (9 pp.); Progress
in the Metallurgy of Gold and Silver, by «'. R. Ingalls, (26 pji.); The Hydro-
Metallurgy of Sil>er, by OttoUar Hofmaun, (27 pp.); The Technology of
gypsum, by G. P. Grimsley, (6 pp.); Progiess in t$H Metallurgy of Steel, bv
•H. M. Howe, (20 pp.); Present Practice in Silver-Lead Smelting at Denver and
Puebelo, by L. s. Austin. (7 pp.); Recent Improvments in Lead Suifliirig, I y
H. O. Hofman, (21 pp.); The Bedford Oolitic Limestone, by ('. B. Si b nthal,
(4 pp.); Lime and-Lime Burning, by H. A, Fra-ch, (14 pp.); The Manufacture I
of Acid Phosphate of Lime, by Peter S. Gilchrist. (10 pp.) • Present Practice in I
the Metallurgy of Quicksilver in California, by R. B. Symington, (7 pp);
Occurrence and Recovi ry of Sodium Cat Donate in the Great Basin, by N.,'a.k
Knapp, (9 pp.); The Manufacture of Chamber Sulphuric Acid, by F. j. Fald-
■ingfiMi pp.); Developments in the Metallurgy of Zinc and Cadmium byW R
Ingalls, (16 pp.); Progress in Ore Dressing in 1898, by Robert H. Richards
(4 pp.); The Progress of Metallography in 1898, by Albert Sauver, (11 pp.); The
Manufacture of Nickel Steel, Titus Uike, (4 pp.).
THE SCIENTIFIC PUBLISHING CO., 253 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.THE MINING RECORD.
VANCOUVER ISLAND COAL.
xxi.
COAUJJOAL!
The New Vancouver Coal
Mining & Land Co.
(LIMITED.)
(FORMERLY THE VANCOUVER COAL COMPANY.)
Are the Largest Coal Producers on the Pacific Coast.
*
NANAIMO COAL
(Used principally for Gas and Domestic purposes.)
*      SOUTHFIELD COAL
(Steam Fuel.)
Protection Island Coal & New Wellington Coal
(House and Steam Coal), are mined by this Company exclusively.
THE NANAIMO COAL gives a large percentage of gas, a high illuminating power, unequalled
lay any other bituminous coal in the world, and a superior quality of coke. h "<*"*"
THE SOUTHFIELD COAL is now used by all the leading steamship lines on the Pacific.
I THE NEW WELLINGTON COAL, which was introduced in 1890, has already become a
favourite fuel for domestic purposes. It is a clean, hard coal, makes a bright and cheerful fire and its
lasting qualities make it the most economical fuel in the market. '
THE PROTECTION ISLAND COAL is similar to the New Wellington Coal This coal
is raised from the submarine workings under the Gulf of Georgia and is shipped from wharves both a
Protection Island and Nanaimo.
The several mines of the Company are connected with their wharves at Nanaimo, Departure Bay and
Protection Island, where ships of the largest tonnage are loaded at all stages of the tide. Special despatch
given to mail and ocean steamers. *
SAMUEL M. ROBINS. Supt. Nanaimo. B.e.XX11.
THE MINING RECORD.
TRANSPORTATION COMPANIES.
Canadian Pacific I Railway
SOO-PACIFIC   LINE.
THROUGH    TRAINS
ATLANTIC to PACIFIC
Lowest Rates.
Best Equipment.
WITHOUT     CHANGE-
TO ALL POINTS IN
1/
Canada and United States
For full particulars as to rates, time, and copies of C. P. R. publications, apply to
B. W. GREER,
Agent,
VICTORIA, B.C.
Or to       E.   J.   COYLE,
Ass't General Passenger Agent,
VANCOUVER, B.C.
R. P. jRITHET & CO.,
WHOLESALE MERCHANTS, SHIPPING AND INSURANCE AGENTS.
PROPRIETORS OF VICTORIA WHARF, OUTER HARBOUR, COLUMBIA FLOURING MILL, ENDERBY, AND VERNON MILLS, VERNON.
Agents for Victoria Lumber and Manufacturing Company, Ohemainus, V.I.; Victoria Canning Company of British Columbia;
Fraser River, Skeena River, and River's Inlet Canneries; Skeena River Packing Company, Skeena River ; Pacific
Coast Steamship Company, San Francisco ; Scottish Union & National Insurance Company of Edinburgh ;
Lancashire Insurance Company of England; Queen Insurance Company of America (Fire);
and English and American Marine Insurance Company.
LLOYD'S   AGENCY.
HAWAIIAN   CONSULATE.
WHARF STREET,
VICTORIA,  B.C
Canadian Pacific Navigation Go,, Ld.
TIME TABLE NO. 48.
Taking effect March 1st.
VANCOUVER  ROUTE.
Victoria to Vancouver daily, except Monday, at 7 o'clock a.m., Sunday at
12 midnight.
Vancouver to Victoria daily at 1 o'clock p.m. or on arrival.of C. P. Railway No. 1 train.
NEW WESTMINSTER ROUTE.
Leave Victoria—For New Westminster. Ladner and Lulu Island Sunday at 11 o'clock a.m.: Wednesday and Friday at 7 o'clock
a.m.
For Moresby and Pender Islands—Friday at 7 o'clock   a. m.
For Plumper Pass—Wednesdays and Fridays at 7 o'clock a.m.
Lieave New Westminster—For Victoria Sunday at 2 o'clock p.m.
^Thursday and Saturday at 7 o'clock. a.m.
For Plumper; at 7 o'clock, a.m.
For Plumper and Moresby Islands—Thursady at 7 o'clock a.m.
FRASER   RIVER  ROUTE.
Steamer leaves New Westminster for Chilliwack and way
landings every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday at 8 o'clock
a.m. during river navigation.
NORTHERN ROUTE.
Steamship of this Company leave Victoria for Naco and intermediate ports via Vancouver on the First and Fifteenth of each month,
and for Queen Charlotte Islands on the 1st of each month.
KLONDIKE ROUTE.
Steamers of this Company leave weekly
neau, Skagway and Dyea.
for Wrangel, Ju-
BARCLAY  SOUND   ROUTE.
Steamer "Willapa" leaves Victoria for Alberni and Sound
ports the 1st, 10th and 20th. Extending 1 atter trip to
Quatsino and  Cape Scott.
The Company reserve the right of changing this Time Table
at any time without notification.
G. A.  CARLETON. C.   S. BAXTER,
General Freight Agent. Passenger AgentThe Hudson's Bay Company
HAVE =
Baie de Peres
Battleford
Calgary
Chapleau
Dauphin
Deloraine
Edmonton
Fort William
Kamloops
Langley
Lethbridge
AT
Lower Fort Garry
Macleod
Mattawa
Morden
Nelson
Pincher Creek
Portage la Prairie
Fort Simpson
Prince Albert
Qu'Appelle
Quesnell*
Rat Portage
Biding Mountain
Shoal Lake
Sudbury
Touchwood Hills
Vancouver
Victoria
Vernon
Whitewood
Winnipeg
.    , ... .   ■■'       .   - Winnipeg
StortTtheb°es^e|oPods atP^oPd0«?^.^ ^f* °0iHb> *«»<*• «"* Northwest Territories.   Purchaser, will find at these
Stores tne best goods at moderate prices, imported direct from all the principal markets of the world.
FELTEN & GUILLEAUME, Carlswerk, lMheim on Rhine, Germany.
Oldest and most renowned
WIRE ROPE FACTORY
On the European Continent.
WIRE ROPES of everu Description for Mining Purposes
Round and Flat Wire Ropesf^L^.^S^
clines, Towing, Ploughs, Cranes, Etc.
" Albert," or so-called " Lang's " Lay Ropes
SPFPIAI TIPS ■        Patent Locked coil Wire Ropes, Patent Flat-
ortUIHLIILO i       tened Strand Wire Ropes.
Electric Wires and Cables for
Telegraphy, Telephony, Electric
Light and Transmission of Power
WIRE..-—JaeK & RoDertson,
7 St. tlelen St.,
MONTREAL.
The James Robertson Co'y> Limited,
VANCOUVER,   B.C.
Ma (1 llf actll rC rS of Lead Pipe, Lead Traps, White Lead, Beady Mixed Paints,Shot Saws, Colors in Oil, Varnishes, Lacquers, &o.
Jobbers in Wrought Iron Pipe.
METALS.
Office and Warehouse,        -      151  Hastings St
Phone 629. VANCOUVER.
Head Office,   Montreal.	
Ontario Gold Mining
District.
Sultana Mine.
Foley Mine.
Mikado Mine.
Olive Gold Mine.
Cameron Island Mine.
Hammond Reef Co.
Malleable and Cast Iron Fittings, Brass Globe,
Angle and Check Valves.
WRITE   FOR
PRICES.
BRANCHES,
Toronto, St. John, Winnipeg,  VANCOUVER.
A few Mines
who Use
British Columbia.
Le Roi Mine.
War Eagle Mine.
Monte Christo Mine.
Centre Star Mine.
Crown Point Mine.
Slocan Star Mine.
CANADIAN RAND DRILL CO., mmH.HVHT'JE13
MANUFACTURERS
OF
Mining
Machinery
OFFICES:
SANDON
ROSSLAND
GREENWOOD, B.C
JS
^
§r
W
OFFICES:
SANDON
ROSSLAND
GREENWOOD, B.C.
SOIvE   AGENTS   IN    BRITISH    COLUMBIA    FOR
John Bertram & Sons, Iron*Working Machinery.
The MacGregor, Gourlay Go.'s Wood-Working Machinery.
R. Hoe St eo/s Celebrated Inserted Tooth Saws.
BRANCH  OFFICE:
MACKINNON BLOCK,
GRANVILLE STREET
I VANCOUVER,
WORKS:   PETERBORO, ONT.
B.C.
* 'Wttt*    ^rrvrwerf*    x» **r^\T} T\   * '
m,WT'   T r 4 SIT rmv     T7TWni,,t     i«n   lTHTrnmm»     pplnl