lltaas^^S
EEHSSS//^o>
V
V
[SAILING    DIRECTIONS
FOE  THE
WEST    COAST
OF
NORTH   AMERICA.NORTH PACIFIC PILOT: PART I.
SAILING    DIRECTIONS
FOR THE
WEST   COAST
OF
NOUTH   AMERICA,
BETWEEN
PANAMA AND  QUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS.
By JAMES F.  IMBAY, F.R.G.S.
**V
L J V-* .  »/» t.
r!9
T? AUG I
X
n  t r
1870   A
rrru
SECOND   EDITION
s\b.
LONDON:
JAMES IMRAY & SON,
MINORIEs    AND   TOWER   HILL,
1870.
North Pacific Pilot,—Part JI includes u The Islands of the North Pacijl
Ocean m by W. H. Rosser.THE LIBRARY
C/OMMTO
Works
THE UNIVERSITY OF
BRITISH COLUMBIA
IS OR  ANY OF OUR
EDGED.PREFACE
Since the publication of the first edition of this work great and important
changes—both political and commercial—have occurred on the western seaboard t)f the North American Continent; not only have vast territories passed
into other hands and new boundaries been determined for various states, but
the discovery of extensive "gold bearing" districts, which at first drew
thither a large body of immigrants bound for the " diggings," and who went
there merely to search for the precious metals and for minerals, has finally
resulted in the settlement of richly productive agricultural tracts; thus villages
have become towns,—and towns, cities,—while the formerly unfrequented
harbours and roadsteads have become marts of commerce to which the
shipping of all nations resort,—and so, as regards navigation, calls for better
and improved charts, and sailing directions.
The lack of information which rendered the first edition very incomplete
can now no longer be pleaded. In the interval the different maritime nations
have been emulous in the production of good surveys, and hence what formerly
could only be presented to the Navigator in detached fragments, becomes a
connected description of the entire coast from Panama to Queen Charlotte
islands,—not so perfect as a continually increasing commerce may ultimately
demand, but still sufficient for its present exigencies. The deficiences will be
supplied as opportunity offers, as new ports are opened, and as the increasing
traffic of the older ports improves,—as changes resulting alike from physical
and human causes occur.
J. F. I.
Nov. 1867.
a 2AUTHORITIES
The following are some of the publications consulted in the compilation of
this work:—
South American Pilot.    Vol. 2.
Dampier's Voyages.    4 vols.
Voyages and Travels by Captain Basil Hall, R.N.
Central America ; describing the States of Guatemala, Honduras, Salvador, |
Nicaragua and Costa Bica, the natural features, &c, by John Baily, 1850.
The Isthmus of Tehuantepec : being the results of a survey for a railroad,
&c. to connect the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, by J. J. Williams, principal
assistant engineer.
A voyage round the world in the years 1740-4, commanded by Lord Anson.
Compiled from his papers and materials by Richard Walter.
Travels in Mexico by Lieut. Hardy, R.N., 1826.
Report of the reconnaissance of the Gulf of California and the Colorado
river, made in 1850-61.    By Lieut. Geo. H. Derby, U.S. Navy.
Reports of the United States Coast Survey, presented to Congress to 1864;
particularly the volume for 1862, from which the instructions for the coast
of California are chiefly taken.
Vancouver Island Pilot.
Mercantile Marine Magazines to 1868.
Nautical Magazines to 1868.
Annales hydrographiques to 1868.
Narrative of an Exploring Expedition to the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean, by
Captain Charles Wilks, U.S. Navy, 6 vols.
Surveys of portions of the coast of California in the vicinity of San Francisco
bay, by Commander Cadwalader Ringgold, U.S. Navy, 1852.
Narrative of a voyage round the world performed in H.M.S. Sulphur,
during the years 1886-42, by Captain Sir Edward Belcher, R.N.AUTHORITIES.
vu
Narrative of a voyage to the Pacific performed in H.M.S. Blossom,
under the command of Captain F. W. Beechey, R.N., F.R.S., in the years
1825-28.
Voyage of discovery to the North Pacific Ocean and round the world, performed in the years 1790-95 by Captain George Vancouver, R.N.
A voyage to the South Atlantic and round Cape Horn into the Pacific
Ocean, &c.    By James Colnett, R.N., 1792-4.
Reconnaissance hydrographique des cotes occidentales du Centre Amerique,
executee par la corvette La Brilliante, sous le commandement de
M. T. de Lapelin, 1852.
Renseignements sur le Centre Amerique recueillis pendant le voyage de
La Meldnie, 1823, par A. Maire, capitaine au long cours.
Reconnaissance hydrographique des cotes occidentales du Centre Amerique,
province de Veraguas (Nouvelle Grenade) par M. de Rosencoat, capitaine de
fregate, commandant L'Obligado, en 1854.
Exploration du territoire de l'Oregon, des Californies et de la mer Vermeille
executee pendant les annees 1840, 1841 et 1842 par M. Duflot de Mofras,
attache a la Legation de France a Mexico.
Voyage autour du monde, sur la fregate La Venus, commandee par Abel du
Petit-Thouars.    Par C. de Tessan.
Gran Almanaque Mexicano y Directorio del Comercio, 1867.
Numerous " Notices to Mariners | and Charts issued by the Governments
of the United States, Great Britain and France.CONTENTS
GENERAL REMARKS ON CENTRAL AMERICA AND MEXICO.
The Provinces, 1; San Salvador and Honduras, 2 ; Nicaragua and Costa
Rica, 3 ; Lake of Nicaragua, 4 ; Productions, precious metals, &c, 5.
GULF  OP  PANAMA.
Cape Corrientes, 6; Utria, Solano, Cupica and Octavia bays, 7; Pinas,
Garachine and San Miguel bays, 8; Rivers Trinidad and Chiman, 11;
Chepo river, 12 ; Panama, 12; Perico and Flamenco islands, 15 ; Taboga
island, 16 ; Urava and Taboguilla islands, 17 ; Tides and Sailing instructions, 17 ; Chame and Parita bays, 18; Cape Mala, 19 ; Pearl islands, 19 ;
Winds, currents, passages, &c, 23.
CAPE  MALA  TO   CAPE   CORRIENTES.'
Frailes islets, 25 ; Montigo bay, Cebaco and Gobernador islands, Bahia
Houda, 26; Monita and Rosario bays, 28 ; Pueblo Nuevo, 28; San Lorenzo
and David bays, 30; Parida island, 32; Point Burrica and Coiba island, 33;
Hicarons islets, 35 ; Rancheria, Contreras and Secas islets, 86 ; Montuosa
and Ladrones islets, 37; Gulf of Dulce, 37—40 ; Points • Sal-si-puedes
and Llorena 41, ; Cano island, river Aguja, Sierpe bay and Sacate
island, 42; Points Mala de los Indios, Ubita, Dominical and Quepos 43 ;
Point Mala or Judas, 44 ; Port Herradura, 45 ; Gulf of Nicoya, 45—49 ;
Culebra bay, 49; Elena and Salinas bays, 51; San Juan del Sur, 52 ;
Gulf of the Papagayos, 53 ; Cape Desolado and the mountains visible from
sea, 55; Realejo, 56; Coast between Realejo and the gulf of
Fonseca, 60—62 ; Gulf of Fonseca, 62—68 ; Jiquilisco 69; River Lempa
and Libertad, 70 ; Acajutla, 72 ; Istapa, 75 ; San Jose, 76 ; Tehuantepec
lagoons, Ventosa bay, &c, 78; Morro Ayuca and Guatulco, 81; Punta
de Zipegua, 83; Sacrificios, 87; Acapulco, 88; Sihuatanejo, 90;
Manzanilla bay, 93 ; Navidad bay, 95 ; Tenacatita and Perula bays, 97;
Cape Corrientes, 98.
CAPE CORRIENTES TO CAPE SAN LUCAS (GULF OF CALIFORNIA.)
Valle de Banderas bay, 98; Maria islands, 99 ; San Bias, 100 ; Isabel island,
Tecapan and Chamatla rivers, 104 ; Mazatlan, 105 ; Piastla and CuliacanCONTENTS.
IX
rivers, Altata, 107; Ignacio point and island, 109; Guaymas, 110; San
Estevan and Angeles islands, 113; River Colorado, 114; Cape San
Lucas, 117; San Lucas and San Jose del Cabo bays, 118 ; Ceralbo and
Espiritu Santo islands, La Paz bay, 119 ; Pichilinque and La Paz harbours,
the islands of San Josef, San Diego, Santa Cruz, Catalina and Mont-
serrate, 120 ; Carmen island, Loreto, 121; Mulege bay, 122 ; San Marcos
island, &c, 124.
CAPE   SAN  LUCAS  TO  POINT   CONCEPCION.
Magdalena bay, 125 ; Cape San Lazaro, 128 ; Ballenas bay and lagoons, 129 ;
Asuncion and San Roque islands, San Bartolome, 129 ; Point San
Eugenio, 130 ; Lagoons of the coast, 130—132 ; Natividad island, 132 ;
Cerros island, 133 ; San Benito islands, Playa Maria, San Quenfcin, 134 ;
Colnett bay, Coronados islets, San Diego, 135 ; San Luis Rey and San
Juan Capistrano, 138 ; San Pedro, 139 ; Santa Anna Lagoon, Bahia Ona,
Point Hueneme, Buenaventura, &c, 140; Santa Barbara, 141; El
Coxo, 142 ; Point Concepcion, 143.
THE   ISLANDS   OF  CALIFORNIA.
Bitumen pit 144; Cortez bank 145; San Clemente and Santa Catalina
islands 146 ; Santa Barbara island 147; San Nicolas, Begg rock and
Anacapa island 148; Santa Cruz and Santa Rosa islands 149; San Miguel
and Richardson rocks 150.
POINT   CONCEPCION   TO  POINT  REYES.
Point Arguello 150 ; Point Sal, San Luis Obispo 151; San Simeon bay 152;
Piedras Blancas, Punta Gorda, point Sur, Carmel bay &c. 153; Point
Pinos, Monterey bay &c, 154—158; Santa Cruz 158; Point Ano Nuevo,
Half-moon bay, &c, 159; San Francisco bay, 161—169; Duxbury
reef, 169; Drake bay, point Reyes, &c, 170.
THE  FARALLONES.
South Farallon, 171; Middle and North Farallons, Noonday rock, &c, 172.
POINT REYES TO CAPE OLASSET.
Tomales bay and Bodega head, 173; Bodega bay, fort Ross, &c, 174;
Haven anchorage, 175; Point Arena, Albion river, &c, 176; Mendocino
bay, 177; Shelter cove, point Gorda, cape Mendocino, &c, 178; Cape
Fortunas, Eel river, Humboldt bay, &c, 179; Mad river, Trinidad head
and bay, 182; Redding rock and Klamath river, 183; Crescent City
bay, 184; Point Saint George and Dragon rocks, 185; Pelican bay,
Chet-ko river, Rogues river, &c, 186; Port Orford, 187 ; Elk river, 188 ;
Cape Orford and its reef, 189; Coquille river, 190; Cape Arago, 191;
Koos bay, 192; Umpquah river, 193; Hecate bank, cape Perpetua,
Yaquinnah and Celeste rivers, 195; Capes Foulweather and Lookout,
Nekas river, 196; Cape Meares and Tillamook bay, 197; Cape Falcon
and Tillamook head, 198 ; Columbia river, 199—204 ; Shoalwater bay, 204;m
X CONTENTS.
Gray harbour, 208; Copalis river 210; Point Grenville, 211; Queniutl
river, Destruction island, 212; Flattery rocks and Tatoosh island, 214;
Duncan and Duntze rocks, cape Classet, &c, 215.
STRAIT  OF  JUAN  DE  FUCA.
General remarks on the Tides and Navigation, 216—222 ; Nee-ah bay, 222 ;
Callam bay, 224; Freshwater bay, 225; Port Angelos, 226; Ediz Hook
to New Dungeness, 227 ; New Dungeness bay, 228; Washington harbour, 229; Protection island and port Discovery, 230 ; Point Wilson, 230 ;
Bonilla point and San Juan bay, 233; Sherringham point and Sooke
inlet, 234 ; Secretary island, Becher bay, &c, 235 ; Cape Church, Bentinck
island, Race islands, &c, 236; Pedder and Parry bays, Esquimalt
harbour, &c, 237 ; Victoria harbour, 239; Brotchy ledge, 240; Trial
islands, Gonzales point, Oak bay, &c, 242; Cadboro bay and Chain
islets, 243 ; Discovery and Chatham islands, 244 ; Cadboro point, Constance and Fonte banks, 245.
Smith island, Kelp banks, &c, 246 ; Admiralty inlet, 247 ; port Townshend,
248 * Admiralty head, 250 ; Foulweather bluff, 251; ports Madison and
Orchard, Duwanish bay, &c, 252; Restoration point, 253 ; Brace point,
254 • Colvos passage, Commencement bay, point Defiance, the Narrows,
Puget sound, Steilacoom, &c, 255 ; Nisqually, Olympia, 256 ; Hood canal,
ports Ludlow and Gamble, 257 ; Suquamish and Hahainish harbours, 258;
head of Hood canal, 259.
m
POSSESSION   SOUND AND ANCHORAGES.
Whidbey island, Fidalgo island,  &c, 259;  Deception passage, Possession
sound, ports Susan and Gardner, Penn cove, &c, 260.
HARO    ARCHIPELAGO.
Haro strait, 262—264; Rosario strait, 264—268; Alden bank, 268; Genea
remarks on the navigation, 268.
GULF  OF   GEORGIA:    EASTERN   SIDE" TO   FRASER  RIVER.
Bellingham bay, 269 ; Birch bay, Drayton harbour, 270; Semi-ah-moo bay,
point Roberts, and Fraser river, 271—275.
SOUTH-WEST  COAST   OF  VANCOUVER  ISLAND,
General remarks upon the geography of the island, 275—281; Remarks upon
the hydrography of the island, 281—282; Barclay sound, 282—284 :
Clayoquot sound, 284—286; Refuge cove, 286; Hesquiat harbour, Estev
9
anCONTENTS.
XI
QUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS.
General remarks on the islands, cape St. James, &c, 304 ; Houston Stewart
channel, 305; Rose, Cumshewas and Skidegate harbours, 806; Masset
harbour and Virago sound, 308 ; Parry passage and Hippa island, 309 ;
Buck point, Inskip channel, Moore channel, Mitchell or Gold harbour, 310;
Douglas and Tasso harbours, 311; Winds, tides and geographical positions, 811.
ISLANDS AND ROCKS OFF THE COASTS OF CENTRAL AMERICA AND CALIFORNIA.
Cocos island, 312 ; Malpelo island and Clipperton rock, 315 ; Socorro, 317 ;
San Benedicto, Roca Partida and Clarion islands, 318; Alijos rocks and
Guadaloupe island, 319.
TABLE   OF  POSITIONS  AND  VARIATION.
Cape Corrientes to Haro archipelago, 320—325 ; Vancouver island and coast
adjoining, 325—327 ; the islands off the coast, 327.
APPENDIX.
Winds on the western coast of America and the Pacific, 828—342; General
remarks on passages to various ports, 342—351; Remarks on passages to
and from various ports in the Pacific, 351—360 ; Remarks on the coast of
Mexico and gulf of California, by M. Duflot de Mofras, 360—371; Remarks
on various ports in the gulf of California, by Lieut. L. Detroyat, 372;
Remarks on the trading posts of Russian America, 374—378; Table of
geographical positions determined in 1852, by M. Lapelin, of the French
Imperial Navy, 379.i
LIST   OF   PLATES
i
jp
San Francisco Bay
Mazatlan
Guaymas
Mangles Road, Amortajada
Pichilinque, Salinas
Magdalena Bay
San Diego
Monterey
Bodega Bay
Royal Bay
Barclay Sound
To face the Title.
Page
105
110
120
125
135
154
174
237
282
The charts of the coast of North America published by Messrs. Imray & Son, of which
this work may be considered the accompanying Memoir are the following :—
COAST of NORTH AMERICA, from COIBA ISLAND to SAN BLAS ; one large sheet
With plans, on a large scale, of the harbours of Sihuatanejo, Acapulco, Guatulco, San
Carlos, Realejo, Salinas, Culebra, Punta Arenas, Arenitas, San Bias, and illustrated
with some views of the coast. Drawn from the Spanish surveys, and the surveys
of Captain Beechey and Commander Belcher, of the Royal Navy.       ,.        ..    5s. Od.
COAST of NORTH AMERICA from SAN BLAS to SAN FRANCISCO BAY, on two
large sheets, with plans of the harbours of Mazatlan, Magdalen Bay, Guaymas, Monterey,
San Francisco, &c. Compiled chiefly from the United States Coast Survey, the
Spanish surveys, &c. &c, and much improved by recent observations made by English
and French Naval officers 10s. Od
COAST ofiNORTH AMERICA from SAN FRANCISCO to QUEEN CHARLOTTE
ISLANDS, on two large sheets, with many plans of harbours, including St. Juan
de Fuca.Strait, Port Victoria, Nootka Sound, Port San Juan, Beeher and Pedder Bays
and Esquimault Harbour
10s. Od.SAILING  DIRECTIONS
FOR  THE
WEST   COAST
OF
NOETH   AMERICA.
(ADDENDA TO MARCH 1st, 1869.;
CAPE CORRIENTES.—The reported rock Richmond, referred to inthie
text, was inserted in the charts upon the sole authority of a shipmaster a Mr. S.
Richmond, in 1855 who had been informed that there was such a rock. As
the locality in question is constantly traversed by vessels trading with the
ports of Central America, the rock if it existed, would be frequently met with;
hitherto its existence has not been confirmed. It was probably nothing more
than a floating wreck.    Page 98.
CULIACAN RIVER leading to Altata. From a sketch of the entrance
to this river by Mr. T. "Warr, E..N. 1866, published by the Hydrographic
Office of the Admiralty in 1867 (No. 2293), it appears that the channel in is
between heavy breakers which are fronted by a bar of 3J to 4J fathoms ; the
latter is, however, probably subject to change as the depth upon is reported to
be at times only 2f fathoms. At that period the leading mark over the bar
was, Double peak in one with the Saddle of Culiacan bearing N.E.; this was
also a good mark for anchoring outside the bar in 6 to 7 fathoms water.
The village of Altata is on the north shore of the river at about 4£ miles
from the bar, and its approximate geographical position (assuming Creston
island, Mazatlan, to be in long. 106° 22' 24" W.) is lat. 24° 36' 36" N. long.
107° 52' $6" W. It is high water on the days of full and change of the moon
at llh. 30m.; spring tides rise about 6 feet.
Schooners and vessels of 50 or 100 tons can enter the river at any time,
provided they have sufficient wind in their favour to enable them to stem then
WEST COAST OF NORTH AMERICA.
tide, which has a strength occasionally of 4 to 5 knots.    The ebb tide carries
discoloured water several miles to sea ; this is often mistaken for shoal water.
The soundings from seaward to the bar decrease very regularly ; at the bar
the depth decreases suddenly. The river above Altata is reported to be
navigable for a distance of 10 or 12 miles, with an average depth of 5 fathoms.
Pages 107 and 372.
AGIABAMPO or Jiabampa was visited in 1826 by Mr. F. Townsend,
R.N. From the published sketch of the harbour (No. 2293) it appears that the
port is fronted by a bar upon which the sea breaks. The channel at that time
was very narrow, only 9 to 12 feet deep, and the leading mark in was the inner
of the two crosses at the shore side (that on the hill) bearing East; the channel
is, however, probably subject to change. The depth immediately outside this
channel is 4 to 6 fathoms.
Mr. Townsend says " Agiabampo is difficult to find as the coast is composed
of one long line of low sand-hills covered with bushes ; mount Alimos to the
North, and Alligator hill to the South are the best guides to it. The best
anchorage is in about 7 or 8 fathoms, with Alligator hill bearing S. i W.;
mount Alimos N. by E. \ E. ; and the cross on the hill E. i S. The soundings decrease very regularly until near the bar, when from 3J fathoms the
water shoals suddenly to 9 feet. The best time for boats to enter is the
morning, before or with the first of the sea breeze. Schooners of 50 to 100
tons go in and out with the sea and land winds. Treasure from Alimos is now
shipped here ; it is, consequently, much frequented. The approximate geographical position of the cross on the hill is lat. 26° 16' 18" N. long.
109° 13*25" W.    Pages 110 and 373,
RIVER COLORADO.—" The Colorado river, whether considered as
an independent water-course through an almost unbroken country, or in connection with the railroads that are stretching across the continent, is an object
of peculiar interest. A report was lately submitted to the merchants of
San Francisco by G, W. Gilmore, who was commissioned to examine and
explore the river, with the view of ascertaining its practicability as a navigable
route to Utah.
A small steamer called the Esmeralda was fitted out for the trip. The
steamer was 97 feet long, with 12 inch cylinders and 12 foot wheel, having
in tow alongside a barge 126 feet long and 27 feet beam, used for carrying
fuel along the upper portion of the stream where wood was difficult to obtain.
The distance from fort Isabel, the mouth of the river, to Colville, in Utah, is
600 miles. The country is described as for a considerable part peopled by
friendly Indians, cultivating corn and nearly every kind of vegetables. Other
portions are heavily timbered. The river is from $ to l£ miles wide, and the
water from 4 to 8 feet deep, and no serious obstructions from rapids or other
causes.
The renowned Black Canon is from 8 to 10 miles in length. Through this
the river flows with a deep current, and an average width of 200 feet. The
water is smooth and unbroken, and no rocks obstruct the passage. A large
portion of the distance perpendicular walls rise to the height of 1000 feet on
either side, in some places almost shutting out the light of day, and awaking
in the mind of the voyager, the most profound admiration and awe. In solemn
grandeur and native sublimity, no spot on earth equals the Black Canon of theWEST COAST OF NORTH AMERICA.
Rio Colorado of the West. Years ago when Lieutenant Ives first passed
through it in a small boat, he reported its navigation impracticable, if not impossible. But the inexorable claims of commerce have at last pierced its
gloomy depths, and its grim walls will soon send back the echoes of shrill
steam whistles and the splash of paddle-wheels." Mercantile Marine Magazine.
1868.    Pages 114-117.
LA PAZ.—The harbour of La Paz has been surveyed by Mr. Dent, C.E.
From the planNo. 2293, (published in 1867), it appears that from the south-west
side of the harbour, El Mocote, a shoal of only 3 to 4 feet water, extends about
2\ miles in a north-easterly direction, or nearly to Prieta point the north point
of the harbour ; the channel in is, consequently, close under that point. The
bar has upon it a depth at 2J fathoms at low water, and immediately outside
it are soundings of 5, 6 and 7 fathoms at the same period of tide. The
harbour consists of a narrow channel of 3£ to 4 and 3| fathoms, between the
shoal just referred to and the eastern shore, and vessels at anchor off the town
are sheltered by the shoal from seas sent in by north-westerly winds. The
depth in the channel-way opposite the town is 3J to 4J fathoms. The
approximate geographical position of La Paz is lat. 24° 7' 30" W.,
long. 110° 16' 20" W.    Pages 120 and 371.
ESPIRITO SANTO ISLAND.—The channel south-westward of this
island, between it and San Lorenzo point, is 4 miles wide and has a depth of
5 to 8 fathoms, the depth of 5 fathoms being on a bar which connects the island
to the shore. Upon this bar is a reef of 12 feet (in some few spots of less than
3 feet) water, situated in nearly mid-channel, but nearer the island than the
shore, known as Lorenzo reef. Shallow ground also extends out a short distance
from the shore on the south-east side of the channel.
In addition to San Lorenzo reef, a reef was discovered by the officers of
H.M.S. Scout in 1868. This rocky patch has a depth of 9 to 12 feet water
over it, is distant nearly l£ miles from the south-east shore of the channel, and
discoloured water was observed to extend some distance northward from it
although a depth of not less than 6^- fathoms was obtained. From it, the
centre of a gap next southward of the highest peaks of Ceralbo island bore
E. by S.: the eastern extreme of Espirito Santo N. £ E.; North rock (breakers)
N. $ E.; and the highest land on the California shore just open north-eastward of a peculiar red mound on Dispensa point, the southern end of
Espirito Santo. These bearings place it W. f S. lj miles from Arranco
Cabella point, and N. J W. H miles from San Lorenzo point.
From the foregoing it will be seen how imperfectly the hydrography of the
channel is known, and how necessary it is for shipmasters to be more than
ordinarily vigilant when sailing through it. The approximate geographical
position of Lopona point, the south-west extremity of Espirito Santo island is
lat. 24° 24' 15" N. long. 110° 18' 20" W. It is high water on the days of
full and change of the moon at 8h. 30m.; springs rise 6 feet.    Page 119.
POINT CONCEPCION.—The lighthouse is on the highest part of the
cape, which is estimated to be 220 feet above the sea. Its geographical
position is lat. 34° 26' 47" N. long. 120° 27' W. not 120° 20' 23" W. which
is stated in the text on the authority of the U.S. Lighthouse Lists published
officially at Washington 1867 and 1868 and is probably a typographical error.
Page 143.WEST COAST OF NORTH AMERICA.
m
IV-;   .
i
CAPE MENDOCINO.—An iron tower 20 feet high, in shape a polygon
of 16 sides and painted white, has been erected on the western slope of this
cape. The official public notice of its establishment states that it " shows a
white revolving light; duration of flash 5 seconds, duration of eclipse 15 seconds
interval between flash and eclipse 5 seconds." It is 380 feet above
the mean sea level, and in ordinary weather^ is visible from a
distance of about 27 miles. Its geographical position is lat. 40° 25' N. long.
124° 22' W. and from it cape Blanco bears N. by W. % W. 145 miles; Crescent
City light N. by W. \ W. 79i miles ; Trinidad head N. \ W. 39 miles; point
Arenas S.E. | S. 93 miles; and point Reyes S.E. \ S. 160 miles.
At about 300 yards southward of the tower, and on nearly the same elevation,
is the keeper's dwelling, a brick house of two stories, with a wing of one storey
on each side.    Page 178.
PUGET SOUND.—The following remarks are from the Mercantile
Marine Magazine, 1868. "Puget Sound has fine natural advantages and
unrivalled beauties, while the thriving towns and numerous large lumbering
camps indicate that enterprising men with means are there. To -enter into
brief detail then, we begin at the head of the Sound and go northward:—
Olympia, the capital of Washington Territory, is 140 miles from Portland (per stage) and 480 from Victoria (per steamer); it is well laid out, is
improving in style of architecture, contains the Government offices, schools,
churches, various ^humane societies, hydrant water, a dozen stores, three
weekly papers, and a telegraph office. Two miles above, the Tumwater river
falls 60 feet in 500 yards, affording a very fine water-power which has not
been neglected. There is a large flour mill just below the Falls, also a saw
mill and tannery; and a picturesque village has grown up along the banks of
the Tumwater. Olympia is in tri-weekly mail connection with Portland,
overland, and weekly with Victoria and various way-points by steamer. The
population is 800.
Steilacoom, the county seat of Pierce county, is 25 miles below Olympia.
Fort Steilacoom (now unoccupied) is \\ miles from the town—back from the
water.    The population of Steilacoom is 150.
Seattle.—Seattle is 30 miles below Steilacoom, on the east shore of the
Sound, is the county seat of King county, and the seat of the University of
Washington Territory. It is situated on an eminence overlooking Seattle bay,
and contains seven stores, a saw mill that cuts 20,000 feet per day, one
weekly paper, a telegraph office, a post office and an express office. It also
has a good harbour, and three steamboats; and it employs three vessels
shipping piles to San Francisco. Two and a half miles back from Seattle is
lake Washington, on the borders of which are the noted coal beds of the
Lake Washington Coal Company,—and other veins. The future prospects of
Seattle are good ; if the railroad terminates there, the growth and prosperity
of the place are rendered certain. The present population is 500. From
Seattle to Port Townshend is 60 miles.
Port Madison.—Passing across the Sound from Seattle to the northwest,
and around a point on the north shore of Brainbridge island, we enter Port
Madison bay, which is 300 yards wide and completely landlocked—one of the
cosiest bays on the Sound. Port Madison is 15 miles from Seattle, on the
east shore of the bay, and about 35 miles from port Townshend.    There is—-
WEST COAST OF NORTH AMERICA.
here a fine steam mill, cutting 75,000 feet of lumber per day ; also, machine
and repair shops, a store, and 600 feet of dock.
Tekalet (Port Gamble of Admiralty chart), is 8 miles by trail, or 25
miles by water from port Madison, and 20 miles above port Townshend. At
this point is the most extensive lumbering establishment on the Sound, if not
on the Pacific Coast. There is a circular saw of the largest class, fitted with the
modern improvements, with a capacity to cut 180,000 feet of lumber per
day,—besides the lath and shingles from each mill. Tekalet has the usual
advantages and attractions (political, social and moral) which appertain to a
modern village, excepting that the proportion of families and ladies is too small
for high social elevation. The same is true .of all the lumbering camps in
Washington Territory.    But time in a manner will remedy this evil.
Tekalet employs 300 men, and has machine shops, stores and hydrant water.
Port Ludlow.—Seven miles from Tekalet are the noted Ludlow mills
which cut 75,000 feet per day, besides lath and shingles.     The harbour
consists of a well protected crescent-formed bay.    The town site has a southern
exposure.    It is 16 miles from port Townshend.
Port Townshend, which is near the entrance to the Sound proper, and
40 miles from Victoria, has the Custom House. It is also the county seat,
and boasts of a newspaper, stores, hotels, and an increasing population
representing the various trades and professions. The residences are mostly
situated on a high bank, commanding a fine view. The climate of port
Townshend, though somewhat disagreeable in winter, is exceedingly salubrious.
At present one vessel is being built here.    The- population of the town is 300.
There are other points on the Sound which I had not time to visit. At least
five other fine mills are now working, namely :—one at Seabeck, cuts 60,000
feet per day, and employs 9 vessels and 120 men; others at port Orchard,
port Discovery, and Utsalady, each about the same capacity as that at Seabeck;
and one at port Blakely, which is a little smaller, cutting about 40,000 feet
.per day.
The aggregate capacity of all the mills on the Sound is about 650,000 feet
per day, of 24 hours.
Puget Sound, then, being a fine, capacious harbour, in range with the
Trade-winds of the Chinese seas and East Indies ; supplied with abundance of
timber, enough to last for three centuries to come; surrounded with a fertile
agricultural country; the probable terminus of a great railroad; the point
selected for a navy yard ; and possessing unlimited water power, inexhaustible
coal mines and valuable fisheries, must become in the future a very important
section of the Pacific slope."    Page 255.
ALASKA TERRITORY,—UNITED STATES.
[Extract from a communication to the Mercantile Marine Magazine hy an  American
Correspondent.]
The territory of Alaska has been recently ceded to the United States
by Russia, and was formerly known as Russian America. Its akea is
estimated at about 578,000 square miles, and its population at less than
§»
1
6
WEST COAST OF NORTH AMERICA.
2000 whites, and about 60,000 half-breeds and Indians. I Its military force
consists of five companies of artillery and one company of infantry—six companies in all. Six military posts have been designated, each garrisoned by one
company, viz. : Fort Kodiak, Fort Kenay, Sitka, Fort Koutznou, Fort Wrangle and Fort Tongass.
Tongass:—Fort Tongass is situated on a small island, one of the Wales
island group, immediately north of Portland inlet, and but a few miles above
the southern boundary of Alaska. The post was established in May last; the
work of erecting quarters is still going on. But a small portion of the primitive forest has yet been cleared off; the new houses—built of logs, with shingled
roofg—are seen struggling up through the green undergrowth, and cropping
out through the stumps of the fallen trees.
The vegetation at Tongass is almost tropical, some of the trees cut down
in clearing for the military post were 7 and 8 feet in diameter. There is
plenty of good timber in the immediate vicinity—principally fir, hemlock,
and cedar. The cedar, especially, makes fine shingles and boards. The grass
on the island is of good quality and abundant. Fish of excellent flavour can
be caught in quantites right at the post; brook-trout of large size abound in
the streams ; venison, bears, geese and ducks can be purchased of the Indians,
at nominal prices ; the beach supplies superb clams   and mussels.
After leaving Tongass the shore presents a better appearance. The hills
are not so high, the soil deeper, and the forest trees uniformly of better
quality. At no distant day all these lands will be valuable for timber, if for
no other purpose. The climate is certainly not as rigorous as has been
represented. It is probably not much different from that of the coast about
the mouth of the Columbia river. The woods are filled with blackberries,
huckleberries, and salmonberries ; the rich undergrowth of shrubs, ferns and
wild vines, indicates a soil that will be fruitful when the woodman's axe
shall fell the ancient forest and let the sunlight in upon the glad acres.
Wrangle is pleasantly situated on Wrangle island, in the bight of a
beautiful bay, called Etoline hai'bour, a few miles south of the mouth of the
Stickeen river. The scenery around this place is the finest we had yet seen
in Alaska. The buildings for the port are being-rapidly erected in a most
substantial manner. There is a large Indian village in the immediate vicinity.
There is also a Custom-house officer here, detailed from the Revenue cutter.
The timber on the island is mainly spruce, hemlock, and cedar. The spruce
makes very superior clear lumber. There is good grazing on the island; we
saw wild rye 5 feet high, also potatoes and vegetables growing. Specimens of
quartz, having indications of silver, were shown us, also samples of coal,
both found in the vicinity. The country has not yet been explored; no
doubt valuable mines will be discovered when the proper explorations are
made ; but such cannot be made except by Companies having sufficient capital
to employ vessels to transport the exploring parties from one part of the coast
to another. Coal has been found in several places ; Captain Mitchell, of the
Saginaw, has taken 60 tons from a mine near Sitka, and run his vessel with
it down to Victoria. Wrangle, from its proximity to the Stickeen river, through
which a large trade with the Indians of the interior can be carried on, its
central position, and contiguity to the best salmon fisheries, will undoubtedly
become a place of importance. A few gold miners still work the bars of the
Stickeen, but no large strikes are reported.WEST COAST OF NORTH AMERICA. 7
Sitka:—The harbour of Sitka is a very picturesque one, with plenty of
water for the largest ships to pass in and out, but a dangerous one, owing to
the large number of little islets and rocks, between which pass narrow channels,
any of them with sufficient water to float a ship, but hardly sea-room
enough to be safe; however, the old Russian pilot seems to have no difficulty
in getting through them when required. The entrance to the harbour lis
superb. Mount Edgecome towers up some 8000 feet above the level of the
sea ; its immense crater, filled with snow, marks the north-western boundary
of the harbour, and can be seen at a great distance ; Branor island is
made up of mountains piled on mountains, looking as if pushed up out of
the sea by some grand convulsion of nature at no very distant day, as
evidenced by their peaked summits and jagged outlines. Edgecome looks
down upon them all and casts its immense shadow far over the waters of the
bay, and at some day long past has lighted it up with its flames, and shaken
the whole island with its mutterings.
The town of Sitka, formerly New Arkhangel, is situated on a point of land
jutting out into the bay, from the base of the mountains, probably containing about 1000 acres, and from the character of the soil appears to have
been made by the washings of the ocean. On the point is a large lake of
fresh water, in front of which, along the edge of the bay, are about 150 log
houses, scattered about promiscuously. There is but one street, and that
extends through the whole length of the town, and is continued for about a mile
to Indian river, a little mountain stream emptying into the bay at this point.
This is the only road on the island ; beyond this, and in fact, on all sides of
the island, for some distance before you reach its termination, the thicket is
impenetrable. This .little river furnishes splendid water, cold as ice, and
seems to get its supply from the melting snows on the summit of the
mountains. To this little river the road leads, and was made by the Russians
for the purpose of getting water, as the lake water is hardly fit to drink.
There is not a well or cistern on the island, a large proportion of the water
used being carried in small casks slung on a pole, on the shoulders of two men
or women.
There is a dock here, which is in a dilapidated condition, and cannot be used
for ships to lay alongside of until it is extended. The Russians had an old
hulk anchored in front of it and a staging built, but this was destroyed by the
furious gale we had here shortly after our arrival.
The Indians have a market here; they furnish any quantity of fish
and game, charging a fair price for it. It might be interesting to
some of your readers to know something about the prices, as well as the
article offered, so I will give you a list : Deer, from three to four dollars;
grouse, 25 cents each; ducks, 25 cents each; wild geese, 75 cents to $1 ;v
snipe, 50 cents a dozen; clams, 25 cents a basket; halibut, as much as you
can carry for 75 cents; cod, 50 cents for a big fish; salmon, during the
season, from 10 to 25 cents each. The smoked articles they offer I am not
familiar with, nor do I care about becoming so, as well as some that are not
smoked.
Our present population may be considered a floating one. It is mostly
made up of a parcel of men who came up here in the employ of the Govern-8 WEST COAST OF NORTH AMERICA.
ment at the rate of one hundred dollars per head, to perform certain duties,
such as driving mules, etc., but becoming recreant to their promises have
built shanties and gone into the liquor business, eating-houses, etc. All
our improvements in the way of new buildings, with but one or two exceptions,
are of this class, and seem to be well patronized. There is one first-class
billiard saloon, with bar attached, and one or two very good restaurants. There
are some stores besides the Sutler's, with very good stocks of goods, and these
seem to be well patronized. We also have a lager beer brewery, which I think
is flourishing.
JAMES IMRAY & SON,
89 & 102, Minories, London.
To be inserted behind the Title of the Sailing Directions for the West Coast of North
America.SAILING  DIRECTIONS
FOE THE
WEST COAST
OF
NORTH   AMERICA.
*** The Bearings and Courses^ are Magnetic. The Depths are those at
low water spring tides. The Distances are in Nautical miles of 60 to a
Degree of Latitude.
N.B.—As the Latitudes in this work are North of the Equator, and the Longitudes are
West of Greenwich, the distinctive letters N. and W. are omitted.
COASTS OF CENTRAL AMERICA AND MEXICO.
Central America includes all the territory lying between Mexico on the
north, and the isthmus of Panama, on the south. In length 700 miles, and of
very variable breadth, it nevertheless contains 192,000 English square miles;
or more than twice the extent of Great Britain. Situated in the torrid
zone, between latitude 8° and 18°, longitude 81^° to 93°, it at once separates
the Atlantic from the Pacific ocean, and unites the continents of North
and South America; a position as important commercially, as it is geographically remarkable and unique.
It includes the independent states of Guatemala, San Salvador, Honduras,
Nicaragua,* and Costa Rica, with the British colony of Belize, or British
Honduras. It is bounded on the north by Mexico ; on the south-west by the
Pacific; and on the east by the Caribbean sea, and the bay of Honduras.
The five states of Central America nearly correspond, at the present time,
with the p Lrtendencias," as they existed under Spanish Colonial rule. Their
boundaries are pretty clearly defined, and vary but little. They are subdivided
into departments, and districts; the latter applying to the less peopled,
though often extensive tracts, covered with almost impenetrable forests.
* The Mosquito  territory, formerly under British protection, is now included in the
state of Nicaragua.
oCOAST OF CENTRAL AMERICA,
The state of Guatemala includes a considerable and populous highland district
to the south and west, while to the northward, vast territories, such as those
of Vera Paz and El Peten, are but thinly inhabited. It has the largest
population (nearly one million), and far surpasses the other states in import
ance. Its growing tradel is considerable, and principally carried on with the
English. Istapa and St. Thomas are the principal seaports. The exports
are numerous, consisting chiefly of cotton, wheat, cocoa, sugar, coffee, dyewoods,
metals, and cochineal. In 1860 the imports amounted to $1,484,700, and
the exports to $1,916,800.
In lat. 14° 41', long. 90° 86', is Guatemala la Nueva, a new city, the
inhabitants having abandoned the old city on account of earthquakes. This
is the present capital, and though a comparatively mean looking place of one
storied houses, it may on many accounts be considered as the principal town in
Central America. It is situated on the border of one of the elevated plateaux
of the main Cordillera, known as Los Llanos de las Vacas, or the valley of
Harmita. This plain is surrounded by bold ranges of mountains, among
which stand prominent the two lofty volcanoes of Agua and Fuego,
and a third called El Volcan de Pacaya, which is scarcely, if at all, inferior
to them. The plain is about 5000 feet above the level of the sea, and is
15 miles wide and 18 broad. The climate though considered inferior to
that of Antigua or old Guatemala, is mild and salubrious. The thermometer
rarely rises above 70°, and still more rarely descends below 64°. The number
of inhabitants, who are chiefly Ladinos, the mixed or Mestizo race, and pure
Creole Spaniards, the unmixed descendants of Spanish colonists, is estimated
at 60,000 ; and in importance and wealth, it is second, in Spanish America,
only to the city of Mexico.
The state of San Salvador is situated on the western coast. Its climate is hot,
but more healthy than that on the eastern shores—perhaps because the land
is better cleared and cultivated. The chief products of this state are indigo,
and tobacco. The city of San Salvador, its capital, only a few miies distant
from the Pacific ocean, was nearly destroyed by an earthquake in 1854, prior
to which it contained 20,000 inhabitants ; but it is now reviving: during a
short period it was the seat of the Federal Union, and, like Washington, it
had at that time a certain territory around the city, distinguished as the
Federal District. Cojutepeque is an important town with 15,000 inhabitants,
and Sonsonate with 10,000 inhabitants is famous for its distilleries. The
principal seaports are Acajutla, Libertad and La Uuion. In 1860 the imports
amounted to $1,319, 800, and the exports to $2,340,800.
The state of Honduras takes its name from the bay of Honduras, (signifying
depths,) which forms its northern boundary. The first navigators so denominated it, because they with difficulty obtained soundings in it. The surface
of the ground is, in this state, even more generally uneven than elsewhere. Its
population is scanty in comparison with the two former states; and, like
Guatemala, it still comprises vast districts of virgin forests, partially peopled
by Indians. The climate, like that of the other states, is varied, being
generally temperate in the interior, which is notable for its mines,—and hot near
the coasts, which abound with rivers, from the banks of which much mahoga,ny
and sarsaparilla are obtained. Comayagua (formerly Valladolid) the capital, is a
city of some importance, with 18,000 inhabitants. This state possesses two
sea-ports, Truxillo and Omoa, which were active as military and commercial depots of Spain, but are now fallen into comparative decay. Tegucigalpa has gold, silver and copper mines in its vicinity.COAST OF CENTRAL AMERICA,
The state of Nicaragua is exceedingly fertile, and generally salubrious; but,
notwithstanding its possessing several advantages over Honduras, it is but little
more populous. This may partly be accounted for by the absence of any
leading branch of industry, or any considerable activity in its commerce, but
still more by its frequent civil wars. In a land surpassingly volcanic, this
state is pre-eminently so. The very roads, in some parts, sound hollow under
the hoofs of the mules or horses. Leon, the capital, and Granada are large
cities, and once enjoyed great wealth and commercial prosperity; but, like all
chief towns in Central America, they have suffered much from crime and
consequent internal disorganization, as well as from civil wars, political commotions, and misrule. These cities, from the highest rank in repute and
influence, are now reduced to little better than heaps of ruins, scantily inhabited,
and, where best, affording abundant evidence of both earlier and more recent
devastations. Leon, between lake Managua and the Pacific, is said to have
contained at one time 32,000 people; it is now reduced to less than half that
number. Granada one of the oldest cities in Central America has about 10,000
inhabitants; it is beautifully situated on the N.W. shore of the lake Nicaragua.
The town of Nicaragua, about 36 miles south-east of Granada, though inferior
in size and importance, gives its name to the state and the lake. Like Granada,
it is advantageously situated on its banks, opposite the populous island of
Ometepec, which is in the lake, and contains an active volcano. Great interest
at present attaches to this state and its waters, in connection with the long
formed and often talked-of project of connecting the two oceans at this point,
which is now about to be put to the test of experiment, if not actually to be
realized.
The Central America state which at present enjoys the greatest degree of
tranquility and political prosperity, is Costa Rica. Its isolated position on the
narrower part of the isthmus of Panama, making communication with the other
states difficult, has preserved it in a great measure from participating in the
wars that have desolated the rest of the country; a circumstance which,
conjointly with a great accession of commercial vigour, arising out of the
successful cultivation of coffee, has given it of late an impulse unknown to the
sister states. While other large cities have been decaying, San Jose, its
new capital, has risen into importance within a very few years, and already
numbers upwards of 30,000 inhabitants. Cartago, the former capital, and
two other towns of some magnitude (Heredia and Alajuela) occupy, with the
modern capital, an extensive table-land stretching almost across the isthmus.
These towns, together with two or three small ports on each ocean, include
almost the entire population (126,750) of this compact and thriving state.
In 1860 the imports amounted to $911,000, and the exports to $1,373,900.
The principal lake in Central America is that of Nicaragua, whose surplus
waters descend to the Atlantic by the river San Juan del Norte. It is an inland
sea, larger than the island of Jamaica, being 90 miles long N.W. to S.E.,
and about 40 miles broad; with an area of about 3500 square miles.
In many places the water is 10 to 15 fathoms deep, and it is stated
that there are but few shallows. It contains a small archipelago of
islands, and on one fertile and populous island, named Ometepec, there is a
volcano. This lake is also connected with that called Managua, itself no
inconsiderable body of water. The shores of these magnificent waters, which
are likely to afford important facilities for commerce, are of surpassing fertility,
b 2COAST OF CENTRAL AMERICA.
I
and as salubrious as they are beautiful. It is from the lake of Nicaragua that
the canal is proposed to be cut, connecting the lake with the port of San Juan
del Sur, on the Pacific.
Not far from the western or Pacific coast, the country is traversed from
north-west to south-east by a continuous cordillera or unbroken chain of
mountains, unbroken at least as far as the lake of Nicaragua, which are
covered with diversified vegetation. This forms a kind of connecting chain
between the rocky mountains of the north, and the Andes of the South American continent. Some of the loftiest summits are 12,000 feet high. Frequent
spurs or offsets from the | Sierra Madre," the main ridge, intersect the plains
at right angles, and sometimes extend to the sea shore.
At various degrees of elevation along the sides and on the summits of the
mountains, are numerous plateaux or table-lands, like so many natural terraces,
some of them of great extent, and all delightfully temperate and luxuriantly
fertile. These regions especially seem to invite the residence of man, and to
invite the culture of his hand. They constitute a distinguishing feature of
this and some neighbouring countries. But none of those countries, and
probably no part of the earth, presents a greater diversity of level on a surface
of equal extent than does Central America; consequently, no country possesses
such variety of climate, or offers such facilities of adaptation to all kinds of
productions and to all constitutions of men, from the sun-burnt inhabitants of
a tropical plain, to the hardy mountaineer inured to perpetual snows.
Most of the highest peaks and isolated mountains are volcanoes. The rocks
are of granite, gneiss, and basalt; but volcanic formations and ejections predominate. Not less than thirty volcanic vents are said to be still in activity.
The traces of remote, as well as recent earthquakes are clearly discernible in
the fissures and ravines that everywhere abound. Extinct craters, rent rocks,
beds of lava, scoriae, vitrified, charred, and pumice stones, together with hot
and sulphureous springs, all mark it as the most volcanic region known.
Indeed, shocks of earthquakes, generally slight, are periodically felt at the
opening and closing of the wet season.
The productions of Central America are numerous. Abundant materials for
exchange with other nations are afforded in cotton, coffee, sugar-cane, arrowroot, ginger, tobacco, and even silk-worms, though but lately imported; but
especially in | anil" (indigo), and | grana" (cochineal), which, because most
lucrative, absorb almost all the attention of the planter. Other marketable
productions are not wanting; but both known and unknown sources of wrealth
decay in the forests, or lie hidden beneath the soil. Besides these, the
more temperate regions yield all, or nearly all, the productions which are
raised in Europe. Wheat and barley are cultivated sometimes by the side of
the sugar-cane, on the elevated plains ; and the markets of the larger towns
are supplied at once with the productions of torrid and of temperate climes;
so that, at all seasons, the green pea, the cauliflower, and cos-lettuce, are sold
along with the avocato-pear, sweet potato, olive, capsicum, or chillies, and
many other productions of opposite climates, less delicate, perhaps, but more
common and useful. Of edible fruits, those most common are the banana,
pine-apple, orange, sweet lemon, lime, shaddock, forbidden fruit, water-melon',
musk-melon, sapote, mango, guava, fig, tamarind, pomegranate, granadilla
(fruit of the passion flower), sea-grape, papia, mammae, star and custard-apples,
cocoa, cashew, and ground nuts. There are said to be in all | more than forty
genera," including, probably, those introduced from Europe, such as the apple,COAST OF CENTRAL AMERICA.
pear, quince, cherry, &c, which, though they are found to thrive, are little
appreciated, and none of any sort can be said to be cultivated with care. The
same remark applies, though with frequent exceptions, to garden flowers,
which are still more varied.
It has been well observed by Mr. Frederick Crowe, that "the precious
. metals of Central America, together with quicksilver, copper, lead, iron, talc,
litharge, and most other minerals that are in use, only await the labour and
ingenuity of man to extract them from the bowels of the earth, and convert
them into objects of convenience and beauty; and seams of coal, ochre, gypsum, sal-ammoniac, and wells of naptha, are also ready to yield their valuable
stores. Jasper, opal, and other precious stones are also found; and pearl
fisheries have long existed upon the coasts. In fine, there is no lack of any
thing that nature can bestow to sustain, to satisfy, and to delight. So abundant
are the necessaries of life that none need want; so profuse are the bounties of
nature that they are suffered to decay through neglect. The peach-tree and
the rose run wild on the borders of the orange grove, whose firuits and flowers
are alike simultaneous and perennial; and the pine-apple, the mango, and the
water melon are preferred to the almond, the olive, and the grape. Such is the
nature of the soil, that the exuberance of that wealth which rots upon its
surface in the less populous parts of Central America, would amply clothe and
satisfy with bread thousands of the sons of want who fill our streets and unions,
dispelling that squalid wretchedness which penury and destitution have produced, and mitigating some of the woes which embitter the lot of so many of
our fellow-countrymen. It may be that the time is not far distant when many
such will seek these fruitful shores, and under wise direction, not only benefit
themselves, but, while redeeming fertile valleys and plains from desolation,
greatly bless the timid natives with higher arts of life.
Lying between the parallels of 10° to 18°, and almost insular as to any
influence of the continent on its temperature, the climate of the coasts and
lowlands is hot and humid. That of the interior varies with the altitude, and
is generally mild, equable, and salubrious. The two seasons, aptly designated
the t wet' and the ' dry,' are well defined. They may be said equally to divide
the year, though they vary considerably in different districts. The rains,
everywhere copious, are more continual in some parts, and the drought is
more severe in others, but the dry season is nowhere uninterrupted by refreshing showers, and the wet is everywhere relieved by an interval of dry weather.
In the highlands of the interior, the seasons are singularly regular. The
dry weather commences about the close of October, and terminates on the
12th or 13th of May, rarely varying even a few hours. It is most frequently
on the 12th that \ the windows of heaven are opened.' The sky is then
suddenly obscured with thick clouds, which burst simultaneously, often
accompanied with thunder, and sometimes with hail. This is confined to the
afternoon, and returns on the following days, or perhaps for successive weeks,
at the same hour, or a little later. During the whole of the wet season, which
is by far the most agreeable, the forenoon is almost invariably cloudless, and
the atmosphere clear, elastic, and balmy. The rains are often confined to the
evening and night, or to the night hours only. During the dry season, the
mornings and evenings are often so cool and bracing as to predispose to active
exercise, though fires are never resorted to. Through the day the sky is
seldom obscured, and light clouds only are to be seen sweeping rapidly along
the plains during the short twilight that ushers in the equinoctial day, thencer     ■
i
I
6
CAPE CORRIENTES,
they rise and hang in clusters round the tops of the mountains till the sun has
gathered strength to dispel them; in the evening they return to attend its
setting, and add inimitable beauty to the gorgeous scene. At all seasons the
entire disc of the moon is distinctly visible through all its phases, but now it
shines with such uninterrupted clearness, as entirely to supersede, when above
the horizon, the necessity of artificially lighting the streets; and even in the
absence of the ruler of the night, the brilliancy of the stars dispels all gloom.
In some districts on the eastern coasts, through local influences, it rains more
or less all the year ; which, however, adapts them for the growth of certain
vegetable productions; while the districts where the dry weather lasts the
longest are alone suitable for the cultivation of others. On the more elevated
plains, such as those of Quesaltenango, in the department of Los Altos, the
heat is never so great has during the summer months in England; and though
snow is said sometimes to fall in December and January, it immediately
dissolves, and the thermometer never descends so low as the freezing point."
GULP OF PANAMA.
The southern limits of the gulf of Panama are usually considered to be
point Garachine and cape Mala. The coast immediately south of the gulf is
not properly included within the limits of the present work, but as many shipmasters using it, may make the gulf from southward, it is considered convenient
to commence our description of the coast with cape Corrientes.
CAPE CORRIENTES, the south-west extremity of which is in
lat. 5° 28' 46", long. 77° 32' 33", may be easily known by the dome-like
peaks of Anana, about 1500 feet high, which rise directly over it; this is the
first high land north of Monte Christo (in Lat. 1° 3' 40", Long. 80° 40',) and
generally makes like an island from southward. It is densely wooded from
the summit to high water mark, and the almost constant rains giving a bright
green colour to the peaks. At about 8 miles northward of the cape is Alusea
point, the northern extreme of the promontory. The water off this projecting
point of land is deep, 50 fathoms being found close to the rocks, and 100 at a
distance of less than 3 miles. In the vicinity of the cape the current
appears to set constantly northward.
On the south side of cape Corrientes is Cabita bay, situated eastward of a
high rocky point, distant about 3 miles from the cape ; although open to southward, there is here good anchorage, with a capital watering place. Vessels
may lie in 18 fathoms at about £ of a mile from the stream in the bight of the
bay, with the western horn bearing S.W. by W. On the eastern side of the
bay the high bold land suddenly terminates, and a beach, with low river land
commences, extending, with the exception of the cliffs north of the river
Buenaventura (in lat. 3° 49',) and that of Cascajal point, as far south as the
river Esmeralda, a distance of 400 miles. At about 5 miles south-eastward
from the watering-place is the mouth of the river Jeya, southward of
which is a remarkable perforated rock named Iglesia (or Church) de Sevira.
The coast from Alusea point northward trends eastward 14 miles to the
river Nuki, a small mountain stream ; the shore between consists alternately
of bluffs and sandy beaches, with a few rivulets.    At about 8 miles N.N.W
from the river Nuki is a cluster of high rocks, facing, at the distance ofUTRIA; SOLANO, CUPICA, AND OCTAVIA BAYS,
2 miles, the river Chiru, another mountain stream; and 3 miles northward of
these rocks is the Monro Chico, a pinnacle of a similar nature. From these
rocks the coast runs in the same direction, high, rugged, and woody, nearly
8 miles to Port Utria.
UTRIA.—This harbour is about 3 miles long in a northerly direction by
i a mile broad, and has an average depth of 12 fathoms. It is formed on the
east side by a lofty but narrow peninsula, which has two islets and some
detached rocks off its south point. The entrance is south-eastward of these;
it has no hidden dangers, the shores being steep. The eastern side consists of
a sandy beach, which runs out to a spit 2£ miles within the entrance ; at this
point the harbour is only a J of a mile across, but northward of it, it widens
and forms a commodious basin.
The situation of port Utria will be easily known by Playa Baia, a beach
about 4 miles long, fringed with cocoa-nut trees ; this is immediately northward of the peninsula, and the land behind it is low. At its north extreme is
the mouth of the little river Baia, off which is a rocky islet.
At about 12 miles northward of the river Baia, is a long, rocky, tonguelike projection named point Solano, on the eastern side of which is the deep
bay of Solano. A reef, consisting of rocky patches with deep water between,
extends 1J miles from the point, and has soundings of 16 to 30 fathoms close
to it; it must therefore be carefully avoided. The coast southward of this
point is high and rocky, with occasional small beaches. There is a patch of
rocks 3 cables from the shore, at about 6 miles southward from the extremity
of the point, and the water is deep, 40 fathoms, within 1 mile of the coast.
SOLANO BAY is a spacious anchorage formed by Solano point on the
south-west, and a lofty promontory, which juts out some 3 miles on the north.
At about 2 miles south-westward from the north point of the bay, there is
a small chain of rocky islets, nearly 1 mile long, the centre of which has a
remarkable sugar-loaf form; they are barren and frequented by large numbers
of gannets. The soundings in the bay are from 60 to 15 fathoms, the latter
being close to the shore.
CUPICA BAY.—From Solano bay the land trends northward about
20 miles to Cupica bay, which is about 5 miles wide, and justly considered
OP& of the best anchorages on this coast. It is formed on the west side by a
projecting point named Cruces, having off it some detached islets, the outermost of which is distant about 2 miles. Vessels may anchor in any pa?t of
the bay in a convenient depth, and find shelter from all winds except those
from southward.
When in Cupica bay, the nearest and most convenient mode of access to
the Naipe, a tributary of the Atrato, is fromLimon bay, on the eastern shore;
the land above it is about 500 feet high, over which is a waterfall named
Quebrada del Mar. The head of Cupica bay is a sandy beach 4j miles long,
at the west extreme of which is the mouth of river Cupica; on its banks there
is a village with some plantations from which vegetables can be obtained.
It is high water, full and change, in Cupica bay at 3h, 30m., the rise being
about 13 feet.    The current in the offing sets northward.
OCTAVIA BAY.—From Cruces point the coast trends north-westward
15 miles to point Marzo, which is of a similar nature, and also has detached
islets extending l£ miles southward from it. The bay eastward of Marzo
point named Octavia, although smaller than that of Cupica, possesses convenient depth for anchorage.    In addition to these detached islets, there arePINAS, GARACHINE, AND SAN MIGUEL BAYS,
Bu
high barren rocks of fantastic shapes lying about l£ miles southward of them;
the passage between is deep and clear.
The coast on the western side of point Marzo is bold, rugged, and thickly
wooded; it runs in a northerly direction nearly 8 miles, to some detached
islets, lying 1 mile from the coast with 16 fathoms in-shore of them.^ Thence
the coast bends sharply to the eastward for 2 miles; the cliffs ceasing at the
mouth of the river Coredo, a small stream easily entered by a boat, from
which a continuous line of beach, with low lands behind it, extends to the
north-west for 14 miles, as far as Ardita bay. On this part of the coast are
the mouths of two small streams, the Curachichi and the Ouredo, both of
which are barred. This whole coast, like that to the southward, is thinly
inhabited, huts being generally found in the bays and in the vicinity of the
numerous small rivers. Ardita bay, may be known by a small islet lying off
it. From Ardita bay to Pinas point, a distance of 32 miles, the coast is high,
rugged, and thickly wooded, having deep water close to the shore, with the
exception of two small bays situated about 20 miles northward of Ardita ; the
northern one, Gusgava, has convenient anchorage;—there is also a beach
directly south of Pinas point.
PINAS BAY in lat. 7° 34', is about 3 miles northward of Pinas point.
It affords the best anchorage between Octavia bay and Garachine point. It is
2 miles deep by l£ miles wide, with an average depth of 10 fathoms, and is
open to south-westward, from which quarter occasional squalls in the wet
season, throw a considerable swell into it. The head of the bay consists of a
beach, little more than 1 mile in length, with low land behind it; the sides of
the bay are high and rocky. Good water may be obtained from a stream at
the west extreme of the beach, which is protected from the swell by a small
natural mole on its western side. Vessels may anchor at about \ a mile from
the watering place in 8 fathoms; in the wet season they should keep more on
the west side of the bay in 12 fathoms, with "the end of the mole bearing
N. by W. Off the western point of the bay are the Centinelas, two high
barren rocks.
GARACHINE BAY. From Pinas bay a high, bold, and wooded coast
trends northward 33 miles to point Garachine. At about 3 miles south-west
from this point is eape Escarpado, off which is an islet named Cajualo, The
land ovor point Garachine is lofty, and mount Zapo (5 miles from the coast),
will be notieed as a sharp conical peak, rising to an elevation of about 3000
feet. Garachine bay, north-eastward of the point, between it and Patena
point, is shoal; its shore consists of low mangrove land, forming the mouths
of the river Sambo, which is fronted with mud banks extending 3 miles from
the coast. At the entrance of the western mc>uth is the Pueblo of Garachine,
a small collection of huts. Fronting the bay, in a direct line between
<Jarachine and Patena points is a bank 5£ miles long, with patches of 15 feet
water on it, and 4 and 5 fathoms inside ; and 4 miles N.W. by W. from the
former point, is a small patch of 4£ fathoms, with 6 and 8 fathoms close to
it. There jte anchorage close off either of these points, the water being deep
in their vicinity.
SAN MIGUEL BAY, is immediately north of Garachine bay. The
entrance is 6i miles wide, between Brava point on the north and Patena point
on the south. At about 2 miles E.S.E. from Brava point is Lorenzo point,
off which, within the bay are Iguana and Napoleon islets, the former is about
\\ miles long, and is the larger of the two—3 miles northward of these is the
mouth of the river Congo.STANLEY ISLAND.
9
From Iguana island eastward the bay opens, being nearly 11 miles across,
and at 7 miles north-eastward of the island is Pierce point, a rocky projection
on the north shore. The western side of the bay between Lorenzo and Pierce
points is little known, but is reported to be shoal. The eastern side has
plenty of water along it; off Patena point, which is just separated from the
main enough to make it an island, there is no known danger; at 2£ miles
inside this, in a N.N.E. direction, is Colorado point, bold and rocky, with a
conspicuous patch of reddish clay on its face, the coast between forming a bay.
The land then for 1-J- miles gradually decreases in height to Hamilton point,
when it falls back to the eastward, and bends round again to the north,
forming a bay 8-J- miles across, with low mangrove shores, having a village
and anchorage in it; but as there are some ledges of rocks in this bay that
do not always show, great caution is necessary in using it, and a boat should
be first sent in to point out the deep water.
In the entrance to San Miguel bay, at a short distance from the north shore,
there is an extensive bank, named Buey, upon which the sea breaks heavily ;
it is 6 miles in circumference, and some of its patches are dry at low water.
Its inner edge lies nearly l£ miles south-westward from Lorenzo point; the
passage between should not be used, as there are only 10 feet least water in
it, and generally a heavy swell. A spit of 12 feet extends l£ miles from its
south-west end; and as only 4-J- fathoms are found at nearly 5 miles southwest from the bank, vessels should not stand within that depth. Colorado
point, kept open of Patena point bearing N.E., is a good mark to clear this
bank, and also for running into San Miguel bay.
At about 12 miles eastward from Lorenzo point, and consequently within
the entrance of San Miguel bay, is Washington island, an islet 3 cables length
long, as many broad, and densely covered with wood. It lies nearly
8£ miles N.N.E. from Hamilton point, and between it and the nearest shore
are several islets and rocks. The channel up the bay is northward of this
island, between it and Jones island, a conspicuous little rock about 20 feet
high, and covered with grass, lying 1\ miles to the N.W. by W. of it.
The coast from abreast of Washington island takes a northerly direction for
about 6 miles to Stanley island; in this space are several little bays, lined
with mangrove, the points generally being of small elevation, rocky, and
covered with bush. The channel is between the coast and a group of islands
on the west, of which the easternmost is named Strain; this little island is
about 25 feet high, covered with trees and scrub, and surrounded by a ledge
of rocks extending a^hort distance off it towards the channel, but connected
by mud banks with two islands westward of it. At this point Barry rock, an
islet 20 feet high, and covered with cacti, lying about 3 cables from the
eastern shore, contracts the channel to 1 mile in width; apparently there is
deep water all round this rock, but the passage on its west side being by far
the widest, most direct, and sounded, there can be no object in using the
other. The channel continues* of about the same breadth to Virago point, a
distance of 2£ miles. When working through do not go within a line drawn
from one island to the other, and avoid Bains bluff, 1 mile southward of
Virago point, where there is a dangerous ledge of rocks at 3 cables from the
shore.
Stanley Island, a low wooded island H miles long by 1 mile broad, divides
the channel into two passages, both leading into Darien harbour ; the principal-
one, or Boca Grande, being a continuation of the bay of San Miguel in aII
10    BOCA CHICA, BOCA GRANDE, AND DARIEN HARBOUR.
northerly direction past the west and north sides of Stanley island, and the
other, or Boca Chica, between its southern side and Virago point. The latter
channel, although much shorter^ is too narrow for a sailing vessel to use with
safety, on account of the rapid tide in it.
Boca Chica.—This has two dangerous ledges of rocks at its outer entrance,
one on each side, the passage between them being barely H cables wide; the
southern ledge lies nearly 1 cable west from Virago point and only shows at
low-water spring tides. The Trevan rock on the north side of the entrance
uncovers at half tide about 2 cables from the shore of Stanley island. Mary
island, the northern of the group before mentioned, kept just# midway between
the summit and north-west extreme of Jorey island, bearing S.W., is an
excellent mark for clearing these dangers, recollecting that if brought on with
the summit, the vessel will get on the northern ledge, and if open to the
westward she will be on the opposite one; when past these rocks keep in mid-
channel. A small ledge runs out a short distance from the south-east point
of Stanley island, having passed which the vessel will be in Darien harbour,
and may anchor, as convenient, in 5 to 10 fathoms, sand and mud. The
Boca Chica is not, however, recommended, unless used at slack water, for
during the strength of the tide it runs 6 or 7 knots ; the eddies making the
steerage difficult.
Boca Grande.—This lies between the rocks outside the Boca Chica and
_Milne island on the western shore, is 1 mile broad, and continues nearly the
same width for 1-J- miles between Stanley island and the shore. After passing
the Boca Chica steer north-westward, so as to shut in Mary island by Milne
island, and do not approach Stanley island within 3 cables, as a dangerous
rock, showing only at about three quarters ebb and connected by a ledge with
the shore, lies off its north-west point. Milne island just touching the eastern
end of the islands connected with Strain island, bearing S. £ E., is a good
mark for running; and if working, when northward of Milne island tack
directly Mary island opens of it on the one side, and when Edith island is shut
in on the other. The navigable channel at this point is f of a mile wide, and
begins to turn to the eastward round the north end of Stanley, narrowing to
£ a mile between Ray and Jannette islands on the north, and a large flat rock,
nearly always uncovered, and a little wooded island about a cable off Stanley
island on the south ; following the channel, it bends back to the south-east,
and continues of the same breadth between Ellen and Paley islands on the
west, and the main land on the east, into Darien harbour.
Darien Harbour is a magnificent sheet of water extending 11 or 12 miles
in a south-east direction as far as the village of Chupigana. It is formed by
the junction of the Tuyra and Savana rivers, and the depth of water in it
from Paley island as far as the mouth of the Savana, a distance of 2 miles, is
from 10 to 4£ fathoms, beyond which there is not more than 12 to 18 feet at
low-water springs. The best place for anchoring is in from 7 to 10 fathoms,
off the village of Palma, 1 mile southward of Price point, at about 3 cables
from the western shore. The Vaguila rock, showing at about half tide, lies
off the mouth of the Savana, East If miles from Palma point, with a good
channel between it and Graham point, the west point of entrance to the river.
The shores of the harbour are almost without exception one continuous line of
mangrove, with densely wooded hills from 100 to 300 feet high a short
distance inland. Palma appears to be situated on the best spot, and has an
abundance of fresh water.TRINIDAD, AND CHIMAN RIVERS, &c.
11
The River Tuyra rises in lat. 7° 40', and enters Darien harbour near the
village of Chupigana. Twenty miles from this point, near the junction of the
river Chuqunaque, are the ruins of the old Spanish fort of Santa Maria, near
which were the gold mines worked by the Spaniards in the 17th century.
The rivef'is described as being navigable 6 miles beyond the town, " abreast
which it was reckoned to be twice as broad as the river Thames is at London.
The rise and fall of the tide there was 2£ fathoms." The river Chuqunaque
rises in lat. 8° 50', westward of Caledonia bay on the Atlantic.
The Savana River rises in lat. 8° 44', and a few miles from its source
meets the river Lara, where the bottom is level with the half-tide. From
this point the depth increases, 3 fathoms at low water being found 3£ miles
to the southward, and from thence to the mouth, a distance of 12 miles, the
depth varies from 9 to 12 fathoms over a soft muddy bottom. The navigable
entrance is nearly 1 mile wide between Graham point and Haydon bank, and
the shores are low mangrove land, skirted with hills from 200 to 300 feet
high, within 2 miles of the banks. H.M.S. Virago anchored in 3£ fathoms,
1 mile to the north-east of Graham point.
It is high water, on the days of fiill and change of the moon in Darien
harbour at 4h., and springs are said to rise 24 feet. The tides in the narrows
run proportionally strong, and great care should therefore be taken.
Brava and Lorenzo points, forming the north side of San Miguel bay, are
edged with reefs and outlying rocks, on which the sea breaks with great
violence ; this fact, together with the proximity of the Buey bank, makes this
part of the coast dangerous, and it should therefore be avoided, even by small
vessels.
Farallon Ingles.—This is a small but high island, on the edge of the shoal
off the river Buenaventura, at about 5 miles northward of Brava point; there
are 12 and 15 feet water on its western side. At 4 miles northward of it is
Gorda point, which is bold and woody with a depth of 4 fathoms close to it.
The Pajaros are two small rocky islets lying off the coast, 4 miles northward
from Gorda point; there is a depth of 4 and 5 fathoms off their west sides,
but only 12 feet between them and the shore. At these islets a shoal commences, with 5 fathoms on its outer edge, which fronts the whole shore of the
bay of Panama as far westward as Chame point.
RIVER TRINIDAD, 2£ miles northward of the northern Pajaros islet,
has a low rocky projection forming its south point of entrance. A 3-fathoms
channel was found into this river, extending l£ miles from the point, beyond
which it was not examined. The northern bank of the river is composed of
mangroves, which continue along the coast, with the exception of the bluffs of
the rivers Chiman and Chepo, as far as Panama, a distance of nearly 70 miles.
Shag rock, a barren islet, frequented by birds, with shoal water round it, lies
2£ miles from this entrance.
Mangue and Majaguay, 7 miles from the entrance of the Trinidad, are
high, wooded islets at tide time, but not at low water, being situated on the
south-west edge of a large mud flat, which extends from the north bank of the
river Trinidad.    There are 10 to 12 feet water westward of them.
EIVER CHIMAN, 4 miles northward of Mangue and Majaguay, is wide
at the mouth, but shoal, being dry at low w]a£er, with the exception of some
small channels deep enough for caaioes. The entrance is well marked by the
islets just mentioned and the wooded bluffs on each side.    On the eastern side,
under
a hill, is the small town of Chiman.I
CHEPO RIVER, PANAMA,
Pelado Island.—At about 4 miles W. by S. from Mangue islet, and directly
off the mouth of the river Chiman, is Pelado, a small flat island, about 60 feet
high. It is steep on all sides, and useful as a mark to vessels bound up the
bay for Panama, which should not go eastward of it.
The coast between Pelado and Chepillo islands, the latter distant 31 miles
to the north-west, consists of low river land covered with mangrove bushes.
In this space are several small streams, the principal of which are the rivers
Hondo and Corutu; but these are shoal at the entrance. The land north of
these rivers is of some elevation; Column peak and Asses ears, about
12 miles north of Chiman, and Thumb peak, at the w&st extreme of the range,
are conspicuous. Extensive mud banks, dry at low water, extend from 2 to
4 miles off the coast; outside these the water is shoal for some distance, hence
vessels standing towards the main should tack in 9 fathoms.
Chepillo island, in lat. 8° 55^', long. 79° 7', lies off the mouth of the
river Chepo, at about 2 miles from the coast. It is 1 mile long by i a mile
broad, low on the north side, and rises by a gentle ascent towards the south,
over which is, or was, a remarkable tree, which forms an excellent mark to
vessels bound up the bay. The southern point of the island may be
approached as near as a mile, but the other sides are shoal, and a reef runs off
its northern point in the direction of the river.
CHEPO RIVER extends some distance into the interior, having its rise
near the head of the Savana river. The entrance is westward of Chepillo
island, through a 10-feet channel, about 3 cables broad; there is a small hill,
with a cliff under it, on the eastern bank, which, if brought to bear N.E. -^ E.
(1847), will lead through the deepest water.
At the west bank of this river the mud flat recommences, and continues to
Petillo point, immediately northward of Panama. It is shallow some distance
out, in front of this flat, hence vessels should not approach the coast between
Chepillo island and Panama, nearer than the depth of 6 fathoms.
PANAMA is a regular and formerly a well-fortified city, standing on a
rocky peninsula. It has a noble appearance from the sea, the churches,
towers, and houses, showing above the line of the fortifications, stand out from
the dark hills inland with an air of grandeur to which there is no equal on the
west coast of South America. It is rendered still more conspicuous by mount
Ancon, a beautiful hill, 540 feet high, rising nearly a mile westward of the
city, to which it forms a pleasant background; on each side of Ancon are flat
hills, with copses of wood and savanas, grassy slopes and wild thickets, while
southward of the city the cultivated islets of Flamenco and Perico complete
the scene.
The site of Panama has once been changed. The old city, built in 1518,
which was taken and destroyed by the buccaneers under Morgan in 1673,
stood at the mouth of a creek, about 4 miles north-east of the present city.
The spot is now deserted, but well marked by a tower, which, together with an
arch, two or three piers of a bridge, and some fragments of wall, are the only
remains of a once opulent city. The tower, in the afternoon, is still a conspicuous object from the anchorage.
The expectations formed of the modern city of Panama, as seen from the
sea, are by no means realised on landing. The principal streets extend across
the peninsula from sea to sea, intersected by the Calle Real or Royal street,
which runs east and west, and has a quiet and stately, but comfortless, air!
Heavy balconies in the upper stories are but little relieved by the uhglazed
grated windows, or any variety in the buildings.
mmxv'
„>-v«^   0
w**®^
*£
2$
is a#
W
o
^^•—-"■"*-
'3^
 3
7to
'\3?
«3%»
-*z
H
n
**
PAJCAMA BAY.  Hif \ iS^*
** 9
-*-
4*
**'
® Aanazdejfi*
1/
k  tPS^
 Scale  of Miles
[79° 31'9 " llr. W
If.E. B<isiioiv •—
frttc
4
^ J   wVacketCo-*. Stay.    ^\
WlLt jZ ^\       '
£3f    ^lle^^^^^ri£0
a   #
a
0ul%^®fFl
«c,*
xmeaaco
'. San Jose
6
nv
J*   3iF*s
Lgamm.
K J*
Kj + -    —    - Bar 2*      2   1
J*
H
*t
1±
3     ^tocovioatiL
■Si
2i }
24
Coroovi/%   8
Tojiola
j   ^TprtoH&i/
10
10
10
4£
Vk   7
3i
4%
21
3*
52
6
&Saax> cle JkCelones
10
io
e
3£eZones£&
9     8
9
17
24
JO
rABOGDIIJLA
9
TAB OGA ISLE
^N;5
Jtf
J5
13
14
IO
5s
74
A  21uilla&statf<m,Mtinc07hirLon*rra%t7i6S*
B   J7w sou&uStecpU of the Cathedral, /uUfnay tebyeert 4i6£&&EJBartian*.
uefxipar^gy. 13
Jk0&Jhae> 1Z:n;iiiijiii^T^j,,,r,i,i,iiij
BhT7,-.     .
12
offi
higl
bay
tot<
Inl
Hoi
the*:
12
are
4 n
ves
nvr
bro
ove
ves
api
its
Mr t
nes
ish
wit
Pe
on
Ch
ro<
toi
tin
we
Ar
cit
hi!
so
th
wi
St(
Tl
ar
re
cu
se
th
W-
H.PANAMA,  &c.
13
The houses, mostly in the old Spanish style, are of stone, the larger having
courts or patios; the public edifices comprise a cathedral, five convents,
a nunnery, and a college, but most of these are in ruins. The cathedral is a
large, lofty building, on the west side of the Plaza, but the structure is hardly
worthy of its situation, the towers alone redeeming it from insignificance, and
forming, in the distance, an ornament to the city. The fortifications are well
constructed, but like the rest of the city in many parts are in ruins, the northeast bastion having fallen in 1845 ; the south and west ramparts are still in
good condition, forming a pleasant promenade. A great want is felt in
Panama with regard to drainage. This is caused by neglect; for the elevation
of the peninsula on which the city stands, together with the great rise of the
tide, offers considerable advantages for cleansing the city, which duty at present
is performed by the heavy rains of the wet season.
The gold discoveries of California and British Columbia, by increasing the
colonization and developing the great agricultural resources of those countries,
have effected a change in the fallen fortunes and grass-grown streets of
Panama; and comfortable inns and large well-stocked stores have been called
into existence by the continuous transit of emigrants from Europe and the
United States to San Francisco and Victoria.
The suburb of Santa Ana, situated on the isthmus which connects Panama
with the mainland, is almost as extensive as the city, though not so well built.
At its northern extreme is the terminus of the Panama railway to Colon or
Aspinwall, on the Atlantic, a distance (by rail) of 47 miles. This railroad
was only completed in January 1855, since which time the company has been
constantly making improvements, until it is now one of the best appointed
lines extant.
Some idea of the increasing trade of the isthmus of Panama may be formed
from the fact that in the first week of June 1860 no less than 10 steamers
arrived and sailed,—5 from Panama and 5 from Colon—all of them being seagoing vessels, of between 1000 and 2000 tons. These steamers, or others
on the same lines, make regular semi-monthly trips direct from the isthmus to
upwards of 50 different ports, in no less than 15 distinct countries. To carry
on this trade a large fleet of first-class steamships is constantly employed, and
few people, even among those engaged in the trade of the Pacific, have any
idea of the amount of traffic these vessels bring to the isthmus. No less than
38 sea-going steamers, many of them registering from 2000 to 3000 tons,
either arrive at or depart from the ports of Colon and Panama every month.
The merchants of the entire west coast of America, from British Columbia
to Chiloe, receive their European mails and export all their specie via Panama.
These facts will show the importance of this narrow neck of land. Every day
the transit business increases, and promises soon to restore Panama to her old
position, so well described by Dampier, when she was the highway between
Spain and her colonies in the Pacific.
Panama affords the usual supplies which are to be obtained in tropical
regions, but in 1857-8-9 they were generally dear; provisions of excellent
quality may, however, be obtained from the United States by ships requiring
them; and, when time will admit of it, getting such from the States is far
preferable to purchasing in the markets of Colon or Panama, which in the
above years were generally supplied with articles of an inferior quality; biscuit
especially will not keep in the hot climate of Panama. The United States
squadron have all their stores and provisions sent across the isthmus.14
PANAMA.
m   5!  *
I Ml
it
1 i 'I
|:     |
Water can be obtained at Panama from the tank of the U.S. mail steamers;
but it is cheaper at Taboga, where it may be purchased at two dollars a ton.
Coal may be bought here at times from the mail companies, but it is generally
dear; the cost of coal imported into Panama by way of Cape Horn being
16 dollars per ton, and by the railroad 15 dollars, (1860.) Consuls of all
nations reside at Panama.
The home value on most of the products of this country has advanced very
much since the completion of the railroad. Large quantities of Peru bark,
balsam, cochineal, cocoa, coffee, hides, india-rubber, indigo, logwood, oil (whale
and cocoa-nut,) sarsaparilla, vanilla, gold, silver, and hundreds of other commodities of the Pacific, seek a market via this great central route of the globe.
In 1858, 142 vessels, of 22,034 tons, entered inwards, and 136 vessels, of
94,912 tons, cleared outwards; the value of imports being £11,373,424, and
of exports £2,468,203. The population of the isthmus in 1853 amounted to
144,108 persons.    The population of the city in 1860 was about 10,000.
The geographical position of the isthmus of Panama, the absence of high
mountains, and the vast extent of forests and other uncultivated parts, tend to
produce a hot and rainy climate, which nevertheless, with the exception of a
few localities, as Chagres, Colon, and Portobello, is healthy and more favourable to the constitution of Europeans than that of most tropical countries.
The most prevalent disease is intermittent fever, which makes its appearance
during the change of the season; remittent fever is less frequent, but generally
proves fatal. On board ship, Panama is by far the most healthy place on the
coast of Central America. Vessels of war have remained here many months
at times, their crews continuing in a healthy state, excepting those men who
had the will and opportunity to indulge in the vile spirit (aguardiente) of the
country, which is cheap and easily procured. The yellow fever that existed
at the Morro of Taboga in the early part of 1859 was confined to that spot,
and, with few exceptions, the victims to it were men of drunken habits, and
for this reason commanders should avoid giving leave to their crews at Panama,.
H.M.S. Herald, when employed on the survey of the Bay in 1847-8, never
gave leave, and although the men were constantly in the boats, the crew were
also healthy.
The seasons are regularly divided into the wet and dry; the former commences in the latter end of May and lasts till November. Slight at first, the
rain gradually increases, and is fully established in June, when it falls occasionally in torrents, accompanied by thunder and lightning; the air is loaded
with moisture, and calms or light variable winds prevail. The temperature
varies from 75° to 87° Fahr.; still the atmosphere is oppressive, until cooled
by the heavy rains and thunder storms before-mentioned. About the end of
June the rains are suspended for a short time; and the occurrence of this
phenomenon is so regular that it is looked forward to by the inhabitants, who
call it the veranito (little summer) de San Juan, probably from its taking place
almost simultaneously with the feast of St. John (June 24th.) In December
the violent rains cease and the north-west wind sets in, producing an immediate change, and the climate now displays all its tropical beauties.
Dampier's remarks on the climate of Panama are too true to be omitted:	
" There are no woods nor marshes near Panama, but a brave, dry champaign
land, not subject to fogs or mists. The wet season begins in the latter end of
May, and continues till November. At that time the sea breezes are at
S.S.W., and the land winds at North.    The rains are not so excessive aboutTHE PORT, PERICO AND FLAMENCO, &c.
15
Panama itself, as on either side of the bay; yet in the months of June, July,
and August, they are severe enough. Gentlemen that come from Peru to
Panama, especially in these months, cut their hair close, to preserve them from
fevers; for the place is sickly to them, because they come out of a country
which never hath any rains, but enjoys a constant serenity; but I am apt to
believe this city is healthy enough to any other people.
The Port.—The port of Panama is formed by Petillo point, l£ miles
north-eastward of the city, (a black rocky promontory with two small hills over
it, between which is a rivulet admitting boats at high water,) and the point
upon which the city stands, the shore between forming a bay nearly f of a mile
deep, the head of which is of mud fronted by a sandy beach. A great portion
of this bay is dry at low water springs; at its entrance there is a depth
of 8 feet. It is here that most of the minor trade of the gulf is carried on, by
means of bongos, large canoes made from trees of such dimensions that some
of them formed from a single trunk have measured 12 tons. These canoes,
though clumsy in appearance, are well fitted for the navigation of the gulf, and
bring most of the tropical productions of the isthmus to Panama.
Perillo point, the north point of the bay, is surrounded by rocky ledges,
which extend out l£ cables length, and have a depth of 40 feet at their
extremity. Buey point, the southern horn of the bay, is the north-eastern
point of the long rocky ledges that surround the eastern and southern shores
of the peninsula of the city ; it is only visible at low tide. These ledges
extend 8£ cables from the north-east bastion, 5 cables from the south-east
bastion in an easterly, and 2£ cables in a southerly direction, forming a bay
southward of Buey point, in which is easy landing after half-flood, on a sandy
beach in front of the Monk's gate, one of the principal entrances to the city.
The general landing, however, is round Buey point, at the market place on the
northern side of the town. From the commencement of the suburbs on the
southern side, another ledge runs off for nearly f of a mile, east of which are
Los Hermanos, three black rocks visible at first quarter ebb. Detached
rocks, with 3 and 7 feet water between them, visible only at low water springs,
lie off the south-east extreme of the rocks, the outer one being 3 cables from
the reef. These ledges, composed of rock with sand patches between, although
now irksome and often dangerous to boats, afford every facility for erecting
substantial piers and improving the port. As yet (1859) there is no attempt
at works of this description, but the daily increasing trade must produce these
necessary improvements.
Guinea point, 2 miles south-westward of Panama, is the northern extreme
of a large round hilly projection, which forms the western side of Panama road.
Between it and the town are the mouths of the Grande, Arena, and Falfan,
small rivers, with cultivated banks. The water on this side of Panama road
is shoal as far as Tortola and Tortolita islands, which lie 2 miles southward
of Batele point, the south extreme of the hilly projection above-mentioned.
One mile E. by S. J S. of Batele point is Changarmi island, surrounded by
the Pulperia reefs; and to the south-west of the point are Bruja and Venado
points, rocky and projecting, with the outlying islets of Cocovi and Cocoviceta.
Although these dangers are mostly above water, this part of Panama bay
should be avoided.
Perico and Flamenco, with the outlying rock of San Jose, is a group
of islands forming the south side of Panama road. Ilenao and Culebra, the
western and southern parts of Perico, are connected with Perico by an isthmus16
TABOGA ISLAND, &c.
i    I
1
I f
of beach and rocks; but at high water these present the appearance of three
islands. Perico is the head quarters of the United States mail steamers, the
bay on its northern side forming a convenient anchorage, while on the isthmus,
which is sandy on that side, steamers of 2500 tons have been easily beached.
Vessels using this anchorage after passing Flamenco should keep close round
the north end of Perico, and anchor when the isthmus opens. Large vessels
drawing over 20 feet may coal at Perico by passing west of the group at half-
tide, with Ancon hill, (which on that bearing makes like a cone) just open of
Ilenao, N.N.W.; pass about a cable's length from Henao/and anchor off its
north-west end in 24 feet, when Perico opens. In both cases attention must
be paid to the time of tide. The passage between Perico and Flamenco is
shoal, and should not be used ; that between Flamenco and San Jose is deep,
and both islands are steep.
DanaMe Rocks.—These patches of conical rocks, lying on the eastern ridge
of Panama road, E. by S. 2£ miles from the south-east bastion, have only
15 to 18 feet on them, and 3£ and 4 fathoms on all sides. They lie
awkwardly in the track of vessels standing for the anchorage, keeping their
luff with the land breeze. The Hermanos rocks, in line with the hill between
the rivers Grande and Falfan, bearing W. by S., lead northward of them; tod
the south steeple of the cathedral kept half-way between the east and southeast bastions, W.N.W., leads southward of them. This spot is a favourite
fishing-place, and vessels should avoid canoes seen in its vicinity, as they are
probably fishing on the rocks.
Sulphur Rocks.—This dangerous reef, 6 cables long by 3 broad, lying
1 mile north-westward of the Danaide, has a rock awash in its centre, with
6 and 9 feet around it, and outlying patches of 12 and 14 feet. The railroad
flagstaff on with the centre of Ancon, bearing W. £ S., leads northward of the
reef in 15 feet, but this passage should not be used at low water springs; and
the Hermanos rocks in line with a round peak over the river Grande, lead
southward of the reef in 18 feet.
The Knocker and Taboga are two rocks, with only 6 feet water on them.
The Knocker, which is, or was, marked by a red buoy, with staff and flag on
it, lies nearly 1 mile E. £ N. from the south-east bastion; the Taboga lies a
little more than 2 cables length south-westward of the Knocker buoy, with
16 feet water between, and 12 feet in-shore of them, but no stranger should
attempt to pass westward of the buoy.
TABOGA ISLAND, with the islands of Urava and Taboguilla, form a
pleasant group, about 4 miles long by 2 broad, situated 9 miles southward of
Panama. Taboga, the largest and westernmost, is 935 feet above the sea,
well cultivated, and has a considerable village on its north-east side. Northward of the village is the morro of Taboga, a small hill, connected with the
main island by a low, sandy isthmus, covered at high water; this is the headquarters of the Pacific Mail Company, who have here a steam factory and coal
stores, also a gridiron, 300 feet long, on which H.M.S. Magicienne, a vessel
of 1255 tons, was repaired in 1858.
Vessels visit Taboga from Panama to obtain water and supplies, both of
which are more readily obtained than at the city; water can be procured from
the Company's tank. The anchorage off the village is convenient, being about
8 cables from the shore in 10 fathoms, with the peak of Urava on with the high
cliff of Taboga, and the church from S.W. i S. to West. Vessels coaling at
this island should avoid giving leave to their crews; those that have not givenURAVA, AND TABOGUILLA,
17
leave have felt no bad effects after visiting this depot. In 1859 H.M.S. Alert
suffered severely from a fever contracted through the excesses of her men
while at the morro.
Urava is a small lofty island, separated from Taboga by a narrow and
shoal channel; off its southern extreme is the small islet of Terapa.
Taboguilla, 710 feet high, is well cultivated, with some islets off its southwest extreme, and forms the north-east island of the group, with a wide and deep
channel between it and Urava, in the centre of which is a sunken rock just
awash at low water; the sea seldom breaks over it at high water and it must
be carefully avoided by closing either island, both being steep-to, or vessels
may pass south of it by keeping the isthmus of the morro open, bearing
N.W. by W. i W. Farallon, a small islet, also lies in this channel, but it is
steep-to with 11 fathoms between it and Taboguilla.
Tides.—It is high water on the days of full and change, in Panama road at
Sh. 23m., springs rise from 15 to 22 feet, and neaps from 10 to 16 feet. The
ebb sets south from 1 to l£ miles an hour, and is stronger than the flood,
which runs to the north-west. The long swell which occasionally sets into
the road always ceases with the flowing tide. It has been remarked by the
officers of the U.S. Pacific mail steamers that there is more rise in the small
bay north of the town, and also in their own anchorage off Perico, than in the
more open parts of the road.
Directions.—Sailing vessels bound to Panama should endeavour to get
within 3 or 4 miles of Chepillo island, especially between December and June,
and so have all the advantages of the prevailing northerly wind. From this
position Ancon hill will be seen, and should be kept a little on the port bow,
as the wind hauls to the westward on approaching Panama. Vessels drawing
over 18 feet should pass south of the Danaide rocks, by keeping San Jose
rock* open of the west point of Taboga island, bearing S.S.W. i W., until the
cathedral towers are open eastward of Ancon. Having passed the Danaide
rocks the ship is fairly in the road and may anchor according to her draught;
—if no more than 18 feet draught she may have Tortola island just shut in by
Ilenao, bearing S.S.W. J W., and San Jose rock open east of Taboguilla
island. Vessels drawing 24 feet may anchor north of Perico, with the peak of
Urava island on with the east point of Flamenco, bearing South, taking care
not to open Changarmi northward of Perico. If it is necessary to work up the
road to an in-shore berth, tack on the western side just before Perico and
Flamenco touch; and in standing to the eastward do not open San Jose of
Taboga island.
Vessels drawing 14 feet can pass north of the Danaide and south of the
Sulphur rocks, with the Hermanos rocks on with the right side of the peak,
between the rivers Grande and Falfan; then San Jose rock on with the peak
of Taboguilla bearing S. i E. leads between the Sulphur and Knocker rocks;
and they may anchor north of the Knocker buoy in 16 feet, keeping it between
Perico and Flamenco, with Gabilan, a small rocky peninsula west of the town,
just shut in by the south-east bastion. During neap tides they may anchor
still further to the N.W.
* On the 25th August 1863, a light was exhibited for the first time on San Jose* rook.
It is only lighted when the steamers from San Francisco are expected, and it is visible at
7 or 8 miles.
c
n
iff- ,\ 4118
CHAME AND PARITA BAYS, &c.
Panama road, although shoal, may be considered secure; the ground being
muddy holds well. A resident in Panama for five years, stated, that during
that time there was no known case of a vessel being driven from her anchor;
and with good ground tackle and common precaution a vessel mightlie there
all the year round with one anchor down. Attention to the tides and
soundings of the roadstead will enable a vessel to lie close in at times for the
discharge of cargo.
Coast Southward of Panama.—The coast southward of Panama between Bruja point and Chame point, a distance of 16 miles, forms a shoal bay,
with several outlying banks and rocky islets; hence vessels bound to Panama
should keep near the island of Taboga, and not approach this shore within the
depth of 5 fathoms. Vique cove, in which is a small village, is 5 miles westward from Bruja point. About 1 mile north-eastward of Vique is a lofty
treble-peaked hill, called Cerro de Cabra, a conspicuous object to vessels
bound to Panama, and frequently mistaken for Taboga by those coming from
eastward. Vacamonte point, the western side of Vique cove, is the only
break in the mud flat which fronts this land, and extends out nearly 2 miles
from shore.
CHAME BAY, at the head of which is a small river of the same name,
is nearly filled up by large banks, the largest of which, the Cabra spit, lies in
the middle, and has on it an islet named Tabor. Chame point, the southern
horn of this bay, is a singular, low, woody promontory jutting into the sea,
Si miles long by \ a mile broad. Between it and Cabra spit is a convenient
harbour, 2 miles in length by about £ of a mile wide, with from 8 to 3 fathoms
water in it, and from 16 to 18 feet close to the beach of Chame point. To the
north-west of the river is a high range called Sierra Capero, and to the southward are the Cerro Chame, a group of wooded hills.
Melones Island is a small rocky islet 2£ miles north-westward from
Taboga, having at about \ a mile northward of it, a rock of the same name
above water. The island is steep, but vessels should be careful not to pass
westward of it.
Chame Island, with the Perique rock, are of a similar character to
Melones, and situated about the same distance southward of Taboga.
Valladolid is a large rock, nearly 2 miles south-westward of Chame island,
having 9 and 10 fathoms close to it.
Otoque and Bona Islands, with Estiva island and the Redondo rock
lying 6 miles south-eastward from Chame point, form a group similar to but
somewhat smaller than Taboga and Taboguilla. A village, named Goleta,
is in the bay on the western side of Otoque, Anchorage, in from 10 to
14 fathoms, may be found in any part of this group, and all dangers are above
water. These islands being high and peaked, form good land-marks to vessels
on this side of the gulf of Panama.
PA.RITA BAY.—From Chame point the coast runs south-westward
45 miles to Parita bay, and consists throughout of a beach named Playa
Grande, which is backed by a low wooded bank. There is a depth of 4 and
5 fathoms at about 2 miles from this beach, except S.S.E. \ E. of the Cerro
Chame, where there are only 4 fathoms at nearly 7 miles from the land, the
bank extending from that to Chame point. To avoid this, vessels from Parita
bay should^ shape a course to pass about 2 miles southward of Bona until
Taboguilla is nearly touching Otoque, bearing N. by E. \ E., when they may
steer up the bay, inside but nearer to the islands.CAPE MALA AND PEARL ISLANDS.
19
The mud-flats are found again on the western side of Parita bay, the coast
being a low mangrove shore, intersected by the mouths of no less than five
small rivers; the land to the westward is also low with several hummocks.
At Liso point on the south side of the bay the hard bank with sandy beach in
front again commences and continues as far as cape Mala, a distance of
38 miles, the coast trending to the south-east.
Parita bay is about 18 miles long north and south, and 10 miles deep, and
has soundings of 13 fathoms at 10 miles from the shore, thence gradually
decreasing to the land.    It is exposed to all winds blowing from eastward.
Iguana Island.—At about 30 miles south-eastward of Liso point, and
9 miles northward of cape Mala, Iguana island, which is a little higher than
the adjacent coast, forms a conspicuous object. A ledge extends about
3 cables from its southern and also from its eastern point, and a reef is
said to stretch to the N.N.E. from its north point, but otherwise the island is
steep-to with 15 fathoms in the channel between it and the main.
It is high water, full and change, at Iguana island at 4h.; the rise and fall
being 15 feet. The flood sets northward, and the ebb south-eastward, the
latter being considerably the stronger, especially between December and June.
CAPE MALA, which forms the western point of entrance to the gulf of
Panama, is a low but cliffy point with outlying rocky ledges, having deep water
close to them. The land from the north-west slopes gradually to the sea at
this point from a considerable distance, making the exact cape difficult to
distinguish, unless the breakers are seen. On opening the gulf round this
cape, a strong southerly set is generally experienced, especially in the
dry season.
PEARL ISLANDS.—These form an archipelago on the eastern side of
Panama bay, consisting of sixteen islands and several rocks. Rey is the largest,
San Jose, Gonzales, Casaya, Saboga, and Pacheca are of secondary, and the rest
of minor importance. There are from 30 to 40 fishing villages scattered
about these islands, the inhabitants of which are chiefly engaged in the pearl
fishery. The islands are low and wooded, the soil fertile, but not much cultivated, and the numerous cocoa-nut groves, and bright sandy beaches,
intersected by small rocky bluffs crowned with trees, give them a pleasant
appearance; most of them belong to merchants at Panama, who employ
negroes to plant and cultivate them.
Pacheca, Saboga, and Contradora Islands, with the islets of Bartholomew
and Chipre, form the northern part of the archipelago, and between them is a
good and capacious harbour, well suited as a depot for steamers. Saboga, the
largest island, on the east side of which is a considerable village, has a reef
extending l£ miles in a northerly direction ; Contradora has 5 fathoms close
to its north-west shore, which is low and well adapted for wharves. This
harbour, which is about 2 miles long by nearly 1 mile broad, with an average
depth of 9 fathoms, has Saboga on its western side, Contradora on its southeast, and Pacheca and Bartholomew on its north side; it has three entrances,
each possessing a 5-fathom channel, which may be used according to
wind and tide. The Pacheca channel lies southward of Pacheca, between it
and the reef extending from Saboga; the Contradora channel is round the
northern end of Contradora
island and Contradora.
It is high water, full
14 feet.
island : and the Saboga channel is between that
xnd change.
at Saboga island at 4h,
and
;prmg
s riseI!
REY,  CHAPERA, &c.
Vessels using the Pacheca channel should pass within £ a mile of the islet
west of Pacheca, and stand southward until the centre of Bartholomew island
bears E. by S. i S.; then keep it on this bearing until the northern islets off
Saboga open westward of Saboga, or the west end of Contradora bears
S. by E. i E., when they should haul southward for the anchorage.
Entering by the Contradora channel, they should pass £ a mile eastward
of Bartholomew island and not stand to the westward before the nearest islets
north of Saboga open northward of Saboga; these islets kept just open
bearing W. by S. lead through. Care must be taken not to open them too
much, as there is a 2-fathom patch off the north-east end of Contradora.
Vessels from eastward using the Saboga channel should steer in with the
outer islet on the reef extending from the south end of Saboga bearing W. £ S.f
as this will lead clear of the Sunk rock, a patch lying nearly 1 mile off the
south side of Contradora; and, when Pacheca is shut in by Saboga, bearing
N. i W., they should steer northward, and run through the channel which is
steep on both sides. There is a channel northward of the Sunk rock, but
that south of it is wider and better.
Approaching the Saboga channel from westward, sail close to the islet of
Santa Catalina, which lies about 1£ miles south of Chipre, to avoid the shoal
extending from the latter island. From Catalina steer N.E. for the north
end of Chapera, the island next south of Contradora, until Pacheca touches
Contradora, bearing N. by W.; then steer N.N.W. £ W. for a small hill on
Saboga, taking care not to shut in Pacheca with Saboga until the north point
of Chipre bears southward of West, and that Pacheca is shut in before the
south point of Saboga bears West, then stand for mid-channel as before.
Chapera and Pajaros, the islands immediately southward of those just
mentioned, are separated by a 4-fathom channel in which the ground is foul
and consequently not safe to navigate. A shoal with 13 feet water on it lies
1 mile eastward of Pajaros, and southward of that island the soundings are
rocky and irregular. No vessel should attempt the passage south of Chapera
and Pajaros islands—between them and Rey island.
Casaya, Bayoneta and Viveros, are the largest among the numerous islands
on the reef extending from the north-west point of Rey island ; the passages
between them all are foul, with occasional strong tides. At nearly 4 miles
eastward of the north point of Casaya is a bank 1£ miles long by f of a mile
wide, having only 9 feet water on its shoalest part; and at about 2 miles from the
north-east point of Viveros are the Caracoles and Cangrejo islets, with foul ground
around them. The whole of these islands should be avoided by vessels bound
up the bay, by approaching their western side not nearer than just to open
San Jose island eastward of Pedro Gonzales island, bearing S. by E. • while
on their eastern side, they should not open San Pablo, a small islet off the
north-east point of Rey island.
Rey, the principal of the Pearl islands, is about 15 miles long, in a north
and south direction, by 7 broad; it has several peaks on it, the highest of
which is about 600 feet above the sea. Numerous islets, having deep water
between them, lie 8 miles off its western shore, and these should not be
approached by strangers within the depth of 10 fathoms. Cocos point, its
southern extreme, is a remarkable promontory, 4 miles long by about one wide
the extreme cliff of which was crowned in 1859 by an umbrella-shaped tree!
On the east side of this promontory is the bay of St. Elmo, where is convenientPEDRO GONZALES.
21
anchorage, and a good stream of water at Lemon point at its head; the soundings in this bay are 10 to 6 fathoms, the latter being at a short distance from
theshore.
The eastern shore of Rey has also islands off it, which may be approached
to i a mile, with the exception of that named Canas. This is an island about
6 miles northward from St. Elmo bay, the larger of two islands separated
from the shore by a narrow channel; it has off it a sunken rock at nearly a
mile distance, and £ of a mile outside this is a patch of 3 fathoms ;—to avoid
these sunken dangers do not open Monge islet, eastward of St. Elmo, until Pablo
islet opens eastward of Muerta, a small barren islet lying about 1J miles northeastward of Canaa.
San Miguel, the principal town of the Pearl islands, is on the north side of
Rey. It is of some size, and has a conspicuous church, but is badly situated,
landing being difficult at low water. Two hills—the Cerro Congo and Cerro
Vali—rise southward of it, the former being 481 feet high. Vessels having
to lie off the town should run in between Caracoles and Cangrejo, and anchor
in about 6 or 7 fathoms, when the church is shut in or behind Afuera, an islet
lying off the town, bearing S.E. by S. The bottom in this anchorage is
irregular and rocks are numerous, hence more than ordinary care is required.
A small island, named Galera lies 7£ miles E. i S. from Cocos point, the
southern extremity of Rey, its position being lat. 8° 11 £', long. 78° 45f.
Its southern side, consists of a cliff sloping down to a beach on the north, and
to the southward a reef runs off for nearly 1 mile. This island is generally
the first land made by vessels bound to Panama from south-eastward; it should
not be approached within the depth of 10 fathoms, but there is a good passage
between it and Cocos point, by using which the vessel will be clear of the San
Jose bank.
A shoal named San Jose lies about 9 miles in an E.S.E. direction from
Galera island, and immediately faces the entrance to San Miguel bay, its
position being 14 to 17 miles from Garachine point, the south point of the
bay, between the bearings from it of W. by S. and W. J N. It consists of a
bank of 7 to 8 fathoms, which extends N.W. £ N. and S.E. £ S. 8 miles, and
is in no part more than £ of a mile broad. Close to it all round is a depth of
12 to 18 fathoms, which in a westerly direction deepens to 30 fathoms at less
than a mile. In the centre of this bank is the Trollope rock, having only
2 feet water over it at low tide; it bears W. £ S. 15 miles from Garachine
point, and E.S.E. 9 miles from Galera island. The shoal upon which this
rock stands is 1 mile long by about £ of a mile broad; the depth close to the
rock is 3£ to 6 fathoms, and there are 7 and 8 fathoms on its outer edge—
vessels should not therefore approach it within the depth of 10 fathoms. The
rock may be easily avoided, either by keeping on the main shore until
Garachine point bears southward of East, or by passing about 2 miles from
Galera island, taking care at the same time not to run on the shoal patch and
rocks off the southern side of the latter.
Pedro Gonzales is separated from the islets off the west side of Rey by a
broad deep channel. It is about 12 miles in circumference, and has on its
northern side two bays protected from the north by the islands of Senora and
Senorita. These bays called Perry and Magicienne, are divided by the little peninsula ofTrapiche, offthe east point ofwhich is a rocky ledge, terminating in a shoal
with 14 feet water, at a distance of nearly 3 cables from the point; inside
this, to the southward, there is a small anchorage in 4£ fethoms.
ifII
22
SAN JOSE.
A large stream of water runs into the sea on the western side of Magicienne
bay. This bay, however, is small and shoal, without the advantages of Perry
bay, which is 1 mile wide, and runs back for the same distance. • Senora and
Senorita, including the shoal off their eastern side, are about 1 mile long, and
lie nearly the same distance northward of Trapiche, with a 7-fathom channel
between, steep on both sides.
It is high water, on the days of full and change of the moon, in Perry bay
at 3h. 50m.; and the rise is 16 feet. The tide stream is not felt in the
anchorage, but there is a considerable set off the island, the flood running to
the northward, the ebb to the southward, the latter being generally stronger.
Vessels may pass on either side of Senora and Senorita; if on the east side,
avoid the shoal extending from them by keeping the eastern point of Gonzales
island, a rocky peninsula, open of the point next north of it, bearing S.S.E.,
until the north end of Senora is shut in by Senorita, bearing N.W. by W. £ W.
Going into Perry bay, a good look-out must be kept for the shoal running
off E.S.E from Trapiche island.
At nearly l£ miles S.S.W. £ W* from the rock off the south end of Pedro
Gonzales, there is a dangerous rock, awash or nearly so at low tide, named
Passage rock, from the circumstance that it is in almost mid-channel between
Pedro Gonzales and San Jose. It has soundings of 12 and 9 fathoms close
to it, and 7 to 5 fathoms at a short distance northward of it. The mark to
lead rather more than \ a mile southward of it is,—the peak next south of the
highest on Rey island, just open southward of Coco islet, one of the outlying
islets off the west side of Rey, bearing E. by N. £ N., vessels should keep
between the San Jose shore and this mark.
San Jose, 4t miles South of Gonzales, is about 6-J- miles long by 8 broad,
and its summit consists of table land. At nearly 2 miles south-eastward from
Iguana point, its northern extreme, is a large waterfall, flowing into the sea,
and forming an excellent watering place. At the south-east side of the island
there is a bay, in which are soundings of 8 to 5 fathoms, but, as the swell sets
in there with great violence, it is not convenient for shipping. Off the southern point of the island are a number of high rocks of singular and fantastic
shape ; this part of the island should be avoided. The western shore is bold
and cliffy, with a small bay near the centre.
The navigation of the approaches to the gulf of Panama, situated as they are
in the region of the doldrums, with the land of Central America considerably
affecting the northern trade, becomes to a vessel unaided by steam one of the
most tedious, uncertain, and vexatious undertakings known to the sailor.
Steam power will considerably simplify these difficulties, but the experiences
of a sailing vessel may materially assist the navigation of the auxiliary screw
steamer in this portion of the Pacific.
WINDS.—Between cape Corrientes and Panama, the prevalent winds are
from northward and westward, with frequent squalls and wet weather from the
south-west between the months of June and December.
In the gulf of Panama the winds are regulated by the seasons; the prevalent
wind, however, is from northward. In the fine season, commencing in
December, these winds are regular and constant, bringing fine dry weather.
Southward of the gulf they blow much harder, and off the coast of Veragua a
double reefed topsail breeze in January and February is not uncommon.    InCURRENTS AND PASSAGES IN THE GULF OF PANAMA. 23
April and May the northerly winds are less regular, and have more westing in
them, with calms, light sea, and land breezes, with occasional squalls from the
south-westward. In June the rainy season sets in, and the southerly winds
become stronger. Still the old north-west wind is mostly found after noon,
and vessels sailing from Panama at all seasons will generally have a fair wind
until south of cape Mala.
Between the Galapagos islands and the coast, westward of the meridian of
80°, and southward of the parallel of 5° N., the winds are between South and
West all the year round, and except between the months of February and June
they are of sufficient strength and duration to make the navigation easy ; but
northward of lat. 5°, between 80° and 110° W., is a region of calm and
doldrums, accompanied by rains and squalls of a most vexatious description.
The weather met with can hardly be better illustrated than by the facts that
in May 1848 H.M.S. Herald, in her passage towards the Sandwich islands,
although towed for 6 days as far west as 89° 20', still took 40 days from
Panama to 110° W., owing to keeping between the parallels of 8° and 10° N.,
and in March of the following year, in the meridian of 87°, and the lat. of
8° N., only made 30 miles in 9 days.
CURRENTS.—The Gulf of Panama is also subject to varying currents,
partly caused by the peculiar formation of the land, and apparently influenced in
turns by the Peruvian or Mexican streams, according as the relative strength
of each predominates. Thus Malpelo island is surrounded by a strong current,
having much the appearance of breakers. Here Colnett found the current
setting strongly into the gulf N.E. by E. at the rate of 2£ miles an hour,
while other navigators describe it as running violently in the opposite
direction. That these varying statements should be equally correct is not at
all incompatible, considering the position of the island amidst conflicting winds.
This uncertainty is another embarrassment to the navigation between Panama
and the Galapagos. A steady current, however, has generally been found to
set northward after passing cape San Lorenzo, extending off shore for about
60 miles. This stream runs along the coast of the continent, round Panama
bay, and then sets with considerable force, especially in the dry season, southward down the western side of the bay. After passing cape Mala it meets the
Mexican current from the W.N.W. and thus causes the numerous ripplings
and short uneasy sea so often met with at the entrance of the gulf. This
troubled water will be found more or less to the southward, according to the
strength of the contending streams.
PASSAGES.—From the foregoing it will be seen that the passage from
southward into the gulf of Panama is easily made during the greater part of
the year, by keeping about 60 miles from the coast north of Guayaquil, and
after crossing the Line shaping a course for Galera island, at the same time
taking care, especially in the dry season, to stand in-shore with the first
northerly winds. By so doing vessels will most probably have the current in
their favour along the coast; whereas by keeping in the centre or on the western side of the gulf, a strong southerly set will be experienced.
After making Galera and clearing the San Jose bank, the navigation
between the Pearl islands and the main is clear and easy, with the advantage
of being able to anchor, should the wind fail and the tide be against the vessel.
As a rule, this passage should be taken, but with a strong southerly wind, the
navigator is tempted to run up the bay, in which case he should keep towards
the western shore of the Pearl islands, where anchorage and less current
ill
Hi24
PASSAGES IN THE GULP OP PANAMA
SI
Effi  I'll'
will be found should the wind fail, an event always to be expected in these
regions.
Vessels bound to Panama from northward should make the island of Hicaron,
which lies about 50 miles westward of Mariato point, and from this endeavour
to keep under the land as far as cape Mala. If unable to do this, they should
push across for the opposite coast of the continent, when the current will be
found in their favour. On getting eastward of cape Mala the safest plan is to
shape a course for Galera island and to use the eastern passage. At the same
time, if tempted up the gulf by a fair wind, vessels should endeavour to
get on the western coast of the Pearl islands, which have the advantages
already explained.
The great difficulty, however, is the passage out of, or rather, from Panama
bay. Pizarro, the first man who attempted this, in November 1525, after
beating about for 70 days was forced to return to the river Chiman, on the
eastern side of the bay. The best plan for all sailing vessels, whether bound
north or south from Panama, is to push to the southward and gain the
S.E. trade; by so doing they will not only avoid the doldrums and vexatious
winds before described, but will have the additional advantage of salubrious
weather, with the sea at a temperature of 75° instead of 88° Fahrenheit. The
passage northward has been made by keeping close in-shore after passing cape
Mala, and navigating by the sea and land breezes; but this should only be
attempted by vessels that are well found and manned, unless they are bound
to the ports of Central America, when it is their only route.
The following directions, the best for sailing vessels, are chiefly by Lieut.
Maury, of the U.S. Navy.
From the bay of Panama a vessel should make the best of her way south
until she gets between lat. 5° N. and the equator; on this course let her
endeavour, if possible, to keep near the meridian of 80° W. From this make
a S.W. course if the winds will allow. Should the wind be S.W. stand to the
southward, but if S.S.W. stand to the West, if a good working breeze; but if
it be light and baffling, with rain, the vessel may know that she is in the doldrums, the quickest way to avoid which is by getting to the southward.
From lat. 2° N., between June and January, vessels may stand off from the
coast to the westward, and pass northward of the Galapagos islands, taking
care to keep southward of 5° N. As far as 95° they will have South and
S.S.W. winds; but after that meridian the wind will haul round to the southward, and vessels bound to the South Pacific may consider themselves fairly
in the trade. Vessels bound northward, after passing the meridian of 100°,
may edge away for the Clipperton rock; after passing which they may push to
the northward for the northern trade.
Between February and June it is better to cross the Line before pushing to
the westward. This will generally take a week, which outlay of time, however, is far preferable to encountering the vexatious weather met in that season
north of the Galapagos. In this route it must be remembered that southward
of lat. 1° N. the wind hauls to the eastward as the vessel leaves the coast, and in
the meridian of 83° it is frequently found eastward of South; but at the same
time, vessels in standing off before crossing the equator, must take care to
avoid being driven to the northward of that latitude. In fact, there are few
passages in which so much depends on the skill and experience of the pilot as
in leaving the gulf of Panama.
Vessels bound to the northward in the above season should keep south ofFRAILES, &c.
25
the Line until westward of 105°, when a course may be shaped for 10° N. and
120° W., in which track they will probably find the northern trade.
The above difficulties will be easily avoided by auxiliary screw steamers,
which vessels may at once proceed to the starting points above mentioned.
The best plan will be to steam for the meridian of 85° W. on the equator,
from which position a course may be shaped, according to their destination,
and to the season of the year. From that point their sails will be found to be as
powerful as their engines.
The following facts will show the singular advantage of even small steam
power in these regions: —There was in 1859, an indifferent, old, screw
steamer, the Columbus, belonging to the Panama Railway Company, that had
been running with great regularity for upwards of a year between Panama and
San Jose de Guatemala, a distance of about 1020 miles, calling at Punta
Arenas, Realejo, La Union, and Acajutla, both going and returning,—at each
place discharging and receiving cargo and mails,—and sailing from Panama on
the 17th of every month, and returning to that port on the 6th of the following;
thus making the round in 19 days. It is estimated that it would take
2 months for a sharp sailing vessel under favourable circumstances to perform
the same work.
CAPE MALA TO CAPE COERIENTES.
The coast from cape Mala trends sharply westward, and continues low so
far as Guanico point, a distance of 22 miles. From this point it gradually
rises for 7 miles to the Morro Puercos, a lofty headland, which forms the
commencement of a range of high coast land. North-eastward of Guanico
-point is an open bay, into which two small rivers, the Tomosi and Juera, empty
themselves.* From Puercos point the coast trends 27 miles to Maraito point,
a bold headland at the termination of the high land of which Morro Puercos
is the commencement; this point is a good landfall for vessels-bound to Panama
from westward, as by keeping under the land eastward of it they will avoid the
southerly current setting from the gulf.
Frailes.—These are two low barren islets situated 11 miles south-westward
from cape Mala, and about 18 miles north-eastward from Puercos point. They
are distant from each other 2 miles in a N.N.W. £ W. and S.S.E. £ E.
direction, and are clear of outlying dangers, with the exception that a reef
extends out about a cable's length from the north-west point of the southern
islet.    The depth within i a mile of them is 20 to 30 fathoms.
At 18 miles westward from cape Mala is a projecting point named Raia, off
which is an islet and reef of rocks, known as the Benado. At about midway
between the rivers Juera and Tomosi, is a patch of rocks at a short distance
from the shore. A reef, 3 fathoms under water, lies about 3 miles northeastward from Puercos point, and another, above water, is distant 4 miles
westward from the point; the latter is at about a mile from shore.    Hence to
* In this bay vessels occasionally anchor, with the wind from the land, near the Met
Benado, and obtain fresh water from the river Juera. As the anchorage is exposed to
southerly winds, it can be considered only a temporary stopping place.If
26
MONTIJO BAY, AND BAHIA HONDA.
IP
Mariato point, the soundings are very deep, as at 3 miles from the shore the
bottom is not reached with a line of 100 fathoms.
From Mariato point the coast-trends 5 miles north-westward to Naranjas
island, a rocky but wooded islet lying about £ a mile off a bluff; it is^ steep,
with 10 and 20 fathoms at a short distance from it. Northward of this islet
the low land again commences, and continues into the great bay of Montijo.
MONTIJO BAY.—From point Mariato the coast trends N.N.W. 20
miles to the eastern entrance of a large bay, named Montijo. This bay extends
northward about 14 miles, with an average breadth of 9 miles, and is fronted
by two islands, Cebaco and Gobernador of which the former is the larger and
southernmost. Within the bay, near its head, is an island named Leones,
having on each side of it a river accessible only by boats. The bay is of little
value to shipping, the soundings in it being extremely irregular, and over the
greater part of its surface only 10 to 12 feet; hence it is but seldom visited.
Cebaco is an island of irregular shape, 13 miles long in a N.E. by E. £ E.
and S.W. by W. £ W. direction, and 3 miles wide at its eastern end, its
broadest part. Some detached rocks lie off its western end; and, a sunken
rock lies about a mile from its eastern point, leaving no safe channel between.
When entering the bay by this, the east channel, it is necessary on account of
this sunken rock to keep nearer to the main than the island,—in steering
thus the depth will be 12 to 10 fathoms; continue now in a north-westerly
direction and pass St Juan rock, distant about l£ miles from the land, on its
west side; the depth will now have decreased to 4 fathoms; hence to the
east side of Leones island the passage is westward of several rocks lying off
the shore, in soundings of 6, 7, and 9 fathoms.
Gobernador island, between the west end of Cebaco and the main, is about
l£ miles in extent, and divides the western entrance into Montijo bay into
two channels, either of which can be taken according to circumstances, although
the northernmost is the better, being wider and less exposed to the strong
outward current from the bay. The depth in the southern channel is 9 to 7
fathoms, and in the northern 16 to 6 fathoms. When the bay is fairly
entered, vessels of light draught may anchor on its west side, and find good
shelter from almost all winds.
When tacking in Montijo bay the utmost caution is necessary on account of
the shoal of 12 feet which extends the whole length of the bay and connects
the northern* side of Cebaco island with Leones island. This shoal occupies a
large part of the surface of the bay, and leaves but a narrow channel on each
side of it.
BAHIA HONDA.—Prom Montijo bay to the entrance of Bahia Hond&
the distance is 20 miles in a W. by N. £ N. direction, and the shore between
is rugged with several islets and rocks off it. At the distance of 2 miles from
the land the soundings are 27 to 35 fathoms, the latter being in the vicinity
of Bahia Honda. In the event of running from one bay to the other, the coast
should have a berth of not less than 8 miles.
The bay consists of an inlet nearly 3 miles in extent in a N.E. direction,
and about 2 miles broad, in which are soundings of 20 to 10 and 4 fathoms.
It affords shelter from all winds, and a berth may be selected according to
circumstances in almost any part of it. The head of the bay, north-east from
Talon island (subsequently mentioned) is shallow, but may be safely approached
by the lead.    When running in it is only necessary to keep in mid-channel.
The entrance does not stand out with sufficient prominence to be distinguishedBAHIA HONDA.
27
from a great distance, but a near approach reveals it with distinctness. The
north point, Guarida, is bold, with a depth of 14 to 10 fathoms close to the
rocks at its base. The south point, cape Jabali, has two islets off it, named
Sentinela and Cono, of which the former is the larger and northernmost; these
islands are connected by a sunken reef, and there is a narrow passage between
them and the shore only suitable for boats.* Within the bay and immediately
facing the entrance is Talon island, having two small islets close to its west
side, of which the larger and northernmost is named Pueril; the island close
to its south end is named Espuela. Talon island is about 120 feet high, and
divides Bahia Honda into two parts, known as Chinche and Legamo bays;
Chinche bay is west of the island. Only vessels of very light draught can
pass round the north end of Talon island. In 1854, the island was inhabited
by some Indian families, from whom were procured eggs, fowl, and various
kinds of fruits, and as the bay affords abundance of excellent fish, such could
also without doubt have been obtained from them.
Fresh water can be procured here in great abundance and especially from a
stream named Cobre, which falls into the south-east part of the harbour, and
can be ascended some distance in a canoe. There is a watering place on the
south side of the bay, S.S.E. from Talon island, which is even more convenient
than the stream just mentioned, because a boat may in calm weather anchor
alongside it and obtain supplies by means of a long hose. Very good water
may also be procured from a cascade outside the harbour, on the north shore,
at about 1£ miles from point Guarida ; the water falls upon a rock, which
affords considerable facilities for fixing a hose.
It has been mentioned that anchorage can be obtained in almost any part of
Bahia Honda, but that which is perhaps the most convenient for large vessels
is westward of Talon island, in Chinche bay. Here the French surveying
vessel Obligado anchored (in 1854,) in 14 fathoms, mud, with point Guarida
bearing S. 40° W.; Sentinela islet S. 14° W.; east point of Espuela islet
S. 83° E.; east point of Sapo islet N. 30° E.; and the west point of Chinche
islet N. 15° W. The only known dangers in the vicinity of this anchorage
are a sunken rock of 8 feet at l£ cables length northward of point Guarida,
and a reef at about the same distance north-westward from Pueril island.
pi When the Obligado was at Bahia Honda the tidal observations showed the
flood and ebb to have nearly equal strength, of the two the ebb preponderating.
High water at full and change 3h. 30m., and the sea rose llf feet.
Making Bahia Honda.—Coiba island and the little island Afuera (between
Coiba and the main) immediately face Bahia Honda, hence these islands will
be first seen from whatever quarter the bay is made. At about 2 miles from
the harbour are two islands named Medidor and Pacora,f situated off the north
shore, of which the former is the larger, of moderate height and nearer the
land; these islands must be left to northward when running for the bay.
The entrance is by no means difficult, but it is recommended to avoid the
southern headland because of the reefs surrounding Sentinela and Cono
islands.
* The French chart No. 1703 shows a detached sunken reef at about one-sixth of a mile
north-eastward of Sentinela island. Although this reef does not appear in the English
(Admiralty) chart No. 1929, it may possibly exist, and should therefore be carefally guarded
against.
+ Named Trucha in Sir Edward Belcher's R.N. chart, No. 192928
PUEBLO NUEVO.
I
Leaving Bahia Honda.—The most convenient time for leaving Bahia Honda
is during the morning, because then advantage can be taken of the East and
N.E. winds. If these winds are weak it may be necessary to haul the vessel
out by the boats.
Monita and Rosario Bays.—The coast from Bahia Honda northward
a distance of 10 miles, is very irregular and forms several bays, of which those
named Monita, Rosario and Pajaro are the principal. The first mentioned
bay is immediately northward of point Ventana, 2 miles from Medidor island;
it has an islet covered with trees in its northern part close to the shore, and
affords good anchorage and shelter only with winds from the lar^d, being
exposed to all others. North of Monita bay is Rosario bay, which will be
easily recognised by an islet near its middle, at about a mile from the shore,
named Muela a Caballo ; this bay is bounded on the north by point Muerto
and on the south by point Gorda, between which is a projecting point dividing
the bay into two parts, the southern of which takes the name of Pivay,—in
each of these little bays is a river. As Rosario bay is exposed to westward,
the anchorage is safe only witk winds from the land. Pajaro bay immediately
northward of that of Rosario, has a depth of 16£ fathoms, and is also unsafe
with winds from westward. All this coast is free from danger at a moderate
distance off.
The shore from Pajaro bay northward for a distance of 9 miles is fronted by
a bank of 6 to 18 feet which extends out about 2 miles. The edge of this
bank being very steep renders the utmost caution necessary in approaching;
at night a depth of 22 to 16 fathoms will be quite near enough;—usually, the
sea breaks heavily upon it. At the south end of this bank is the river Lavenia,
and at the north end the river Tavasera; the latter is not barred.
PUEBLO NUEVO.—At about 3£ miles northward of the river Tavasera
is point Cayado, the south side of entrance to the river of Pueblo Nuevo.
The entrance to this river may be at once recognised by the peculiar formation
of the hills between it and Tavasera river, which are 300 to 400 feet high,
and appear as two islets from a distance. A hill 550 feet high, and having
the form of a sugar-loaf, situated close to the shore on the north side of the
river, is also a good landmark. In front of the entrance, almost due West
from it, are two islets named Silva and Silva de Afuera, of which the latter is
the westernmost; these are also good marks for the river.
In the entrance to the river are two large marshy islands formed of the soil
brought down by floods; these are named Espartal and Porcada,—the latter
is the southernmost. The channel between the islands is too shallow, and
too much obstructed by shoals to be navigated except at high tide, and then
only by boats, the entrance to the river is consequently south of the islands
between them and point Cayado, and is about £ of a mile wide; the channel
north of the islands is also unnavigable. The depth in the principal channel,
in 1854, was 6 to 8 fathoms at low tide, and it was then sheltered on the north
side by the Belitre bank, partially dry when the tide was out, extending westward from the south end of Porcada. Immediately within or eastward of this
bank is a rocky islet named Perdono.
The best time to enter the river of Pueblo Nuevo is during the flood and
"with the wind from seaward. Special care is required on account of the shoal
extending seaward from Porcada islet, the limits of which are indicated by
breakers while there is any sea. Having entered, steer for Perdono islet and
pass it on its south side; the depth hereabout will be 4$ fathoms, deepeningPUEBLO NUEVO.
29
to 6£ and 7 fathoms, fine sand. The anchorage selected by the French
surveying vessel Obligado in 1854, was immediately southward of Perdono islet,
with that islet in one with the south end of Porcado island bearing N. 28° E.;
north point of Silva island N. 75° W.; north point of Silva de Afuera S. 88° W. ;
and point Cayado S. 83° W.
Perdono islet is steep and safe to approach; it may be rounded (1854), but
there will be little occasion to go north of it, the channel south of it being wide
and the main body of the river. In the event of going north of it, keep close
to it on account of the shoal from Porcada island. The depth eastward of the
south point of Porcada island is very irregular, and frequently does not exceed
8£ fathoms; hence it is not a convenient anchorage for large vessels, but for
small vessels drawing less than 16 feet it offers the advantage of being well
shut in and protected from almost all winds. According to the inhabitants,
westerly winds, frequent from June to October, occasionally send into the river
a very heavy sea, which causes considerable inconvenience to vessels anchored
near Perdono island; at such times it will be advisable to run further into the
river, and obtain shelter under the south-east side of Porcada,—the best
passage is westward of Conejo, an island situated about a mile from Perdono.
The village of Pueblo Nuevo is at some distance within the river, and such
is the difficulty of the navigation that it is necessary to be guided to it by a
native. Here, although it is but a small place, almost all kinds of provisions
can be obtained in considerable quantities.*
The best time to leave the river is when the land wind is blowing and a
little before the end of the flood. Steer so as to give point Cayado a berth of
about a cable's length, and pass southward of the islands Silva and Silva de
Afuera, after which such a course may be run as may be convenient. If
necessary, a vessel may run between the two Silvas, but the channel eastward
of the easternmost islet is safe only for those that draw 10 to 15 feet; there
is an isolated rock off the north-west side of Porcada, at f of a mile from shore,
which renders extra care necessary. The north end of Silva island has a
shoal extending from it nearly a mile.
It is high water full and change at 3h. 44m. The tide apparently rises
8 to 9 feet.
The foregoing description of the river of Pueblo Nuevo is b£sed chiefly upon
the observations of the French surveying vessel Obligado in 1854. According
to the chart of Sir Edward Belcher, R.N., 1859, a spit of 2£ fathoms runs off
about a cable's length from the west side of point Cayado, and on the south
side of the point are some rocks close to the shore, named Nueces, which are
above water. The shoal extending northward from Silva island has not more
than 10 feet on its extremity, and as it nearly joins the sandy spit jutting out
from the north end of Porcada island, the channel north of the island cannot
be considered safe. The soundings between the Silva islands are 9 to 12
fathoms, the latter being near Silva de Afuera. Sir Edward Belcher says,
"the port consists of the outlet of a large river, which takes its name from a
small village of huts, situated on the river Santiago, at some distance from the
entrance. It is formed by a neck or island about 3 miles in length, which
affords good anchorage for vessels of any class.    Three larger streams discharge
* It is said that the serpents in the various islands of the river, and also in the marshy-
land immediately bordering it, are of a venomous character.
ill
1
WW
'mmSAN LORENZO AND DAVID BAYS.
ml
themselves into the main basin at the western end of this island, where the
apparent great entrance is situated; but so studded with rocks and shoals, as
to be unnavigable for anything larger than boats. It is in fact, an extensive
archipelago, as most of the regions towards the Chiriqui territory will be found
to be on future examination.
Water cannot be procured in any quantity, although it may probably be
procurred by digging wells. The principal article of trade was sarsaparilla,
that of this neighbourhood being esteemed of superior quality. The stream
runs fresh at some miles up, but we did not either meet it, or succeed in finding
the town. Sugar-cane, of good quality, was offered; and tortoise-shell, one
of the articles of trade, can be procured at the season."
From the river of Pueblo Nuevo the coast takes a sudden turn in a westerly
direction,—and at the distance of 23 miles is point Juco or Ojo the east side
of David bay. Nearly all this shore is low and fronted by a sandy strand.
In the interior, at about 12 miles from the sea, is a chain of mountains of
considerable altitude, one of the peaks, in lat. 8° 23', long. 81° 55', being
3140 feet high; the country at the foot of these mountains consists in general
of a well wooded plain. The entrances of the various rivers can usually be
easily recognised by the white trunks of the mangrove trees, only the tops of
which are in leaf; these rivers are barred, and the approach to them is known
better by the nature of the bottom than by the depth, it being sandy in their
immediate vicinity and muddy outside. Along all this coast as far as David
bay there are no known sunken dangers, and vessels may run along it at the
distance of 2 or 3 miles in soundings of 11 to 9| fathoms. At about 18 miles
from Pueblo Nuevo is the commencement of some cliffs of a red colour, which
are very conspicuous ; these continue some distance, and then the coast turns
sharply southward and forms point Juco, the east side.of David bay. On the
east side of point Juco are some islands named Benado, which are a good
mark for the bay to veseels approaching from eastward.
San Lorenzo Bay.—The bend of the coast just mentioned, terminating
in point Juco, forms a bay named San Lorenzo, from a river of that name
which falls into it. It is so thickly strewn with rocks that all vessels should
avoid entering it, nor from the same cause can the river be approached
except in boats. There is rather a considerable village on this river at a few
miles from the sea.
DAVID BAY is included between Juco point and a large island named
Parida, ll£ miles south-westward from the point. In it are numerous islands
and rocks, but with the assistance of the Admiralty chart No. 2816, little
difficulty will be experienced in selecting an anchorage. At about a mile
south-westward from the point are two islets connected together and surrounded
by a reef, named Monitas, the southern of which bears a close resemblance to
a saddle ; and, at 2f miles S. £ W. from these islands is an isolated rock
named Viuda, having a reef extending from it about £ a mile in an E. by S. £ S.
direction,—as this rock and reef are both steep, with soundings immediately
around them of 10 to 12 fathoms, they require great care to avoid. It is said
that to vessels approaching David bay from southward the presence of the
Viuda reef may generally be known by breakers, but whether this be the case
or not, it is a very formidable danger.*
at about
A sunken rock, the existance of which there is great reason to doubt, has been reported
>out 4 miles S.S.E. from the Viuda.   The French surveying vessel Obligado soughtDAVID BAY, H
81
In nearly the middle of David bay is a very dangerous rock named El Buey
which is only visible at half tide, and for which unfortunately no well defined
landmarks can be given. Its position is 3 miles W. by N. from the southernmost Monitas islet, and 1T% miles N.E. £ E. from the largest San Jose islet.
Its extent is but small, and the soundings close to it are 5 to 7 fathoms.
David bay is so named from the river which falls into it, upon which is
situated at the distance of S£ leagues in the interior the principal city of the
province of Chiriqui in the state of Panama; the city bears the names of David
or David Chiriqui, and is in lat. 8° 27', long. 82° 26'; it can only be reached
by boats, through a very intricate navigation.* At a short distance to the
westward is the boundary between the Granadian Confederation and the
Republic of Costa Rica.
The channel between the Monitas islands and point Juco is not considered
safe, although the depth is 7 to 8 fathoms; hence vessels seeking the anchorage
in David bay almost invariably pass southward of these islands, between them
and the Viuda rock, or between the latter and the islets off the east side of
Parida island. The mark to steer for is the San Jose islands, a small group
of islands 4 miles westward of the Monitas; as these are covered with trees,
and at low water the little sandy channels which separate them become dry,
they are easily recognised. Vessels may approach the San Jose islands to a
moderate distance, if ordinary precaution be taken to avoid any undiscovered
outlying danger there may be about; having made the islands, bear up a little
northerly and anchor, or anchor about midway between the islands and the
Monitas. The only known sunken reef in the bay is the Buey rock already
mentioned, for which a good lookout must be maintained.
The Buey rock being an isolated danger at a considerable distance from the
shore, can be passed on all sides. If a vessel be so far in the bay that it is
most convenient to pass it on the west side, she should give the San Jose
islands a berth of about £ a mile, and steer with them bearing South to
S. by W., until the bottom changes from mud to gravel, when the vessel will
be inside the rock. If, on the contrary, the intention be to go eastward of the
rock, pass the Monitas on the south side, and steer for Carre island, situated
l£ miles W.N.W. from Juco point, and afterwards continue along the south
side of the chain of islets as far as the entrance to Boca Chica, off which there
is anchorage in 4t£ to 5 fathoms. In 1854 the French surveying vessel
Obligado anchored here in 4 fathoms, with Viuda rock bearing S. 34° E.; the
for it unsuccessfully, although assisted in the search by a native of the country who stated
that he had seen the breakers upon it. The difficulty of finding an isolated sunken rock in
deep water is well known; hence, it will be prudent to exercise more than ordinary vigilance
when in the vicinity of this reported danger.
* The city of David had in 1854 a population of about 5000. Its distance from the sea
is about 10 miles, but the Boca San Pedro, the mouth of the river David nearest to it, has
a bar across it which is we believe so shallow as to be impassable; hence vessels are obliged
to resort to the Boca Chica 16 miles eastward of it, making a total distance of 26 miles
from the city. Around the city are cultivated lands which reach to the foot of the extinct
volcano of Chiriqui.    There is but little commerce, and that chiefly with Panama.
From the summit of the volcano of Chiriqui the waters of the Atlantic and Pacific can
be perceived, and it has been proposed to construct a railway across the level country
between the two oceans. It is said that there are no obstacles to the construction of such
a means of communication greater than an engineer of average ability would be able to
overcome with ease. The proposed route was from Almirante bay on the north side of the
isthmus, to David bay on the south side, taking the city of David on the way; hence
vessels would have a sheltered anchorage at each terminus. A bed of coal of considerable
value traverses the whole distance.
fcifl
if
Hi
i82
BOCA CHICA, AND PARIDA ISLAND.
PSD
HI
if
southern Monita S. 59° E
Lavandera rock N. 15° E.
north-west point of San Jose S. 88° W.; and
This anchorage is safe during the fine season, as
it affords good shelter from the prevailing breezes, and especially from
northerly winds which at that time have occasionally considerable strength ;
but during winter, when S.W. winds prevail, it is better to anchor further out
under shelter of the San Jose islands.
The coast north of the chain of islands extending from Juco point to the
entrance of Boca Chica forms a bay named Playa Grande, in the north-eastern
part of which is an inlet known as Chuchegal bay. Playa Grande has not
been closely examined, and is reported to have many sunken reefs in it; the
soundings over its surface are probably 4 to 3 fathoms. The country behind
Chuchegal bay affords abundant pasturage for cattle.
Boca Chica.—This is the narrow channel between Saino and Ventana
islands, 3^- miles W.N.W* from Juco point, and is the only entrance to the
river David practicable for vessels, which must be of very light draught, there
being at low tide only 8 to 10 feet water in some parts of it. Boca Chica
may be recognised by the rocks of Ventana island, which have been pierced
by the sea. On the east side of the entrance is a rock named Lavandera, an
isolated danger visible except near high water, situated about 1^ cables' length
southward from Saino island, and which must be carefully guarded against,
there being a depth of 4 and 5 fathoms close to its south side.
At the village of Boca Chica, on the north side of the river and 31 miles
from the sea, the usual articles of provision can be procured, such as poultry,
fruits, vegetables,  &c.    Meat cannot be obtained in any quantity, but
eggs,
cattle can be bought without difficulty.    Fresh water of excellent quality can be
got from the stream immediately east of the village.
It is high water on the days of full and change of the moon at Boca Chica
at 3h. 15m. The rise of tide is about 10£ feet. During the Obigado's visit,
the flood at the anchorage outside the entrance was observed to flow N.N.W.,
and the ebb the contrary, with an average strength of 1 mile per hour, which
diminished in force towards the San Jose and Monitas islands. Within the
entrance and in the river, the current was much more violent.
When leaving David bay, if obliged to go westward of the San Jose islands
it is recommended to approach nearer those islands than to Palenque because
of the rocks extending from the latter; the depth in the channel between is
6 and 7 fathoms. In the French chart No. 2816 a sunken rock of 11J feet
is inserted at about £ a mile westward of the south part of the San Jose
islands. Having cleared this sunken rock, a wide berth should be given to
some rocks situated If miles almost due South from the San Jose islands ; the
depth throughout will be 8 and 9 fathoms.
PARIDA ISLAND.—This is an island of irregular shape 3f miles long
in a N.N.E. and S.S.W. direction, and about 1£ miles wide in its broadest
part. It is well wooded and there are rivulets affording abundance of water.
Numerous islands having among them many sunken reefs, are scattered about
on its east and south-east sides to the distance from it of 3 to 4 miles, the
largest (and almost furthest to seaward) of which is named Bolano; these islets
and reefe make the approach to David bay from south-westward a proceeding
of some little risk. Among the islets and reefs there are doubtless channels
which might be navigated in boats, but vessels must be kept outside them, as
they have not been closely examined.
The only commodious anchorage in Parida island is at its north-east end
under protection of an island which affords shelter from southward ; the depthPOINT BURRICA AND COIBA ISLAND.
83
is 6£ fathoms on mud, and there is a little sandy bay where a landing can be
effected. If from David bay, vessels may pass either on the west or south
sides of San Jose islands ; if the former, it is necessary in the boards to westward to tack immediately the depth becomes 4f fathoms. If this anchorage
be approached from seaward, steer for the Viuda rock, and, passing it at the
distance of about 1^- miles on its west side, direct your course for the San
Jose islands ; leave these islands to the northward, and then steer for the
north end of Parida island, maintaining a depth of 7 to 6 fathoms, but
decreasing to S£ fathoms as the anchorage is approached;—when it deepens
again to 6£ fathoms, anchor. The lead should be kept going, and a good
look-out kept for any undiscovered sunken rocks. At this end of Parida
plenty of good water may be obtained.
Chimmo Bay.—At the south-west end of Parida island is a little bay named
Chimmo, where is a depth of 10 to 2£ fathoms; good water may be obtained
from here. In front of the bay is a little islet known by the name of Santa
Cruz ; the passage in is north of this islet, because some rocks extend from it
southward to the shore. A reef also runs off southward a short distance^from
some islets on the north side of the bay.
When sailing round the south-west point of Parida island, it should have a
berth of about a mile, on account of some sunken rocks £ a mile from it,
which have a depth of 15 and 16 fathoms close to them.
From Parida island northward to the archipelago of islets fronting the coast,
there is, with the exception of a narrow channel of 8 to 3£ fathoms close round
the north end of the island, a bed of rocks through which they may be
channels fit for boats. The sea usually breaks upon these reefs when there is
any wind.
Point Burrica.—From the south end of Parida island to the extremity
of point Burrica, the bearing and distance are W. by S. £ S., 34 miles. The
coast between forms a large bay which receeds 20 miles from a supposed line
connecting these points. The shore in the east part of the bay, consists of
low islands forming the delta of the river David. The principal entrance to
the river, the Boca San Pedro, is between Sevillia and San Pedro islands, and
as already noticed is impracticable for vessels. Sevillia is the easternmost
island ; it abounds with game of various kinds, which can be obtained with
facility. San Pedro is the westernmost of the large islands of the river; from
this island the coast trends westward and southwrard to point Burrica, and
along the northern shore are met with in succession the rivers Piedra, Pinos
and Bartolome. In all this bay there is no sheltered roadstead, nor does it
possess any advantage which should make it a place of resort for vessels.
COIBA ISLAND.—This is the largest island off the coast between
Mariato and Burrica points, as it is 19 miles long in a N.W.- by N. and
S.E. by S. direction, and about 12 miles wide in its broadest part. It is
covered with forests, and there is abundance of good water in every part.
Vessels may anchor off it on all sides during fine weather, but unfortunately
it possesses no bay nor harbour in which shelter may be obtained from all
winds. As it is at present (1854) uninhabited, it is seldom visited. It was
surveyed in 1848 by Lieut. Wood, B.N., and a chart (No. 1928) of it was
subsequently published by the Admiralty. To this chart we must *efer the
reader, for the various details of its coast and outlying reefs.
The western coast of Coiba island appears, from the survey, to be of moderate
height, and bold, and there are no known dangers outside those abutting on theiff
34
COIBA ISLAND.
shore.    At about half way down there is an open bay, named Hermosa, in
which is a depth of 20 to 14 fathoms.
The eastern coast of the island forms a Damas bay, 5 or 6 miles in extent,
which affords a good depth of water and excellent shelter from westward. The
soundings are from 30 to 15 fathoms, shoaling to the shore; and water may
be obtained in the northern part of the bay. Off the southern' shore rocky-
shoals extend nearly a mile out, so that some care is required to avoid them.
In the middle of the bay the land is low, and here there is a small stream,
named San Juan, at the entrance to which are some sandy flats.
The navigator Colnett anchored in Damas bay in 1794, and considered it
to be the most commodious place for cruizers he had met with in these seas,
as it abounded with wood and water; also trees of the cedar kind, large enough
to make masts for first-rate ships, and of excellent quality; his place of
anchorage was in 19 fathoms, with the watering place bearing about
N.W. i N., and the south point of Coiba S.E. by S.; but he stated that
vessels might lie near enough to the shore to be able to haul off their water;
the time of anchoring must however be considered, for sandy flats run a long
way off, and may deceive in distance. At the period of his visit the flood
came from northward, flowing seven hours and ebbing five, and the perpendicular
rise of the tide was 2 fathoms. "The anchorages throughout the bay are
good; and 5 or 6 miles off you will find 33 and 35 fathoms, good holding
muddy ground. Few vegetables or fruits are to be obtained here, but shellfish, as crabs, cockles, periwinkles, and oysters, may be had in plenty ; there
are also other fish to be caught, but alligators, sharks, and sea-snakes swarm
on the adjacent shores, and seem to harass, destroy, and lessen the quantity;
deer and other animals are said to inhabit the island, and birds and monkeys
are numerous, but they are very shy, and difficult to get at, owing to the state
of agitation they live in, from the wolves, tigers, hawks, and vultures that
prey upon them. Turtles also are in great abundance, yet hard to catch.
Whales also frequent these shores, but not in any great numbers; some of
these are of the spermaceti species.''
In the account of Lord Anson's voyage, by Richard Walter, published in
1776, there is a description of Coiba island, in the following terms. It should
be premised that the anchoring place was in Damas bay.
"The island of Coiba is extremely convenient for wooding and watering,
since the trees grow close to the high-water mark, and a large rapid stream
of fresh water runs over the sandy beach into the sea: so that we were little;
more than two days in laying in all the wood and water we wanted. The
whole island is of a very moderate height, excepting one part. It consists of
a continued wood spread all over the whole surface of the country, which
preserves its vendure the year round. Amongst the other wood, we found
there abundance of cassia, and a few lime-trees. It appeared singular to us,
that, considering the climate and the shelter, we should see no other birds
than parrots, paroquets, and mackaws ; indeed, of these last there were prodigious flights. Next to these birds, the animals we found in most plenty,
were monkeys and iguanas, and these we frequently killed for food ; for,
notwithstanding there were many herds of deer upon the place, the
difficulty of penetrating the woods prevented our coming near them ; so that,
though we saw them often, we killed only two during our stay. Our prisoners
assured us that this island abounded with tigers ; and we did once discover
the print of a tiger's paw upon the beach, but the tigers themselves we neverHICARONS,
85
saw. The Spaniards, too, informed us, that there was frequently found in the
woods a most mischievous serpent, called the flying snake, which, they said,
darted itself from the boughs of trees, on either man or beast that came within
its reach; and whose sting they believed to be inevitable death. Besides
these dangerous land animals, the sea hereabouts is infested with great
numbers of alligators, of an extraordinary size: and we often observed a large
kind of flat-fish, jumping a considerable height out of the water, which we
supposed to be the fish that is said frequently to destroy the pearl-divers, by
clasping them in its fins as they rise from the bottom; and we were told that
the divers, for their security, are now always armed with a sharp knife, which,
when they are entangled, they stick into the belly of the fish, and thereby
disengage themselves from its embraces.
Whilst the ship continued here at anchor, the Commodore, attended by
some of his officers, went in a boat to examine a bay which lay to the northward ; and they afterwards ranged all along the eastern side of the island;
and in the places where they put on shore, in the course of this expedition,
they generally found the soil to be extremely rich, and met with great plenty
of excellent water. In particular, near the north-east point of the island, they
discovered a natural cascade, which surpassed, as they conceived, everything
of this kind which human art or industry hath hitherto produced. It was a
river of transparent water, about forty yards wide, which rolled down a declivity
of near 150 in length. The channel it fell in was very irregular, for it was
entirely composed of rock, both its sides and bottom being made up of large
detached blocks; and, by these, the course of the water was frequently
interrupted : for in some parts it ran sloping with a rapid but uniform motion,
while in others it tumbled over the ledges of rocks with a perpendicular
descent. All the neighbourhood of this stream was a fine wood, and even the
huge masses of rock which overhung the water, and which, by their various
projections, formed the inequalities of the channel, were covered with lofty
forest trees."
Rear-Admiral Sir George Seymour has remarked of Coiba island, "It is
about the same size as the Isle of Wight. Off the points, ledges of rocks
generally extend; but there is an appearance of an anchoring-place in the
intervening bays on the east side, along which I proceeded in the Sampsori
steam-vessel. The soil on the coast is good, but the interior is nearly
inaccessible from the steepness of the cliffs and the tangled vegetation. We
found traces of pearl-divers having visited the shores; but there are no
inhabitants (1847) except at the small islet of Rancheria, between which and
the north-east end of Coiba there is good anchorage. A Frenchman, of the
name of Sorget, is resident on Rancheria; and this situation, as far as I could
judge on a cursory view, seems more favourable for an establishment than any
we saw on the larger island."
Hicarons.—Southward of Coiba are the Hicarons, two small islands, the
southernmost of which is in lat. 7° 6', long. 81° 46'; the larger island is 8f
miles long, and the smaller 1 mile; they lie north and south of each other,
being separated by a narrow channel. The small island is entirely covered
with cocoa-trees; and the large one bears an equal appearance of leafy verdure,
but there are very few trees of the cocoa kind. Hicaron is 830 feet high, and
the most extensive look-out, says Captain Colnett, is from the top of this
island, for it commands Coiba and the whole of the coast and bay to tha
northward.
d 286
RANCHERIA, CONTRERAS, SECAS, &o,
Ml
The channel between Hicaron and Coiba is about 4 miles wide, and has an
irregular depth of 6 to 10 fathoms. It is clear of sunken rocks; but as there
are some dangers near the south-east point of Coiba, it will be more prudent
to pass southward of the islands than to attempt the passage within them.
The principal danger to be avoided is the Hill rock, a small patch of 6 feet
water, lying 2 miles S. £ E, from Barca island, a small islet close to the shore
of Coiba, and 5£ miles E. f N. from David point, the eastern point of Hicaron
island; close to this rock are soundings of 10 to 15 fathoms, so that it is
very dangerous.
Rancheria &c.—Off the N.E."point of Coiba island are several islands
and rocks. The largest island, named Rancheria, is l£ miles in length, and
lies about If miles from the shore, from which it is separated by a ohannel of
7 and 8 fathoms, but, as there are several rocks in this passage, it will not be
prudent to attempt to run through.* North-eastward of this, about 4-J- miles
are two smaller islands, named Afuera and Afuerita, which are surrounded
(for a very short distance) by rocks. A reef extends from the south-east point
of Afuera, the larger island, about 2 cables' length; at its extremity is a black
rock, almost covered at high tide.
Contreras.—This group is about 10 miles northward from Coiba, and is
composed of two principal islands surrounded by many small islets and rocks.
The northern island is named Brincanco, the southern Pajaros. Among them
there is no good anchorage. The Obligado anchored north of Brincanco in
1854, opposite a little bay in which were anchored the boats of some pearl
and turtle fishers, and found the bottom very bad for holding, although
composed of gravel.
Vessels may approach the Contreras without hesitation if due precaution be
taken, as it is believed that there are no sunken dangers among them the
positions of which are not shown by breakers. The soundings immediately
around them are 80, 85 and 40 fathoms, the latter being close to their southwest side, and there is a clear channel between the two large islands in which
the depth is 88, 21 and 84 fathoms. At about 2 miles south from the islands
is the Prosper rock, a pinnaole having the appearance of a black tower;
although this rock is steep on all sides, it will be prudent not to attempt to
pass between it and the islands on aooount of a reef partially dry at low tide
situated about midway in the channel.
Secas.—This group of islets and rocks is situated nearly 15 miles from
the coast between Pueblo Nuevo and David bay. About and among them are
no known sunken rocks, the positions of which are not usually indicated by
breakers. Here there is good shelter for small vessels, and upon some of the
islands a landing may be effected, but there is very little inducement to go
ashore as no water can be obtained. If the approach of night or failure of
wind oblige a vessel in their vicinity to anchor, the best anchorage is in
10 to 12 fathoms on sand.
At about 8 miles eastward from the Secas is a dangerous rock named Bruja,
which is almost awash at low tide. The position of this reef makes it a very
formidable danger, especially at night; there are soundings of 20 to 24 fathoms
close around it.
* There is good anohorage S.S.E. of Ranoheria, opposite a sandy beach, whence wood
and water oan be easily prooured from the island. Some shelter is furnished by a high
round island.GULF OF DULCE, &o.
37
Montuosa,—This little island is situated about 22 miles westward from
Coiba island, its position being considered to be lat. 7° 28', long. 82° 13'. It
rises to a considerable height, and has its summit covered with cocoa and
other trees. A narrow reef above and under water, extends from it about
3 miles in a north-westerly direction, and a reef also runs off from its southeast side. Captain Colnett landed here in 1794. He mentions that the
bottom on the south side of the island, and also the shore near the sea is rocky.
A sandy beach was found behind some little creeks between the rocks which
afforded a safe landing for boats.
Ladrones.—These are two islands situated about 15 miles southward of
Parida island, their position being about lat. 7° 52', long. 82° 25'. They are
barren, of moderate height, and together are not more than a mile in extent.
They may be approached with safety, if precaution be taken to avoid any
sunken rocks there may be in their vicinity. The only known dangers are
some rocks nearly a mile northward of them, and a reef about 4 miles from
them in the same direction, upon which at low tide is a depth of only 6 feet;
as the position of this latter is only shown by breakers when there is a stiff
breeze, it is a reef that must be very carefully guarded against.
GULF OF DULCE.—Point Burrica, the extremity of the land on the
south-east side of the gulf of Dulce, appears like an island at a distance, and
may be readily recognised, whether seen from south-westward or south-eastward. It advances seaward considerably from the main land, and its summit
rises into three hills of apparently equal height and distance from each other.
A nearer approach brings into view the low point which terminates it; this
also resembles an island from a distance. At rather more than a mile from
its extremity is a high isolated rock, serving as an excellent object for recognition when making the land from seaward ; in the channel between, and also
around this rock are breakers, upon which account it will be prudent for
veesels to give it a wide berth. Point Burrica is sufficiently lofty to be seen
in clear weather from a distance of about 35 miles; in its vicinity the flood
tide sets N.W. with some strength, hence it is recommended to avoid being
becalmed on its south-east side.
From point Burrica the coast trends about 25 miles in a N.W. direction to
point Platanal at the entrance to the gulf of Dulce. It is bold throughout,
especially at point Platanal, where the mountain immediately over it rises to
the height of 2330 feet, and faces the sea in an almost perpendicular cliff.
This mountain is succeeded in a northerly direction by a moderately flat
country, not visible from a distance, hence the cause of the land between points
Burrica and Platanal appearing like an island from seaward. It is said that
in all this coast there is but one place where a landing can be effected, and
that is in a little rocky creek at about 13 miles from point Burrica, into which
a rivulet falls.
With a westerly wind it will be advisable to give the coast just described a
wide berth. Although not absolutely unsafe, the sea in its vicinity is very
deep and rocky. At 2 miles from the land the lead fails to touch the bottom,
sounding 80 fathoms, and with a strong wind from south-westward breakers of
extreme violence are to be met with inshore. For these reasons, vessels bound
into the gulf of Dulce are advised to bear away for cape Matapalo, the west
side of the gulf, after making point Burrica; moreover within the cape is good
anchorage and a more moderate depth of water.
The gulf of Dulce extends into the land about 40 miles in a north-westerly38
GULP OF DULCE.
II i
direction, with an average width of 14 to 10 miles. It is but little frequented,
and until 1852 was almost unknown to Europeans; at that time its population
consisted only of 12 to 15 families located at point Arenitas, on the west side
of the gulf. Its soil is extremely fertile, and it is asserted that its navigation
is by no means difficult. It possesses numerous excellent anchorages, and
there are no known sunken dangers at a greater distance from the land than a
mile, with the exception of the bank facing the river Coto, on the east shore,
at about 15 miles within the entrance; .this is the principal danger in the
gulf, but as the sea almost always breaks upon it, and its position is well
indicated by the soundings in its vicinity, there is but little difficulty in
avoiding it.
Cape Matapalo, on the west side of the entrance to the gulf of Dulce, is
high, precipitous and covered with trees ; where the trees have fallen on the
steep slopes the soil has a reddish appearance. This cape is the south-eastern
termination of the high land Sal-si-puedes, which can be seen from a considerable distance; hence, with the high land terminating at point Burrica, the
situation of the gulf of Dulce is well marked. At about a mile from the cape
in an E.S.E. direction there is a rock 10 to 12 feet high, known as Matapalo
roek, which stands out prominently from the coast, and when viewed from
south-westward or north-eastward, appears very conspicuously; it is safe to
approach, but as there are breakers between it and the land, vessels should
always pass it on its south side. The coast on the opposite side of the gulf
is believed to be clear of all outlying dangers, but what are visible.
All the western shore of the gulf consists of a flat well wooded country,
sandy to the village of Arenitas, and afterwards alluvial. At- about 6 miles
northward from Matapalo rock is point Sombrero, from which a reef extends
about £ a mile; and 3 miles further in the same direction is Tigrito point,
also having a reef from it to the distance of f of a mile;—these reefs are the
only known dangers on the western side of the gulf which vessels have to fear
in the approach to Arenitas from southward.
Point Arenitas.—At about 9 miles from Tigrito point is point Arenitas, a
low sandy projection of the coast, which in 1852 was for the greater part
covered with trees. The houses on its extremity are visible only from a
moderate distance. At about a cables' length eastward from the point is a
coral bank, which partially dries at low tide ; it has an extent of only 2 cables'
lengths from East to West, and as its eastern edge is so steep that soundings
of 14 to 12 fathoms may be obtained close to it, more than ordinary care is
required when approaching the point. Small vessels may pass between this
bank and the shore, the narrow channel having a depth in it of 16 to 13 feet'
it is necessary to use the lead.
When approaching point Arenitas from cape Matapalo, the sea is too deep
for anchorage until point Tigrito is approached, the average soundings being
35 to 30 fathoms. Off this point (Tigrito) is anchorage in 13 to 16 fathoms,
sand and shells; or further out in about 20 fathoms, green mud. At Arenitas
point there is anchorage either N.W. or S.E. of the village; the latter is
preferable if it be intended to remain only a short time, on account of its
exposure to the sea breeze and the consequent freedom from the excessive
heat felt northward of the point. The best position for anchoring south-eastward of the point is, at about a mile from the land in 10 to 12 fathoms, green
mud, with the flagstaff (1852) bearing W. by N. £ N., and point Tigrito
All? * oGULF OF DULCE.
39.
The anchorage north-westward of the point is very good, and convenient for
effecting general repairs; but, if it be necessary to heel the vessel over, the
Golfito, on the eastern side of the gulf, will be found a far more suitable place.
The depth is 16 fathoms at £ to £ a mile from the land, on green mud; eastward and northward of this position the soundings are 33 to 55 fathoms.
The . landing place at point Arenitas is on its north side, at the entrance to
a little creek which is dry at low water. The point is almost as steep as a
quay. No water can be obtained here" to supply a vessel, but sufficient may
be got from the river Tigre, 5 miles north-westward from it; when off this
river it is advisable to send ashore at half-flood, that the stream may be
ascended as far as possible, and it is recommended to leave the river at half-
ebb, because the sea falls rapidly. It is high water at the village of point
Arenitas on the days of full and change of the moon at 3h. 15m.; the highest
rise of tide observed was 12 feet.
When the Brilliante was at point Arenitas in 1852, a small quantity of
fresh provisions was obtained from the village. Cattle could only be.procured
from the hacienda of Tigre. The neighbouring forrests were ascertained to be
rich in spars, and timber suitable for building purposes.    Fish was abundant.
Point Tigre.—From Arenitas to point Tigre the distance, as before observed,
is 5 miles in a north-westerly direction; the coast between, covered with
mangroves, is so steep that at about a J of a mile from it the depth is 15 to 30
fathoms, on sand. This point is formed by a mud bank, dry at low water,
which extends out about £ a mile. It is on the north side of the point that
the little river Tigre, already alluded to, falls into the sea. In 1852 there
were two entrances to the river, neither having much depth nor breadth, but
the northern had the most water.
From point Tigre to El Rincon, the head of the gulf, the distance is 17
miles, along a shore destitute of any objects sufficiently remarkable to be
mentioned. At 5 miles from the point is the little river Aguja, which has or
had a hut at its entrance; and 9 miles from this is Palma point, a very slight
projection of the land, recognised by its two cocoa-trees, which are the only
trees of the kind on all the coast from point Arenitas. The river Rincon is
S£ miles from Palma point; it has two entrances which can only be entered
by boats.
The soundings between the rivers Tigre and Aguja are not so deep as*those
southward of Tigre point; but they increase in depth as Palma point is approached, and also towards El Rincon, the head of the gulf.
At El Rincon the coast suddenly turns N.E. by E. J E. and trends in that
direction 11 miles, when it changes to E.S.E. and maintains that line of
bearing throughout almost the whole of the east side of the gulf. In a very
considerable part of this coast the mountains rise almost from the sea, and
are covered with impenetrable forests; this description of coast prevails so far
as the Golfito, when the mountains recede from the shore, and are succeeded
by an almost flat country. At the head of the gulf, at not more than £ b,
mile from the north shore, are some islets, surrounded by coral banks.
River Esquinas.—Following the coast round the north-east side of the gulf,
we meet, at 4 miles from the islets just mentioned, the small river Esquinas,
which falls into the sea through a marshy plain. Fronting it is a bank of mud
and sand, soil brought down in rainy seasons, which extends from the shore
about 1£ miles and is for the most part dry at low tide. A channel into the
river has been reported as existing across this bank, but at the period of the11
!',i ';',!
m
B III     kill J
40
GULF OF DULCE
examination of the gulf (in 1852) by the officers of the French ship BHlliante,
the bank was dry over the whole of its extent; there may therefore be a
channel only during floods in the interior.
From the river Esquinas the coast trends 4£ miles south-eastward to point
Esquinas and is bold all the way, and the soundings met with in succession
are 3 to 10 and 16 fathoms at a very short distance off it, the latter being
close to the point. From this headland to point San Jose the distance is
9£ miles in an E. by S. £ S. direction, passing at about midway a bold
projection of the land; around point San Jose are rocks, off which is a pearl
fishery at the depth of 6^ to 10 fathoms. From this point to the entrance of
the Golfito the distance is about 4 miles.
When running down the coast from the islets to the Golfito, it is advisable
to give the shore a good berth, as it has not been very closely examined.
The soundings close to the land are represented as deep, which the mountainous nature of the country in its immediate vicinity would lead one to infer.
Golfito.—This is an inlet of irregular shape running into the coast
about 8£ miles, the upper or south-eastern part of which is very shallow.
The entrance is well defined on the north side by point Golfito, a high bold
promontory having a depth of 6 fathoms close off it, and on the south side by
a hill 790 feet high having at its base a low sandy peninsula; the latter is very
narrow, and has or had a few cocoa trees upon it. The entrance is about
£ of a mile wide, and is in the direction of N.E. by N.; at first the depth is
13 to 7 fathoms, being shallowest off the southern shore, and thence it gradually decreases to 4£ fathoms as the extremity of the sandy peninsula is
approached. Immediately within this sandy spit, on its south side, the
soundings are ££ to 2 fathoms, and vessels may enter, if care be taken to use
the lead frequently to avoid any shallow spot that may have escaped the
detection of the surveyors. If unfortunately it be necessary to heel the vessel
over for repair, it may be done in the Golfito, as there are many places
suitable for that purpose.    Squalls and heavy rains are very prevalent here.
The regular winds of the gulf make the navigation of the channel leading
into the Golfito comparatively easy, and with the land wind vessels can leave
it without difficulty. There is anchorage in mid-channel in about 4£ fathoms.
If desirous to anchor eastward of the peninsula, it will be advisable not to do
so northward of the house on its extremity bearing W. by N. £ N.
River Coto.—From the Golfito the shore trends 7£ miles S.E. by E. to the
river Coto, and afterwards 15 miles south-eastward and westward to point
Banco, the latter portion of coast forming the bay of Pavon; it is low and
sandy throughout, and backed by a flat well timbered country". The river
Coto is the most considerable stream that falls into the gulf. It is said to
have two entrances, 5 to 6 feet deep with sufficient water therefore for the
admission of boats, but fronting it is a bank, already alluded to, which renders
approach to the river difficult; this bank extends from shore about 2 miles,
and lines the coast northward as far as the entrance to the Golfito, its breadth
gradually decreasing as it approaches the sandy peninsula into which it ultimately merges. The sea, even in calm weather, generally breaks on the
bank; hence, although its outer edge is very steep, it can usually be avoided
without difficulty.
In Pavon bay the soundings at a mile from the shore are 5 to 3 fathoms on
sand. Vessels may anchor there, but only in very fine weather, and with the
wind from eastward.SAL-SI-PUEDES AND LLORENA POINTS.
41
Point Banco is bold and steep, but not so lofty as point Platanal 6 miles
south from it. It is well wooded, and at its base are some rocks too near the
land to be dangerous except to vessels close in shore. At about a mile south
from it is a little stream, named Claro. It is advisable to give the coast
between points Banco and Platanal a good berth, as it is believed that rocks
extend off it a short distance.
Point Sal-si-puedes.—From cape Matapalo the coast trends W.N.W.
16 miles, and then westward about 4 miles to point Sal-si-puedes ; the actual
bearing and distance of the two points of land from each other being
W. by N. £ N. and E. by S. £ S., 20 miles. It is low and sandy all the way
but immediately behind it is high land visible from a considerable distance.
Except in very fine weather it is unadvisable to approach this coast closely,
the sea off it being deep, and there being usually extremely heavy breakers
upon the beach; in some parts there is no bottom, sounding 50 fathoms, at
less than £ a mile from the shore. At times, after landing, a sudden breeze
has sprung up bringing with it so heavy a sea, that many hours have elapsed
before the unlucky boatmen could re-embark.
At about a mile southward from point Sal-si-puedes there is a round bare
rock named Choncha Pelona. It is possible that there may be a clear passage
between this rock and the shore, but as such has not been ascertained it will
be advisable for vessels to keep outside it; it is believed that deep water
exists at a very short distance from its south side.
Corcovado Rock.—Point Sal-si-puedes is high and precipitous, and when
bearing E. £ N., with an offing of 5 miles, appears abrupt and cliffy. Hence
to point Llorena the distance is 14£ miles in a N.W. £ W. direction. At
about midway between the headlands is the Corcovado rock, which is 33 feet
high, and, viewed from a moderate offing, stands out very prominently from the
coast; it is apparently joined to the shore by a sunken ledge, which is probably
the seaward termination of a bank fronting the small river Sirena. It will be
prudent when passing the Corcovado to give it a wide berth, as the locality has
not been closely examined ; at l£ miles south-westward from it the depth is
14 fathoms, and it is said that there is no bottom at 80 fathoms at a short
distance southward from it.
When approaching the Corcovado rock from north-westward it is strongly
recommended to avoid the coast between it and point Llorena, as it is
suspected that there are sunken rocks or shoals off it; the bottom is known to
be extremely irregular, and the low sandy coast presents no prominent marks
to prevent a vessel getting too near. It is said that having rounded point
Llorena and steering a course too much to the shore, the depth decreases
suddenly and with great irregularity from 20 to 18 (?) fathoms; but if a direct
course be steered from the point to the rock the average soundings will be
11 fathoms on fine sand, differing however 1^ to 2£ fathoms between the
casts. As soon as the rock bears about East the depth rapidly increases in
the track southward.
Point Llorena.—This is a high, steep, and almost perpendicular headland, well wooded, and partially covered with a luxuriant vegetation.; it will
be easily recognised by a fine cascade which falls from one of its cliffs. At
a short distance from it are some islets some of which are well covered with
shrubs.
From point Llorena the coast runs 6 miles in a northerly direction to point
San Jose, a bold bluff headland, having it is believed, deep water at a moderate1
42
CANO ISLAND AND RIVER AGUJA, &c.
\
distance from the rocks at its base; this point may be recognised from a good
offing by a spot on it bare of trees. At about midway is point San Pedro, a
cliffy projection having rocks about it under water. At nearly l£ miles from
this part of the coast is a little rocky islet, named San Pedro, which is covered
with trees and has sunken rocks about it extending seaward a cable's length or
more. As this little islet is probably joined to the shore by a rocky ledge, it
will be prudent when running down the coast to keep westward of it, giving it
at the same time a wide berth. The islet and reef shelter a little bay under
point San Pedro, the situation of which could, in 1852, be further known by
a rock with a single tree on it, and also by the huts of the native Indians.
The beach on the south-east side of point San Jose is bordered with cocoa
and banana trees. Boats can land here under the rocks extending from the
point.
Cano Island.—Off this part of the coast, at about 10 miles distance, is the
island of Cano, which is about a mile in extent from E. by N. to W. by S.,
and £ a mile across. It is covered with trees, and the surface of the island
is so level, that their summits present from a distance the appearance of
almost a horizontal line. Its west extremity is surrounded by a reef under
water, extending out, it is considered, about £ a mile; upon account of which,
and also because the current sets strongly upon it, vessels should give this
end of the island a wide berth;—so steep is this reef that close to its edge is
a depth of 15 fathoms, and at a cable's length from it 33 fathoms. The
north-east point of the island has also some rocks about it, above and under
water.
The landing place on Cano island is on a sandy beach at its north-west
side. In stormy weather, with a strong wind from westward, it will be
imprudent to attempt to go on shore, as these winds always bring a heavy sea.
In the channel between the island and the shore there is no known danger.
The depth midway is about 35 fathoms, which diminishes gradually eastward
and westward; it is perhaps less deep nearer the land than the island.
When steering from the island southward towards point Llorena the bottom
becomes very irregular, as the soundings change suddenly from 27 to 82
fathoms; but near the point it again becomes regular. Northward of a
supposed line joining the island to point San Jose, the lead brings up a green
compact sand ; southward of the line this sand is mixed with fine sand and
broken shells.
River Aguja.—Following the shore from point San Jose about 8 miles, we
meet with the little river Aguja which can be entered by boats. This is the
only stream on the coast between the gulfs of Dulce and Nicoya, whence water
can be obtained with facility.
Sierpe Bay.—From the river Aguja, a high wooded shore fronted by a
narrow beach, trends northward 5 miles to Sierpe bay, where is a little river.
The bay is surrounded by high land, and can be recognised from an offing of
8 miles by a large bare part called the rastrado.    The soundings across the
th
16 to 18 fathoms,  on green sand of considerable
entrance to wie Day are
tenacity.
The north point of Sierpe bay, named Violine, is a bold and rugged projection of coast. Off it is an islet covered with trees ; around this islet is a
sunken rocky ledge, which may possibly extend to the shore,—hence vessels
should always pass this islet on its west side, giving it a wide berth.
Sarnie Met.—At about 2 miles from Violine islet in a N. by W. direction,MALA DE LOS INDIOS, AND UBITA POINTS, &c.
43
is a little islet named Sacate, which is distant nearly 8 miles from the nearest
shore.    It is believed to be surrounded by a rocky ledge.
Point Mala de Iob Indios.—From point Violine the coast bends sharply
round eastward and forms the little bay of Violine, into the north side of
which the rivers Gnajumal and Matapalo fell. It then trends northward, or
rather westward of North, 19 miles, and at the end of that distance suddenly
turns to the westward to point Mala de los Indios. All this land is low, well
wooded and in the interior marshy ; it contains several rivers, at some distance
inland is said to be a large lake of which these streams are the outlets.
These rivers, in succession from the Matapalo, bear the names of Brava, Chica,
and Coronada. The coast is believed to have no sunken dangers off it, and
it is asserted that the soundings in its vicinity are regular, averaging 15 to 10
fathoms at 8 to 2 miles from shore; the bottom
is.
however, as might be
expected, shallower in the immediate neighbourhood of the rivers.*
Point Mala de los Indios is bold and rugged; at a mile south-westward from
it the depth is 16 fathoms. This point is the commencement of some high
land, the Cerro de Ubita, which extends along the coast in a north-westerly
direction; from this circumstance it is easily recognised, and especially too,
as the land eastward and southward of it is low.
Point Ubita.—The coast from point Mala de los Indios trends 7 miles in
a N.W. by W. £ W. direction to point Ubita, and is in general bold and
cliffy. At rather more than 2 miles from point Mala de los Indios, a cluster
of rocks above water, named Ballenita, will be recognised by their peculiar
form, being slender in shape and pointed. Outside these, at a mile more to
seaward, is a large rock, the Ballena, covered with guano ; it is surrounded by
a rocky ledge, which extends from it some little distance in a W.S.W.
direction, and should consequently be approached with some care;—it is said
that the sea always breaks upon this ledge.
Point Ubita has some rocks jutting off from it, and these are followed by a
reef, under shelter of which, in what is called port Ubita, vessels of any size,
it is said, may obtain shelter. Boats can land here without difficulty, and
water may be procured from a river which here falls into the sea by two
mouths, one eastward and the other westward of the point.
Point Dominical, distant 6^ miles from point Ubita, is easily distinguished by its dark appearance, owing to the peculiar vegetation that covers
it. The various projecting points between are well wooded, and there are
several creeks of little importance, the chief of which bear the names of
Dominical and Puerto Nuevo. At 2 miles eastward from point Dominical the
depth is 20 fathoms, muddy bottom, and here vessels may anchor in fine
weather, or nearer the shore, according as it may be convenient; the ground
is good for holding.
Point Quepos.—Point Dominical is succeeded by a low sandy coast
which trends 17 miles in a W. by N. £ N. direction to point Naranjos, a bluff
projection, and this again is followed by a low coast for a distance of 4 miles
to point Quepos. In this.extent there are four rivers, named Dominical,
Barru, Savagre, and Naranjos, the last mentioned being on the east side of
the point of that name;   none of these can, we believe, be ascended for any
* n jf probable that all the rivers on this part of the coast are in some way connected
in the inferior, as it is stated by the natives, that a canoe entering the river Sierpe, at
point Violine, can rejoin the sea at point Mala de los Indios.11 m
44
POINT MALA.
distance even by canoes.    The river Savagre is the most important of the
rivers, and its banks are the most visited by the Indians.
The coast between points Dominical and Naranjos is believed to be clear of
sunken dangers. It is stated that vessels may run along it at the distance of
2 miles in a depth of 19 to 24 and 27 fethoms, green mud. A nearer
approach than this should not be made, the coast having been only very
imperfectly examined.
In the vicinity of Naranjos point is a group of islets, having sunken rocks
about them; the largest and easternmost is of reddish colour. At a mile
outside these islets the depth is 25 to 27 fathoms, mud.
Quepos point is of moderate height and covered with trees. On its west
side are some rocks situated some distance from the land, under shelter of
which boats may anchor. In the immediate neighbourhood of this point,
between Naranjos point and it, are some islets of similar character and
appearance to those described in the proceeding paragraph; the largest,
Manuel Antonio, will be recognised by its form being that of a trapezium, and
its highest part, having trees upon it, is cleft in a remarkable manner. This
islet shelters a small sandy creek, which is occasionally a resort of turtle
fishers.    There is no passage between these islets and the land.
Point Mala.—From Quepos point to point Mala the coast runs in the
direction of West about 24 miles, and is low and flat the whole distance. At
about a mile from Quepos point is the little river Veija; 2 miles from this is
that of Las Damas; and 5f miles further westward is the river Pirri. These
rivers, with the exception of the Vieja, are easily recognised from a moderate
offing; not any of them are of the slightest value to shipping. Upon the
whole of this coast the surf beats with great violence, rendering a landing
almost impossible with a strong southerly wind. The soundings at 2 miles
from shore are 12 to 16 fathoms, fine sand, which increase as point Mala is
approached, and the sand becomes mixed with mud.
Point Mala is very low, and covered with trees and mangroves. A reef
extends from it in a southerly direction about 1£ miles, upon which are some
islets and rocks. The bottom in the immediate vicinity of this reef is very
irregular, changing suddenly from 18 to 11 fathoms on a bottom of coarse
sand and broken shells. When rounding the point, more than ordinary care
is required, there being no objects on shore by which the position of the outer
part of the reef may be known;—the current off it is always westerly, but
varies in strength from 1 to 2 miles an hour, according to the wind. It will
be prudent not to get into a less depth hereabout than 80 or 25 fethoms.
From point Mala (in the English chart No. 2145, point Judas) a low sandy
coast continues in an almost straight line 6£ miles in a N.W. by W. direction
to point Ouapilon, off which about £ a mile, are two rocks, awash at low water
whose position is generally denoted by breakers; this point is the termination
of the high land which at only 3£ miles N.E. by N. from it rises to the height
of 2172 feet, hence it is a very bold headland. All this coast has a ahoal
extending from it some distance, causing breakers in blowing weather. At
2 miles from point Mala is the little river Tusulubre, the position of which is
readily recognised.
When off point Guapilon it will be prudent not to approach the coast nearer
than the depth of 24 fathoms, which will be at an offing of about 2 miles ; this
is on account of the sunken rocks just mentioned. It is said that in the
narrow channel between the rocks and the point is a depth of 8 to 10 fethoms.PORT HERRADURA AND GULF OF NICOYA.
45
Port Herradura.—From point G-uapilon the coast maintains the direction
of N.W. by W., for 3^ miles to a little bay named Herradura where good
shelter may be obtained from all winds except those from westward. It is
formed on the north side by a bold rocky point, from which a reef extends a
short distance ; and on the south side by a similar point of land, but bolder,
great rounded
hill with very high land immediately behind
as it consists of a
it. Attached to the south point by a reef dry at low tide is an islet, named
Cano, which is nearly of the same height as the point; this islet has also a
reef extending from it on all sides to l£ cables' length or more. When the
bay was surveyed in 1852, the islet was covered with trees.
Port Herradura has an extent east and west of about If miles, and is
l£ miles wide from shore to shore. The soundings decrease from 20 fathoms
at the entrance to 5 and 4 fathoms close to its head. It is or was uninhabited,
and as it offers but few inducements for a visit vessels seldom resort to it.
Good water in great abundance may be obtained from a stream which falls
into its north-east part; it is said that twenty casks may be filled at a time,
if they are rolled into the basin. Communication with the interior is very
difficult.
The only known danger in port Herradura is a rock, named Havannah,
situated in nearly the middle of the bay, upon which the sea breaks at half-
tide. It has a depth over it of only 2 feet at low water spring-tides, and is
sometimes visible when there is a swell. It lies with a house on the beach
bearing N.E. £ N. T\ of a mile, and Cano pinnacle S.W. by S. Tg6 of a mile.
At full and change of the moom the tide rises about 9£ feet.
When running into port Herradura, it should be remembered that the reef
on each side is very steep. Having entered, the usual place of anchorage is
off the watering place, in about 5 fathoms.
GULF OF NICOYA.—This large gulf is the most important resort of
traders on the west coast of Central America. It extends about 50 miles into
the land in a north-westerly direction, and is 25 miles wide at the entrance—
between port Herradura and cape Blanco, but it soon begins to decrease in
width and at its head is only 6 miles across. It contains numerous islands,
all lying off the western shore, some of which are of considerable extent; most
of these are covered with trees, and in 1852 were uninhabited. Chira, the
largest island, is at the head of the gulf; vessels of very light draught of water
can sail round it, but as the channel is intricate, it is necessary to obtain the
assistance of some one having a knowledge of the locality. San Lucas island,
immediately opposite Punta Arenas, has good anchorage on its north side, to
which vessels may run with facility.
When bound into the gulf of Nicoya, shipmasters should provide themselves
with the Admiralty chart No. 1931, as it shows the navigation on a large
scale. At present, 1867, the only place of trade is Punta Arenas, on the east
coast, at about half-way up the gulf.
East coast of the Gulf.—From Herradura point the coast trends northward
about 2£ miles to point Sucia, off which a rocky ledge extends westward one
mile, and partly shows at low tide; close to the outer edge of this ledge, there
is deep water of 18 to 25 fathoms. Hence the coast turns round to N.E. f N.
4:£ miles, and then trends north-westward, 10 miles, to Calderas bluff, a high
rocky point, eastward of which is port Calderas, formerly the principal port in
the gulf, but now deserted.    Calderas was generally considered to be unhealthy
to all new
residence.
residents,  aud the higher authorities usually managed to excuse
'IfJ46
GULF OF NICOYA.
From Calderas bluff the coast trends round to the north-westward 8 miles,
to Arenas point, off which a bank of S£ and 4£ fathoms extends 2 J miles in a
southerly direction, having a small spot of 10 to 12 feet upon it; this spot
lies with the extremity of the point bearing N. £ W., l£ miles, and the Pan
de Azucar W.S.W. £ S., 8f miles. The bank is very steep on the western
side, deepening suddenly from 7 to 22 fathoms; but not so on the eastern
side, the soundings from it to the eastern coast being 5 to 8, 9 and 7 fathoms.
Arenas point has a shelf of mud extending about a mile westward from it,
which is awash at low water. It forms the south bank of a small stream,
which has its outlet immediately northward of it. On the north side of this
river there is another shelf of mud, which also becomes dry at low water.
Upon this point there is or was a small fixed light, visible about 10 miles.
The village of Punta Arenas, has not at present, a population of more than
1500. The inner anchorage, named the Estero, situated northward of the
point, admits at high tide, vessels drawing 10 to 13 feet, and can be entered
only with a pilot's assistance. The outer anchorage southward of the point,
will accommodate all ordinary vessels, the depth being 5 to 7 fathoms; but
this anchorage, being exposed to southerly winds, can be considered safe only
during fine weather or with the wind from the land.
The anchorage usually selected during the fine season, from November to
June, is immediately southward of the point, with the Pan de Azucar bearing
about S.W. £ W., or Aves islet S.W. The vessel will here be at about a
mile from the beach, in 5J to Q£ fathoms on fine muddy sand, and in a position to communicate freely with the village. When the French ship Brilliants
anchored here in 1852, her bearings were, the church, N. 15° W.; lighthouse,
N. 18° W.; custom-house, N. 27° W.; Pan de Azucar, S. 52° W. : and
Aves islet, S. 43° W.;—at a little eastward from this, the ground was tougher,
consisting of mud upon sand, and therefore better for holding;—from this
last position the bearings were, the lighthouse N. 28° W., and the customhouse N. 39° W.
In winter it is necessary to anchor further out than as indicated in the
preceding paragraph, on account of the inconvenience occasioned by the heavy
rollers sent in from the south-westward, which tend to carry the vessel on
shore. The position recommended is in 5£ to 6 £ fathoms, mud over sand,
with the custom-house bearing N.W. by N., or the lighthouse N.N.W., and the
Pan de Azucar about W.S.W.*
It should be remarked that the soundings which in the passage from the
Nigretas islets to the anchorage decreases gradually from 20 and 17 fathoms,
to &£ fathoms on the bank bounding the anchorage, increase again towards
the eastern coast to 10 and 9 fathoms. In the immediate vicinity of Calderas
bluff, the depth is 15 to 12 fathoms.
When at anchor it is recommended to moor S.E. and N.W. The holding
ground is not good, and the anchors are liable to be fouled by the flux and
reflux of the sea, and by the moving of the vessel during the sea and land
breezes.
Mr. Hull, R.N., H.M.S. Havana, 1859, says "the light at Punta Arenas is plainly
visible southward of the Sail rock. By not bringing it eastward of N.N.W. vessels will be
clear of all danger till the anchorage be reached. We came to in 6 fathoms, with the lighthouse bearing N.N.W. 1 W., distant 6 miles. Both ebb and flood set strongly over the
Punta Arenas bank".GULF OF NICOYA;
47
It is high water on the days of full and change of the moon at 3h. lOin.
The tide rises about 10 feet.
Water for shipping is obtained at the river Baranca, 7 miles eastward from
the anchorage. The river may be recognised by a large yellow spot, which is
left to starboard when entering. The bar can be crossed only at half flood, or
a little before half ebb. The best water is obtained at about a mile from the
entrance. Only boats can ascend the river, and the channel is very tortuous.
The vessel should be anchored at about l£ miles from the river, in 6£
fathoms.
Abundance of fresh provisions can be obtained at Punta Arenas, but some
difficulty may be experienced in obtaining cattle.
West coast of the Gulf.—Cape Blanco, the west extreme of the gulf of
Nicoya, is of moderate height and covered with trees, even to the beach. The
land, of which it is the southern termination, is sufficiently high to be visible
from the distance of about 25 miles, especially when bearing about N.N.W.
At a considerable offing it somewhat resembles an island, but a nearer approach
reveals some white spots which help to distinguish the cape from the back
land. At about a mile southward from it is an islet, of whitish colour, without
verdure ; this, viewed from a distance, apparently forms part of the main land.
The islet is surrounded by a rocky ledge, which dries at low tide, and has deep
water of 10 to 30 fathoms immediately southward of it; between it and the
shore the depth is &£ to 9 fathoms.
It is only when the cape bears East, and southward of East that the point
which actually terminates it can be distinguished. It is much lower than the
land in its immediate vicinity, and advances seaward as an island, falling at
last abruptly to the water. A needle shaped rock of slender form can then
be perceived at a little southward of the islet.
The west side of the gulf from cape Blanco to the islets opposite Punta
Arenas, is believed to be clear of any sunken dangers. It may be approached
as near as l£ miles ; closer than that would be imprudent.
From cape Blanco, the western side of the gulf trends 11 miles to the
N.E. by N., and is free from outlying dangers, except that at about 2£ miles
from the cape, a ledge of rocks, partly above and partly under water runs
1 mile off the shore, and has deep water of 17 fathoms close to its outer edge.
At the end of this distance, 11 miles, the coast bends a little inwards, forming
a small bay, named Ballena, where are soundings of 18 and 9 fathoms,
shoaling gradually towards its head, which is low land covered with mangroves.
The north side of Ballena bay, Ballena head, is of moderate height, and
steep, having 14 fathoms at a short distance from it. Hence, the coast
trends N.E. £ N., about 8 miles to the Nigretas islands, and there are, at
about midway, two islands, separated from the shore by a narrow channel
navigable by boats, named Jasper and Alcatraz, of which the former is
the easternmost. The Nigretas are two islands pretty close to each other,
which run off 2-f miles from the coast; from the eastern one a ledge of rocks
extends a J of a mile eastward, and has near its extremity a large rock known
as the Sail rock.
From the Nigretas islands the coast trends to the N.N.W., 6£ miles, and
has several islands off it, lying more or less near the shore; of these, the
largest, about 2 miles westward of Nigretas islands, is named Cedro. At the
end of this distance are the islands Aves, Pan de Azucar, and San Lucas;
these are surrounded by shoals to a short distance, but separated from each
other by soundings of 7 to 11 fathoms.
ill48
GULF OF NICOYA
The channel up the gulf northward of San Lucas islands, between them and
the bank extending from point Arenas, has considerable width and a depth of
18 to 27 fethoms, muddy bottom. Hence up the golf, and failing a pilot, the
eye and steady use of the lead will be the best guides.
Directions.—The entrance to the gulf of Nicoya is so wide that no difficulty
whatever is'experienced in making it. It is usual to steer for cape Blanco,
keeping a little eastward of its meridian, and afterwards to direct the course
into the gulf; but it appears probable that some advantage would be gained if
the land about port Herradura were made instead of the cape, as the effect of
the westerly current would thereby be to some extent neutralised,—a mile or
two would also be saved in the subsequent route to Punta Arenas.
Having entered the gulf, keep along the eastern shore, as it is shallower
than the opposite coast, and also because the effects of the ebb stream, which
southward of the Nigretas islands, flows south-westward, will not be so strongly
felt. The soundings, although great, are not so deep, but that the anchor can
be let go in the event of being overtaken with a calm and a contrary current.
The flood has occasionally considerable strength, and requires to be guarded
against as its tendency is towards the Nigretas islands, in the vicinity of which
the water is very deep; close to the south side of the Sail rock the depth is
24 fathoms, deepening rapidly seaward to 86 fathoms. The course hence to
Punta Arenas is direct and clear of any known sunken danger. The bank
extending southward from the point has already been mentioned.
The following instructions were written in 1843, and are added because
they supply some useful hints.
" The entrance of the gulf is safe; the tides, however, attunes run strongly,
especially at the full and change of the moon. There is ebb and flood, but
the former is of longer continuance and much stronger than the latter.
To run in, keep eastward of the meridian of cape Blanco, which is the
westerly part of the gulf; and should you round the cape at the distance of
from 1 to 8 miles, the course will be about X. E. ; or, if you should be about
half-way between the cape and port Herradura, the eastern side of the gulf, it
will be a little more northerly.
Having sighted the Nigratas, which will show themselves on the port-bow,
you will see a rocky point a little eastward of them, having the appearance of
a vessel, and hence called the Ship rock, to which give a good berth,
leaving it on the port hand. Haul then over to the starboard coast,
that in the event of it felling calm and an ebb tide, you may anchor
in shallow water; whereas, if becalmed, with an ebb tide, when near
the Ship rock, it would be difficult to find anchorage, at least
in not less than 20 to 80 fathoms; and if unable to anchor, the ebb tide,
which is very strong in this part of the gulf, would drive the vessel back again
past cape Blanco. Steer along the starboard coast, so as to pass the extreme
points at a distance of from 2 to 8 miles, and you will soon perceive
the custom-house of Punta Arenas, towards which shape your course, and as
soon as the village is seen, bring the custom-house to bear N.N.W., or the
middle of the village N. by W., when you will be in from 18 to 8 fethoms,
and see in the distance the point named Punta Arenas. Further out there is
a heavy breaking of the sea, occasioned by some sand-banks, which run out a
great distance, and partly dry at low water. Westward of these banks are the
islands of San Lucas ; eastward of which, between them and the banks, there
is good anchorage, but in deep water.IE
CULEBEA BAY,
49
Merchant-vessels prefer lying closer in, on account of the proximity of the
landing-place and stores. The course indicated above leads ships to this
anchorage. The leading mark is the custom-house on with the flag-staff of
the port. The depth is about 8 fathoms, muddy bottom, at from a £ to 3
cables' lengths from the shore.
The banks above alluded to have a tendency to augment and change their
position, and the safest course is to keep the custom-house a little open eastward of the flag-staff, keeping the lead constantly going; and should the water
shoal, to haul immediately to starboard. If desirous to come to anchor on
heaving a ship to, at some 2 or 3 miles from the port, in order to obtain a
pilot, it may safely be done, until one comes off and carries you to the place
desired.
The custom-house is easily known by its white painted roof; but it should
be carefully borne in mind that, from the rapid progress the sea appeared to
be making upon this spot, it may soon be removed and another built
elsewhere.*
It has been stated that ships from southward should make cape Blanco, to
obtain a fresh departure for their intended port. Such is the course recommended by the writer of the foregoing directions, who considers it better than
to make a direct course for the volcano of Beija, because in winter the winds
are light, variable, and attended with calms, and it is frequently the case that
the high land is obscured by mists or haze, which renders navigation difficult
even to those well acquainted with the coast.
CULEBRA BAY.—From cape Blanco the coast trends north-westward
and westward 38 miles to a point of land named Morro Hermoso, from which
a reef extends a short distance; afterwards it bends round to N.W. f N.,
28 miles to point Velas, so named from its resemblance to a sail, off which
are some rocks. It is recommended to give all this land a good berth, to
avoid any sunken dangers there may be; for it has not been closely examined.
It is represented to be, in general, high land covered with trees, with
occasionally some sandy plains and small deep bays. From point Velas the
coast trends 14 miles north-eastward, to point Gorda, the south-west extremity
of Culebra bay.f
I
* A despatch from H.M. Consul at Costa Eica, states that the port of Punta Arenas
ceased to be a free port on January 26th, 1861.   Mercantile Marine Magazine, 1861.
+ The coast westward of cape Blanco as far as Culehra bay is very imperfectly
represented in charts, as the delination is chiefly derived from a sketch obtained during
a running survey by Mr. T. A. Hull, B.N., in 1859. M. Lapelin of the French surveying
vessel Brilliante in 1852, gives the name of Guiones to a point of land 30 miles W.N.W.,
from cape Blanco, which we suppose to be the Morro Hermoso of Mr. Hull's chart,
although the latter is there represented 8 miles farther westward. M. Lapelin approached
cape Blanco from westward and observes " All the coast between points Gorda and Guiones
is high and wooded and bordered with a strand of white sand interrupted here and there
bv cliffs of reddish colour having rocks at their base over which the sea breaks. We
coasted it at the distance of 2 to 3 miles, and had soundings of 24 to 27 fathoms. Point
Yelas is unknown to the pilots. In the positions assigned to points Yelas and Morro
Hermoso we found neither point nor hill; it was only in lat. 9° 53', long. 88° 12', (?), that is
to say in a position 21 miles more south and 12 miles more west than that assigned to point
Yelas that we met with a greyish coloured cliff surmounted by some trees, and having
breakers at its base to the distance seaward of apparently l£ miles. The sea broke upon
some detached rocks, which lie in a considerable number southward of a white sandy islet,50
CULEBRA BAY.
I
The coast between points Velas and Gorda is quite unknown. It is said to
have some islands off it, the outernmost of which is named Brumel. Point
Gorda, viewed from southward, appears as a great rounded hill with a slight
indentation in the middle of its summit: it is higher than the country in its
vicinity and its highest part is near the sea.
Port Culebra, the north-eastern part of Culebra bay, is an inlet running
about 4 miles into the coast, in a north-easterly direction. At its entrance it
is about a mile wide, with soundings of 10 to 20 fathoms, which depth decreases
gradually towards the head of the bay, where there are 9 to 6 fathoms. On
the south side of the entrance are some islets, or rocks, at a short distance
from the shore, called the South Viradores ; and on the north side are also
two similar rocks, called the North Viradores. Captain Sir E. Belcher
observed the north end of the bay to be in lat. 10° 36' 55", long. 85° 33' 30".
After mentioning various difficulties experienced in finding the port, he
describes it in the following terms :—
" At daylight on Sunday, the 25th of March, 1838, we were close off the
port, but not being able to detect the Viradores, we wore, and intended
running further south; as Kellet had informed me that, in his search for me,
he had been unable to find it.
While in the act of wearing, a gleam of sunshine showed an island in-shore,
which induced me to make another attempt, and on reaching to windward we
opened the heads and discovered the Viradores; but even then could only
ascertain from the mast-head that any recess of bay lay within. At noon we
entered the heads, and at 3h. anchored in 8 fathoms in this splendid port,
justly deserving that appellation.
The port is certainly magnificent, and, from information derived from the
natives, I learned that it is connected with Salinas, and thence on to Nicaragua, Granada, &c. If any railway be contemplated in this quarter, it ought
to enter at the bay of Salinas, which would render these two ports important.
When this portion of the country becomes settled, civilized, and more populous,
I little doubt but Culebra will be better known, and probably the chief port of
the state of Nicaragua.
Water, fit for consumption, was not found at the beach, but may be obtained
a short distance up the creek, which a boat may enter at high water. If wells
were dug, doubtless it would be found at the N.W. side, and the surrounding
country is mountainous. Another indication in favour of this is the thickly
wooded sides and summits, as well as bright green spots of vegetation
throughout the bay.
Brasil wood is very abundant. Mahogany and cedar were observed near
the beach, but, as people have been employed cutting the brasil, probably all
the mahogany and cedar, easily attainable, has been taken.
From port Culebra the coast trends to the N.N.W. about 20 miles to cape
Elena, northward of which are Elena and Salinas bays. All this shore is quite
unknown and as usually represented in charts is believed to be very badly
upon which are two rocks resembling sails at a distance. Having from this point run
along the coast about 20 miles in an E. by S. direction, we discovered that the land then
trended S.E. to cape Blanco. All this coast is steep and covered with trees; the hills were
seldom more lofty than those of the country behind the cape ; and the sandy beach interspersed in many places by rocky points which formed little sheltered bays, offered great
faculties for a landing.ELENA AND SALINAS BAYS.
51
following
delineated; it is said to have some islets off it of considerable size. Cape
Elena is an elevated promontory of a triangular form, the ridge of the promontory being very irregular in outline, having a somewhat serrated aspect, while
its northern side is an unbroken steep escarpment without any indication of
verdure. On the south side of this remarkable cape is a cluster of islands,
named Murcielagos. Captain Sir E. Belcher, R.N., makes the
remarks on these islands :—
I On rounding the point in view corresponding to point Catalina of Bauza,
we discovered a cluster of eight islands. These I determined to examine, as
they did not appear on the chart. They almost formed two distinct harbours ;
the smaller islands forming a crescent by the south, one large island protecting the east, and another of similar size forming the line of separation.
Passing into the bay, we anchored in the inner or eastern harbour; and
having fixed the positions, surveyed it, and completed water at a very convenient position, where we anchored in 32 fathoms, with a hawser fast to the
shore.
We quitted for Salinas, after having satisfied ourselves that Culebra was
not near us. The name of this remarkable cape, which we had mistaken for
Catalina, is Elena, and the cluster of islands is termed Murcielagos, or Bat
islands.
The springs are numerous, and there are tolerable rivulets ; but only that
which we watered at (between the centre point and the main) is safe to approach,
by reason of the constant surf. We found the gulf squalls, even in this
sheltered position, come down the gullies with great force, and impede our
work as well as endanger our boats. In 48 hours, however, it was finished.
The geological structure of the cape and islands is a schistose serpentine,
containing balls of noble serpentine."
ELENA BAY.—Elena bay is a large open bay having an extent from
north to south of about 4 miles ; at its head in its south-east corner, is a small
inlet of 11 to 4f fathoms, named Tomas bay, in which vessels might perhaps
be able to anchor and obtain protection from westerly winds,—but this is
uncertain. Elena bay is quite open to all winds from westward. In the
south part of it, at about a mile from the shore, are some rocks above water,
named Vagares; and at the head of the bay off its north-east shore is the small
island, Juanilla, inside of which is a depth of 7 to 11 fathoms. The north
shore has also an islet off it, named Despensa. The water in this bay is very
deep, there being 30 fathoms at 2 miles from its head; whence it shoals
gradually to Juanilla island. As there is good anchorage in Salinas bay
vessels seldom enter Elena bay.
SALINAS BAY northward of Elena bay is separated from it by a bold
headland, terminating in point Descartes. It is a little more than 3 miles in
extent, with soundings of 12 fathoms at the entrance, which decrease gradually
to 4i and 2 fathoms at its head, on sand and mud. The northern shore is
high land; the southern is comparatively low and flat. In the south part of
the bay, at a short distance from the beach, are some rocks above and under
water; and in the centre of the bay is a little island, named Salinas, under
shelter of which vessels anchor during winter and find protection from westerly
winds.
When bound into Salinas bay it is advisable to give a wide berth to point
Descartes, because reefs are said to run off from it, in a westerly direction,
upwards of a mile.    A good mark is the north peak of Orosi, 5199 feet high,
e 2
ina
a :fe
afl
InI
52
SAN JUAN DEL SUR.
situated about 12 miles inland, bearing E. $ S. (S. 83° E.), as this will
lead to the bay. The depth on the south-east side of Salinas island is shallow
for nearly £ a mile.
SAN JUAN DEL SUR.—From Salinas bay to port San Juan the
coast trends 12 J- miles in a N.W. £ W. direction; it has not been surveyed,
and should have a wide berth given to it. Cape Nathan, in lat, 11° 9', has
some rocks off it above water, and there are also some similar rocks at about
midway between this point and San Juan; all these rocks lie off the land at a
considerable distance, and as there may be sunken dangers in their vicinity, it
will be prudent to avoid their near neighbourhood.
The bay of San Juan del Sur is of but limited extent, being only about £ a
mile across. It is situated in about lat. 11° 16', long. 85° 49', and is by no
means easy to find, even when running down the coast, the little bays being
all of similar character and appearance; in approaching from seaward
considerable assistance in discovering the port is afforded by the mountains
Mombacho (4482 feet high). Ometepe (5050 feet), Madera (4190 feet), Orosi
(5199 feet), and Miravalles (4700 feet). Mombacho, in lat. 11° 48f, long.
85° 54-^', bears a strong resemblance to the volcano San Salvador, (in lat.
13° 49', long. 89° 10'), but is not sufficiently lofty to be seen from all directions
by an observer at only a few miles from the land. The pointed summit of
Ometepe, in lat. 11° 32', long. 85° 34', and the large saddle shaped summit
of Madera, in lat. 11° 27', long. 85° 27£', can be seen in clear weather above
the hills between them and the coast. The volcano Orosi, in lat. 10° 59',
long. 85° 25', is frequently obscured by clouds; when not so hidden it will be
recognised by its double pointed summit, which resembles the pointed roofs of two
towers, connected by a vast ridge. Miravalles, in lat. 10° 39' 40", longitude
about 85°, can also be seen from almost all directions seaward. From San
Juan, the summit of Ometepe bears N.E. by N., and that of Madera
N.E. f E.
This little bay was selected by Mr. Bailey, who was employed by the
government of Nicaragua to make a survey of this part of the country, as the
point where the railway or canal from the lake of Nicaragua, projected at that
time, 1838, should communicate with the Pacific. High land surrounds it on
every side, excepting towards the S.S.W. and W. by S. quarters, in which
directions it is open to the ocean. At its head the beach is low and sandy,
and on each side the land juts out towards the sea, forming promontories of
400 to 500 feet high. The entrance from the sea is clear, with a depth of
water of 9, 8, 7, and 6 fathoms, decreasing gradually to 8 fathoms at the
distance of 300 yards from the beach. In every part there is moderately
good anchorage, generally on a muddy bottom; and the rise of tide is from
10 to 14 feet.
The prevailing winds on this part of the coast are North and N.E., which
blow occasionally with considerable violence; and when such is the case
vessels may sometimes experience some difficulty in making the port. Fresh
water can be obtained at a short distance from the beach. Fish is abundant
but nothing else, except firewood, is to be had; the neighbouring lands at
present (1838) being in a state of nature, without inhabitants or habitations •
nor is there either village or town nearer than that of Nicaragua, at a distance
of 7 or 8 leagues.    There are a few cattle about.
At the distance of less than a mile from the port of San Juan, there is
another port named Nacascolo, which is of nearly the same size and figure •GULF OF THE PAPAGAYOS
58
and, as the land between them is low and nearly level, they might be united
by a cut, where it thought necessary. As these places are so nearly adjacent,
they could, probably, both be usefully occupied, one as an entrance to, the
other as an exit from, the proposed canal.*
It de Lapelin, 1852, does not write favourably of the bay of San Juan.
" It is usual to anchor outside the port in 8| to 11 fathoms, nearer the south
than the north side of the bay, and always close to a little bed of rocks which
reduces the breadth of the entrance. The bottom, consisting of sand and
broken shells, is a very indifferent holding ground against the violence of
north-east squalls, and its sharp declivity towards the sea still further increases
the difficulty of the anchor retaining its hold; this declivity is, however, of
some advantage during the prevalence of West and S.W. winds, which sometimes in winter blow with considerable violence. At this outer anchorage,
with on-shore winds, the loss of a vessel is unknown, although instances have
occurred of vessels dragging their anchors.
The Brilliante was anchored in 12 fathoms, sand and broken shells, with
the flagstaff of Nicaragua bearing N. 82° E.; south point of the bay S. 49° E.;
north point of the bay N. 44° E.; and the volcano of Orosi S. 64° E. We
were a little too far from the south point, it would have been better to have
brought the flagstaff some degrees more to the north. From this anchorage
it took our boats 20 minutes to get to the shore; when the squalls were strong
they sought shelter of the south point and found it to be of considerable
advantage.
The port consists of a little bay open to all winds from seaward. The
bottom, of the same description as the exterior anchorage, does not hold better,
and as the anchoring ground is very limited in extent, it will be prudent not
to enter the bay but to remain outside. Except perhaps in winter, small
vessels may, however, obtain shelter behind the rocks of the north point.
It is not difjicult to effect a landing, as boats ground at some little distance
from the beach and the surf is not very heavy.
Water is obtained from a well, and is of indifferent quality; it is small in
quantity and not easily got. With the exception of fresh provisions at an
extravagant price, we could obtain no supplies."
Gulf of the Papagayos.—The portion of coast described in the preceding
paragraphs, from port Culebra to the bay of San Juan del Sur, or perhaps as
far as cape Desolado in longitude about 86° 35', is known as the gulf of the
Papagayos; these are violent winds, which blow with such considerable strength
as frequently to cause the loss of spars and rigging.
They commence about the meridian of Leon, long. 86° 50', and when
approaching from westward, are first felt off cape Desolado, about 6 miles
eastward of Realejo. They decrease about sunset, and attain their greatest
force about nine or ten o'clock in the morning.
Captain Sir E. Belcher, R.N., says of this wind or breeze, that its limits
may be considered to be included in a line drawn from cape Desolado to point
Velas; and it is rather a curious phenomenon, that its strength seldom ranges
so far as this chord, but seems to prefer a curve at a distance of 15 to 20 miles
from the land.
* The government of Nicaragua decreed in about the year 1840, the erection of houses
and the buildings necessary for making San Juan bay a port of commerce, but in 1852
there were only a few wooden buildings pompously called hotels.si
I m
\ • g§ |
|   ';•
54
GULF OF THE PAPAGAYOS.
Captain Marie says " In this part of the coast, and as far as the entrance of the
gulf of the Papagayos, the winds are very light, with frequent calms; the tides
setting strong from the N.W. Custom recommends steering along the coast
in the gulf, as by so doing it is thought that the squalls are less severe, the
winds more steady, and the sea much smoother. I have frequently crossed
the gulf, sometimes close in shore, and at other times been forced, by strong
winds from N.N.E. to N.N.W., to keep in the offing. In the summer time I
have navigated in this locality both near to, and at a distance from the coast,
and in both cases met with strong winds, accompanied with sudden and heavy
squalls, which are almost immediately followed by calms; great care is therefore necessary. I have always taken the precaution to keep from one to three
reefs in the topsails, taking care promptly to shorten sail when the squalls
came on, and then keeping as close to the wind as possible, with a good full
sail, so as easily to make cape Desolado, and have thus been enabled to cross
the gulf with this sort of weather in about 12 or 15 hours. The winds
generally enable ships to make a N.W. course, but in order to keep in with
the coast, it is desirable, as the squalls subside, to steer, if possible, a little
to windward of that point."
M. de Lapelin states " In the gulf of the Papagayos, and on other parts of
this coast, northerly gusts come without any announcement, being felt suddenly
with a cloudless sky equally as when there is a calm or fog. In accordance
with the opinions of most navigators, I consider that it is better to keep along
the land at the distance of 5 or 6 miles than to get out to sea, because at this
distance the gusts, although perhaps more sudden, have less strength and
have not such long intervals between them—sometimes indeed these intervals
do not exist at all, and instead of them is met a continuous breeze freshening
every moment. If the opinion of Sir E. Belcher, R.N., be correct that the
gusts prevail most at the distance of 15 to 20 miles from land, it follows that
if the shore cannot be coasted at the distance of 5 or 6 miles, it would be
better to keep outside at about 30 or even 45 miles from land; the gusts will
there to a very considerable extent lose their force and become less sudden,
the sea also will not be so heavy and trying. As the vessel advances northerly
towards the coast, the direction of the wind becomes more easterly, and it is
often possible to reach Realejo in a direct course without tacking."
The Coast.—From port San Juan del Sur to Realejo the coast trends
N.W. f W., 112 miles, and is in general bold with soundings of 10 to
12 fathoms at a short distance off it; it has not been surveyed, and should
consequently have a wide berth given to it. A point of land, but slightly projecting from the general outline of the coast, in about lat. 11° 58', will be
recognised by its desolate appearance, and hence has obtained the name of
cape Desolado. The rocky cliffs of the cape are not lofty, but are steep; on
its west side is a little plateau with stunted trees upon it, and its south-east
side is of reddish colour and bare of vegetation. It is believed that off all
this coast, as far as Realejo, there are no detached sunken dangers, with the
exception of the Conway, situated 2f miles south-eastward of Castanon bluff,
on the south side of the entrance to the port*; the Admiralty chart No. 2146
* The Conway reef should have a wide berth given to it, as the bottom in its immediate
vicinity is so very irregular that there may be dangerous sunken rocks near it. If the
west point of Cardon island be kept open of Castanon bluff, about N.W. J W , it will clear
it in 7 fathoms on its south side ; this is quite close enough to approach the reelGULF OF THE PAPAGAYOS,
DO
soundings were not sufficiently
has, however, a reef extending off from the coast about l£ miles in lat. 11° 47',
or about 16 miles south-eastward from cape Desolado. M. de Lapelin
describes this coast in the following manner, sailing down it from Realejo.
"From Castanon bluff to cape Desolado the coast is very low, wooded, of
even outline, and sandy. Apparently it has no sunken danger off it except
the Conway, the rocks of which are above water, and whose position is always
sufficiently indicated by breakers. As cape Desolado is approached the sandy
beach will be observed to be bounded in some places by little wooded cliffs,
while in other parts rocks extend out a short distance into the sea. In all
this section the soundings, which are of sand and mud, are deeper at the same
distance from shore, than they are northward of Realejo; at 2 to 6 miles from
the land, the depth is 11 to 22 fathoms.
The cliffs of cape Desolado are succeeded by a sandy shore, which soon
rises a little and forms a long arid bare escarpment, named Gosta Tosca.
The southern part of this escarpment gradually decreases in height until it is
lost in the drowned land of a little hollow in which is situated the creek of
Tamarinda. At 6 miles from the Costa Tosca the bottom, of mud, is of the
depth of 16 to 18 fathoms, which at a short distance further out suddenly
increases to 22 fathoms. Off the beach of Tamarinda, the bottom is apparently
level in a depth of 16 fathoms, but the
numerous to establish this with certainty.
From the beach of Tamarinda the coast rises a little and becomes as high
as that of Tosca; it contains here and there sandy creeks and cliffs against
which latter the sea generally breaks with violence. All this land is remarkably little undulated, and behind it will be seen the volcano of Mombacho
which bears a close resemblance to that of San Salvador, being a rounded
mountain whose summit rises into a peak."
Mountains.—The mountains in the vicinity of Realejo are very lofty and
visible from many miles at sea. They are known as the Marabios mountains.
Commencing with Momotombo on the shore of lake Managua, which is said
to be 6000 feet high, they advance almost parallel to the coast and terminate
in that named Coseguina on the south-east side of the gulf of Fonseca, which
is estimated to have an elevation of 3800 feet. When viewed from the sea
off Realejo, at an offing of some miles from the land, at least eight of these
remarkable mountains can be seen at one time, supposing the weather to be
favourable; of these Viejo and Momotombo are very conspicuous and easily
recognised not only by their great height but by their form and position. The
peaks in succession from Momotombo are Axusco, Las Pilas, Orota, Telica,
Santa Clara, and Viejo.
Viejo mountain appears in the offing opposite Realejo as a magnificent cone,
having a very perceptible cavity at its summit; it is 5557 feet high, and
apparently rises from other mountains, of which the smallest and westernmost
has a well marked conical form. Momotombo, an active volcano, is a lofty
mountain whose sides are at a very sharp angle; it rises from lake Managua,
form as boldly and well defined as a pyramid, and hence cannot fail to be
recognised at once, especially as it terminates the chain of mountains in an
easterly direction. When viewed from the sea at some distance southward of
Realejo, Momotombo appears as an immense isolated mountain, but when seen
from Cardon island it is joined to Axusco,  a volcano of less height, the two
mountains then revealing themselves as perfect con<
as Pilas, 3015 feet
* In lake Managua near Momotombo mountain, is an island which rises into a mountain
of conical form, named Momotombita.   This is of much less elevation than Momotombom
56
BEALEJO.
Ill
18
i
i
high, has two
saddle shaped
rounded summits of almost equal height which give its top a
appearance; it is not sufficiently lofty to be seen from the
offing;—this volcano became active in 1850, after remaining quiet many
years, a crater having then opened at its base. Telica is the most remarkable
of the mountains between Las Pilas and Viejo; it is a cone of extremely
regular outline, which appears to be connected to Viejo, of which it has about
half the altitude, but from which it is in reality separated by a wide interval
containing the mountain Santa Clara;—on the eastern side the mountain
Orota is between it and Las Pilas.
Having obtained sight of and recognised these mountains, it is easy to make
the port of Realejo, even from a considerable distance in the offing, for both
Viejo and Momotombo are visible at about 60 miles from land. If Viejo is
brought to bear N.E. by N., and kept thus in approaching the coast, it will
lead to Cardon island, which is sufficiently high to be visible from a distance
of 7 or 8 miles, where are soundings of 38 to 45 fathoms.    When Viejo is
a course
or Telica
recognised, if it should be on a bearing eastward of N.E. by N
should be steered to get Momotombo on the bearing of E. £ N..
N.E. by E. £ E., either of which will also lead to the port.
If it should so happen that the mountains are hidden by clouds, it is
necessary to make the land south-eastward of the port, somewhere in the
vicinity of cape Desolado, because of the current which is almost always to
the N.N.W.* The coast should then be followed in about 10 fathoms water,
and care should be taken as Realejo is approached, to keep the west point of
-Cardon island well open westward of Castanon bluff, to avoid Conway reef; on
getting nearer the port the same end of Cardon island should not be brought
westward of North on account of the Castanon shoals.
REALEJO.—The port of Realejo, formed by the outlet of two rivers named
Realejo and Telica, is situated in about latitude 12° 27'. The land on each
side for some distance is low and wooded; that eastward of it close to the sea
is higher than that to westward, but its elevation is not more than 80 feet, and
Castanon bluff is only 40 feet high. The outlet is between the main land, of
which Castanon bluff is the extremity, on the east side, and Aserradores island
(a long island lying along the land to the north-westward, and whose western
side is the sea-beach) on the west side; and, facing it is the small island
named Cardon already alluded to. The town of Realejo is about 4£ miles from
Cardon island, and has a population of 1200 to 1500, the males of which are
employed chiefly in attendance upon and providing for the wants of the vessels
that frequent the port. There is a custom-house with its staff of officials, and
some merchants reside here who supply the interior with European goods.
Chinendega, 6 miles northward of the town, and having a population of about
5000, being the principal place of business. At 18 miles eastward from the
port is the city of Leon; it has been proposed to construct a railway from this
city to lake Managua, which it is considered might be effected without
difficulty, but neither the population nor trade of the district appear to be
sufficient to warrant such a step at present, unless as the act of the government.
and not visible from the port of Bealejo, but it is very distinctly seen over the land, when
advancing southward along the coast.   The two mountains are ain^'lnr in shape.
* This is chiefly necessary in the months between November and May, as the usual
winds are then from north-eastward and blow, occasionally, with considerable violence out
of the gulf of the Papagayos ; at such times a strong current sets along shore to the northwestward.REALEJO.
57
Cardon island, in front of the port, divides the entrance into two channels,
the Cardon on the north, and the Barra Falsa on the south. It is about f of
a mile long, and a cable's length broad at the south end, whence it increases
a little in width towards its other extremity. It is of moderate height, and its
north-west part, cape Ponente, appears of a brownish red colour ; on the side
towards the land are cliffs, which are almost perpendicular. When viewed
from some distance in a S.S.E. direction, the north end of the island resembles
a huge rock separated from the island by a narrow channel. Its highest part,
the north-west end, is only 30 feet high. There were only very few trees on
the island in 1852 when the survey was made upon which our remarks are
based, and these were in its north and east parts ; the remainder was covered
with little shrubs. These trees formed a valuable means of distinguishing the
island from Manzana, an islet off the coast at some few miles north-westward
from Realejo, which otherwise so closely resembles it as to be called the False
Cardon. In 1838 a tree, standing by itself, on the north-west end of the
island, was an excellent landmark, and subsequently a mast bearing a barrel
was erected near it; these may yet be standing. Viewed from seaward,
Cardon island stands out conspicuously from the low land behind it, appearing
not unlike a wedge, of which the highest part will be the cliffs just alluded to.
Its western end consists of a sandy beach, and at its south end are some
detached rocks.
Barra Falsa.—This, the southern channel into Realejo harbour, is between
Cardon island and Castanon bluff; the latter will be easily recognised because
it is the western part of three islands running off from the main, and connected to it and each other at low water by dry sand. It is about f of a mile
wide from shore to shore, but the channel-way is not more than a cable's
length wide, being narrowed by the shoals on each side. In 1865 there were
about 15 feet water in the deepest part of the channel, and as this was 10 feet
less than in 1838, there are reasons for believing that it is filling up.
The south-west side of Cardon island has a bank of 3f to 4£ fathoms
extending from it seaward to the distance of nearly a mile, which, from the
irregularity of the soundings upon it, is known as the Castanon shoals.
As both ebb and flood flow towards this bank, more than ordinary care must
be exercised in using the Barra Falsa channel; indeed, it should not be
attempted without a strong leading wind.
Cardon Channel.—This is the best, and probably now (1865) the only
entrance into Realejo harbour. It lies round the north end of Cardon island,
between it and Aserradores island, and is nearly f of a mile wide from shore
to shore, but the breadth of the channel-way is only about -^ of a mile, being
contracted to that width by the Sawyer bank, a shoal running off from the
south-west end of Aserradores island; the channel is consequently close under
Cardon head. The depth on the shoalest part of Sawyer bank is only 3 feet,
and its edge is very steep, the lead at once falling from 3 fathoms into 9 and
10 fathoms; sometimes this edge is indicated by breakers, but more frequently
not, for which reason and also because the tendency of the flood is towards it,
additional care is required when in its immediate vicinity.
Shoal water, having a dangerous patch at its extremity named Gorgon
shoal, extends out a short distance from the north-west side of Cardon island.
This patch is about f of a cable's length due North from the rock off Ponente
point, and there is a depth of about 6 fathoms close to it.*
Gorgon shoal or rock was discovered in 1849 by Commander J. A. Paynter, R.N., ofI ;
1  -
I  !
1
58
REALEJO.
Cardon channel should not be attempted without a pilot, and especially
because there are reasons for believing that considerable changes in it have
taken place since the survey in 1838. At that time the leading mark for
making the channel was, the low south end of Aserradores island well open of
Cardon head, until Ponente point bore S. by W., when it was necessary to
change the course to south-eastward in such a manner as to sail close round
Cardon head.
Having entered the port through Cardon channel, soundings of 6 and
7 fathoms will be found for some distance within. There is complete protection from all winds, and Cardon island and the shoals at the entrance keep out
all heavy seas.
It is high water at Cardon island on the days of full and change at 3h. 6m.
Spring tides rise 11 feet.    At Realejo the tide rises an hour later.
Exterior Anchorage.—The anchorage outside Cardon island is safe only
during fine weather, consequently when it is intended to make a lengthened
stay at the port it is most prudent to enter the river. A very large vessel
should anchor with the north point of the island bearing East or E. £ N., in
6£ to 8 fathoms, bottom of mud and black sand; if in a position more northward than this, the same soundings will be found at a greater distance from
the land but not from the shoals, and if more southward a heavier sea is generally met with.    This is the winter anchorage for all vessels.
In fine weather, vessels may anchor close in at about a mile W. £ N. to
W. by N. from Cardon island, with Viejo mountain bearing N.E. by N.; the
depth here will be 4-J- to 5 fathoms, sand and mud.
In 1852 the French surveying-vessel BriUiante anchored here in 4£ fathoms, with Viejo mountain bearing N. 34° E.; Momotombo in one with
Cardon island N. 87° E.; Telica N. 68° E.; and the north-west point of
Cardon S. 83° E.
At this anchorage the flood stream flows from N.E. to E.N.E., and the ebb
the contrary, with a mean strength of about -,"„ of a knot per hour.
The port of Realejo was surveyed in 1838 by Sir Edward Belcher, R.N.,
who says :—" Cardon island is of volcanic origin, and the beach contains so
much iron, that the sand, which probably is washed up, caused the magnetic
needle to vibrate 21° from zero. I do not believe, however, that the needle
was much, if at all, affected on the summit of the island, where our observations were conducted. Our position was on its new cliffy angle. The boats
having examined and found the anchorage safe, the Sulphur was brought in
and anchored within the island of Aserradores, in perfectly still water, 4 fethoms, mud.
On the island of Aserradores our tide-guage was established, being free from
undulation, although directly open to seaward through Barra Falsa; and we
were fortunate enough to find a good well of fresh water close to the beach.
Trusting to the accounts I had read of the magnificence of this port, I had
fully intended placing the ship near the town.    The visit of the Captain of the
H.M.S. Gorgon. It had then 11 feet water upon it, and from it the south point of
Aserradores island bore N. 80° E.; Cardon head 8. 87° B.; and point Ponente 8.14° \y.
(Variation 9° E.) To avoid this rock, steer towards the entrance with Cardon head
touching Icacos point, and when at a good cable's length from point Ponente stand out
N.E. by N. until Castanon bluff opens out from Cardon head, then round Cardon head at
a short distance, remembering that the current flows over Sawyer bank.REALEJO.
59
port soon undeceived me. He assured me that at low water not more than
8 feet would be found near the town, and so narrow, that there was barely
room for the oars of my gig, and then only by careful steerage. Indeed,
I found, that although the ship might be warped 2 miles higher up, she would
there be entirely shut from any breeze, her yards probably locked in the trees,
and swarming with mosquitoes.
This port, if a settlement were established on the islands of Aserradores,
Cardon, or Castanon, would probably be more frequented; but the distance
from the position where vessels usually anchor (within Cardon) to Realejo, is
a sad drawback to vessels touching merely for supplies. Rum is also too
cheap, and too great a temptation for the seamen. Supplies of poultry, fruit,
bullocks, grain, &c, are, however, very reasonable, and of very superior
quality ; turkeys are said to attain an incredible weight; they still, however,
justly maintain a very high reputation.
The present village of Realejo (for the name of town cannot be applied to
such a collection of hovels) contains one main street, about 200 yards in
length, with three or four cross openings, leading to the isolated cottages in
the back lanes. With the exception of the houses occupied by the commandant, vice-consul, administrator of customs, and a few others, there is not
a decent house in the place. The ruins of a well-constructed church attest its
former respectability. The inhabitants generally have a very unhealthy
appearance."
Realejo was visited in 1859 by H.M.S. Havana, Captain T. Harvey. The
following is from the journal of her voyage :—| There is a little island off the
north point of Aserradores island, which, to a stranger, makes very much like
Cardon. It has deceived many, and at Realejo we heard that one vessel had
been lost by the mistake; we made it at about 5h. p.m. on June 4th, and
supposing it to have been Cardon, ran for it till we saw breakers right across
our course. We hauled out S.E., running along in 14 to 16 fathoms, good
holding ground. At Realejo we took the ground while anchoring on the bank
opposite to Icacos point, being deceived by its white beach, but we soon hove
off into 7 fathoms, good holding ground, with cape Austro, the south-east end
of Cardon, bearing S. 46° W. The difficulties of the port disappear after the
first visit.
Entering Realejo, stand in with Cardon head bearing East or E. £ S., which
will carry you clear of the Gorgon rock.* From the head steer S.JE. by E.
for the end of Castanon bluff until the east point of Cardon island bears
S. by E.; then steer E.N.E. to the anchorage. There is nothing to fear off
Icacos point and you may anchor off the houses in 5 or 6 fathoms. Going
out, a boat anchored on the south-west point of the shoal off Aserradores island
will be found very useful. The tide sets across the southern channel; both
ebb and flood set through Cardon channel.
The water at point Icacos was not found fit for ship's use. Whether the
troops (some 400 in number) in the neighbourhood brought it to the state in
which we find it or not I cannot say, but from its appearance it could only be
necessity that would oblige one to take it. There is good water to be obtained
at about 5 miles above, in a stream, at dead low water, which would prevent
more than one turn a day generally, and the position is so unhealthy at the
There is apparently an error in these bearings.   See the Admiralty chart No. 1927.60
REALEJO.
season
we
visi1
ted
it that
we
took none.    Be
ef,
stock,
and
fruit
pi<
•ntitul
and
good.
Ve
getal
)les
scarce
and
difficult to find.
The Co
ast.
—I
'rom Cardon island the trend
of
the
con
stisi
abou
tN.
.W.by
W.
M
along Aserradores island, which is low and well wooded, and has a sandy beach.
A near approach to this shore is not recommended, because, if the wind should
subside, the current and swell would soon drift the vessel on shore. During
winter, when the wind sometimes blows from S to S.W. with rainy weather,
there is also danger, in remaining at anchor off it, as the sea runs very high.
At a short distance north-westward from Aserradores island is the small
round islet, named Manzana, already alluded to, which is covered with trees,
and has a beach of a whitish colour; between it and Aserradores is a channel
nearly dry at low water, at which time it appears to consist of a single bed
(plateauJ of rocks. It is dangerous to attempt this passage, even in a boat,
unless in very fine weather and at nearly high water. Between Manzana and
the main is another passage, even more dangerous than that just mentioned;
for, although the sea in it breaks less, and consequently does not so readily
show the rocks and sandy shoals, there is much less water upon them than is
found in the other channel.
It has been already stated that vessels bound to Realejo, and unacquainted
with the bearings necessary to make the entrance of that port, have occasionally
mistaken Manzana for Cardon, and Aserradores for Castanon, and the passage
mentioned for the entrance to Realejo; so that great caution is necessary
when sailing along this coast not to be deceived in the appearance of the
land.
It is said that north-westward of Manzana are rocks extending out
some miles, upon which the sea breaks violently. They are reported to extend
along the coast as far as the parallel of the Mesa (Table) de Roll a ml, a small mountain close to the beach, with a flat top. The statement is that they border the
coast, are separated by channels, and have between them and the shore smooth
water. Hence to point Coseguina, at the entrance to the gulf of Fonseca, the
coast has a north-westerly direction.*
M de Lapelin of the French surveying vessel Brilliants, 1852, makes the
following observations upon this coast. It will be observed that he approaches
Realejo from north-westward.
9 The frequent wrecks that have occurred on this coast in consequence of
mistaking Manzana for Cardon, when the high lands are concealed, is our
reason for the following detailed remarks.
As to the coast itself, although low and in some parts fronted by shoals, it
is by no means dangerous if attention be paid to the lead, for the soundings
off it are regular; it is, however, to be noticed that the depth of 8 to 11
fathoms, within which it is not prudent to approach, prevails at a greater
distance from it than from any other part of the coast.
Point Coseguina, the south-east point of the gulf of Fonseca, in its western
• The ooast between Realejo and the gulf of Fonseca has not been surveyed and is
known to be very imperfectly delineated in charts. A reef, named Speck, is inserted in the
Admiralty chart No. 2147, in about long. 82° 27|\ or at about 7 miles from Manzana islet
and 20 miles south-eastward from Coseguina point; it apparently extends 2 miles from tho
land, has 2* fathoms upon its extremity, being in other parts awash or nearly so, and close
to its outer edge are soundings of 6 and 7 fathoms;—unfortunately we have no detailed
account of it.REALEJO,
61
and southern parts presents to the sea moderately high and almost perpendicular cliffs; its northern part is, on the contrary, very low, as it consists of
a sandy beach. Vessels may safely approach it from all directions, even to
within the distance of a mile, if a depth of 8 to 5 fathoms be maintained; but
during the flood, this offing would not be sufficient, as it might carry them
into the Estero Real, towards which it flows with a strength of l£ to 2 knots.
Having doubled point Coseguina, the coast for some miles in a south-easterly
direction will be observed to consist of steep cliffs, which gradually decrease in
height as. they recede from the point, and these are followed by a sandy beach
which at last disappears to the south-eastward in a large depression {enforcement)
of land which is continued as far as the Mesa de Rolland ; this flat land is so
low and flooded, that it could not be perceived from the bridge, although we
approached it to the depth of 8 fathoms. The cord of this great arc is indicated
by a line of breakers, towards which the soundings from sea decrease gradually
but rapidly, for the depth of 9f fathoms which hitherto prevails at the distance
of 2 miles from the land, is now 5 miles from the breakers.
The Mesa de Rolland is the extremity of a little mountainous chain, which
runs from the interior in the direction of the sea. It is easily recognised by
the plateau of which its summit consists, and by the large reddish coloured
spots which occur in parts where there are no trees. Similar spots may also
be observed upon another flat topped mountain, situated a little more in the
interior.*
From the Mesa de Rolland to Cardon island the coast is almost straight; it
is low, wooded, and at the beach consists of gray sand. The bottom off it is
so level, that at the distance of 6 miles parallel to it, the depth is only 11
fathoms on muddy sand.
When nearly on the meridian of the Mesa de Rolland, a group of trees will
come into view, detached from the coast in a manner very
low wooded point often appears ; this is Manzana island or
When advancing towards it, heavy breakers will be seen upon a bank near it
which leaves apparently a passage, but which channel does not exist, being
barred by sand banks and rocks. The island is only 16 feet high, but the
trees upon it render it visible at the distance of about 8 miles; as these trees
are almost of equal height, their tops form nearly a level line.    Its beach
which from a short distance presents the appear-
It terminates in a very gentle declivity, especially
extreme point is connected to Aserradores island
by a bank under water, upon which the sea almost always breaks, and over
which there is such little depth that it completely closes the channel.
In the event of the mountains being seen it is impossible to mistake
Manzana for Cardon, for Viejo bears E.N.E. from the former island and
N.E. by N. from the latter. Viejo is so lofty that its summit is often hidden
by clouds ; in such an event, the volcano of Telica, a perfect cone south of and
not very far from it, whose summit is rarely concealed from view, is very
useful as a mark,—from Manzana it bears East,f and from Cardon E.N.E.f
Continuing along the coast of Aserradores (which island is apparently part
of the main land) in a depth of 11 fathoms,  Cardon island will rise into view
similar to what a
the False Cardon.
consists of a whitish gravel,
ance of a belt of white sand,
on its south side, where its
* If these peculiar appearances are occasioned hy drought, they will most prohahly he
green during the rainy season.
+ These are apparently true hearings
!62
GULP OF FONSECA.
Iff
before Manzana, which by that time will present the appearance of a large
wooded and half submerged island, disappears. This island although only
83 feet high in its most elevated part, will appear high compared with the land
in its immediate vicinity."
GULF OF FONSECA—This large inlet contains one of the most
important ports on the Pacific coast of Central America, namely La Union.
The gulf reckoning from shore to shore, has an extent of about 23 miles north
and south, and of nearly 30 miles east and west, and over nearly the whole of
it, wherever the depth of water is suitable, is excellent anchorage. Although
known chiefly by the name of Fonseca, it is also called Amapala, Conchagua,
Coseguina, Omatapa, and San Carlos, the latter being derived from its principal
port San Carlos now La Union; by English shipmasters it is recognised as
the gulf of Fonseca.
In the north-western part of the gulf are several islands of considerable
size, of which that most to seaward is Manguera. These will be described
subsequently.
The mainland is divided between the states of Nicaragua, Honduras, and
San Salvador. The islands belong only to the two last mentioned states, and
these are arranged as follows; Honduras possesses Amapala or Tigre, Sacate
Grande or Velasquez, and Disposicion,—San Salvador owns Conchaguita,
Manguera, Perez, and Punta Sacate. The islands are all of volcanic origin
and extremely beautiful in appearance.
Each of the states has a port in the part it possesses. That of La Union,
belonging to San Salvador, although the most important in the gulf, is only a
small place, boasting of a population of perhaps 700 or 800, but it derives its
importance from its proximity to the city of San Miguel, which in Frbruary
and November (when its fairs are held) becomes the most commercial town in
Central America. San Lorenzo, belonging to Honduras, is on the river
Nacaome, which is too shallow to admit foreign vessels, and is consequently
only visited by the small trading craft of the country.*
Playa Grande, in the Estero Real, belonging to Nicaragua, is on the left
bank of the stream, and so rarely visited as to be a place of but little commercial importance. This arm of the sea is fronted by a bar, having over it a
depth of 16 feet at low tide; all vessels that can cross this may sail 30 miles
into the interior, and those of only 10 feet draft fully 60 miles.
Point Coseguina, on the south-east side of the gulf, has been already
mentioned (see page 60). Although it is there stated that it may .be approached to within the distance of a mile, shipmasters should be aware that
according to the Admiralty chart No. 1960, a reef extends from the point
about £ of a mile; hence it will be prudent not to get very near it when
entering or leaving the gulf. The same chart also shows a reef running off
from the land a similar distance, at S£ miles northward from the point. A
safe offing is apparently in soundings of 7 and 8 fathoms.
Estero Heal.—At nearly 12 miles north-eastward from point Coseguina
is point Monypenny, which is low and swampy, and has immediately under it
a little river or lagoon. Hence the coast takes a sudden turn in a southeasterly direction, about 14 miles, to the mouth of the Estero Real, and is low
* The government of Honduras has recently declared the anchorage of Amapala, Tigre
island, a free port, in the hope that its central position, may make it a resort of foreign
merchant ships..GULF OF  FONSECA.
63
all the way, but rises inland to high mountain land. The depth within the
bar of this river is 5 fathoms, rapidly deepening to 6 and 7 fathoms, which is
maintained for many miles. Sir E. Belcher R.N. ascended it about 30 miles
in the surveying vessel Sulphur, and could easily have gone further, had not
the strong head winds rendered the toil of towing too heavy. In reference to
it he says '\ I am satisfied that the stream could have been followed many
miles higher, and have not the slightest doubt that it is fed very near lake
Managua. I saw the mountains beyond the lake on its eastern side, and no
land higher than the intervening trees occurred. This, therefore, would be
the most advantageous line for a canal, which, by entire lake-navigation, might
be connected with the interior of the states of San Salvador, Honduras,
Nicaragua, and extended to the Atlantic. Thirty navigable miles, for vessels
drawing 10 feet, we can vouch for; and the natives and residents assert 60
more; but steamers will be absolutely necessary to tow against the prevailing
breezes."
About 8 miles within Coseguina point is the volcano of that name,
notorious for its frequent emissions of dust, ashes, and water. Its summit is
about 3800 feet above the level of the sea, and can be seen at the distance of
nearly 70 miles in clear weather. The verge of the crater is £ a mile in
diameter. The interior walls fall perpendicularly to a depth of about 200 feet,
when the bottom of the crater becomes flattish, with a small transparent lake
in the centre. The last grand eruption of this volcano occurred on the 20th
of January, 1835, and was attended with the most disastrous effects.*
From the Estero Real the coast trends round N.N.W., about 30 miles, to
the head of the gulf, and has souudings of 1^ to 3^ fathoms, at 4 miles from
the shore; some dry patches lie in the direction of E. by N., 6 miles from
Monypenny point.
Amapala Point.—The western side of the gulf, point Amapala, is of
moderate height, and bordered by a reef of rocks and sands extending some
distance into the sea, and causing heavy breakers; thus enabling it to be
easily avoided. Outside the point, at a short distance, is a depth of 6 to 8
fathoms.
From point Amapala the shore bends in north-westward to the outlet of a
small river, and then turns north-eastward, 9 miles, to Chicarene point, round
the north side of which is port La Union.
The volcano Amapala, the summit of which is 1^ miles inland in a W.S.W.
direction from Chicarene point, rises to the height of 3866 feet. It has not
the conical form so characteristic of the volcanoes of this part of Central
America. It is a large mountain, with two summits contiguous to it; of which,
the highest has a gradual slope and is in parts crowned with trees,—whilst
the other, of a very rounded form, is covered with the herb named Sacate.
The second summit is the true crater of the volcano, and has been extinguished
for many years; it differs little in elevation from the first, upon which is or
was a signal staff, f
* The summit of the volcano fell in; until then the mountain was almost as lofty as
Viejo. It now presents so remarkable an appearance, that coupled with its near vicinity
to the sea, it cannot he mistaken for other mountains on the coast,
+ The existence of this staff is doubtful, as it was of but little use as a mark, not being
visible with sufficient distinctness from the offing. The herb Sacate covers the whole
country except where there are trees.    It has a long and strong fibre, and in the dry64
GULF OF FONSECA.
La Union.—Immediately northward of point Chicarene is the bay forming
port La Union. It extends 8 miles in a north-west direction and is about
8f miles broad, reckoning from shore to shore, but the whole of this is not
available for anchorage as extensive oyster beds and mud flats, dry at low
water, line the northern shore, and contract the space in which shipping can
be accommodated to not quite half that extent. The western and northern
shores of the bay are low. The town of La Union is on the south shore, at
about 4:£ miles from the entrance ; a small pier runs off from it for the convenience of boats, close to the head of which is a depth of 4 to 7 feet at low
tide.
From the foregoing paragraph it will be seen that the deepest water in the
port is off the south shore. The depth from point Chicarene to the town is
8 to 4 fathoms, and vessels may anchor in almost any part of it if precaution
be taken not to get so close to the mud flat as to ground when the tide falls.
It is common for very large vessels to anchor just within the entrance in
6 to 5 fathoms, mud, before the north point of Punta Sacate comes on the
bearing of East, as they are then sufficiently sheltered from the heavy seas
sent in by strong winds from southward and not exposed to the intense heat
prevalent further within the bay. Vessels of 300 or 400 tons generally anchor
at 2 miles south-eastward from the town, in about 6 fathoms, mud, nearly
midway between the town and point Chicarene. Small merchantmen anchor
at about 1£ miles north-eastward from the town in 5£ to 3£ fathoms, on mud
of a very tenacious quality; in this position it is necessary to preserve a good
scope of cable, because northerly winds sometimes blow with great violence.
If it be intended to remain only a short time in this part of the gulf of
Fonseca, and it be not convenient to enter the bay of La Union, vessels may
anchor in the channel formed' by the islands Conchaguita and Punta Sacate
and the coast. The best place will be at about £ of a mile southward of the
watering place* of Chicarene, in 6 or 7 fathoms, mud, with point Chicarene
bearing about N. £ E., and the north point of Conchaguita S.E. by E. £ E.
Such a berth should be selected as may place the vessel as much as possible'
out of the influence of the violent sea which prevails here when the ebb is
opposed by a strong sea breeze; and, it is recommended to moor north and
south because of the current.
The bay of La Union affords, in fact, a land-locked anchorage. It is not
considered desirable to take up a berth directly opposite the town, because in
summer it occasionally blows so hard from northward, that if the anchor drag
the vessel might be on shore before another could be let go. In some parts
of it the holding ground is not good.
It is high water at La Union on the days of full and change at 3h. 15m.
Springs rise 10J feet;   neaps 8| feet;   neaps range 7 feet.     The tides
season gives the lands covered by it a peculiar yellow appearance, so that, where it not for
their great extent they might be mistaken for fields of ripe corn. As the termination of
the dry season approaches the whole country covered by it is parched and arid to a
degree, and then appears of a reddish colour; immediately after the commencement of the
rains, this changes to a pale green colour and presents the appearance of young sugar
canes.
* This watering place is at rather more than a mile south-westward from point
Chicarene. Although the surf here is occasionally very heavy, especially during a breeze
from seaward and at full and change of the moon, water can be obtained with facility either
by the hose or by filling the barrels on shore. The water is very superior in quality to
that obtained from the wells of La Union.GULF OF FONSECA,
65
are regular, except in the rainy season, when the ebb continues rather longer
than the flood;—at the entrance of the bay, between point Chicarene and the
island Punta Sacate, they flow (especially the ebb) sometimes at the rate of
3 knots and cause a strong race which has the appearance of breakers,—in
the vicinity of the town the rate is seldom more than 2 knots.
When bound to the bay of La Union, steer for the island Conchaguita,
(subsequently mentioned,) and pass it at a short distance on its west side, as
you will thus avoid getting into the bay on the north side of Amapala point,
towards which the flood tends. If obliged to tack there is plenty of room, but
Amapala point should not be approached nearer than the depth of 10 or
9 fathoms, because of the reef which surrounds it, the edge of which is steep ;
as the sea usually breaks on this reef it is not difficult to avoid. It will be
prudent to preserve an offing from the land at least l£ miles when in the
vicinity of this point.
When passing through the channel between Conchaguita island and the
coast it is recommended to keep over towards the shore of Amapala volcano,
to obtain the advantage of the flood which here flows northward; and, this
course should be followed even as far as Chicarene point, because immediately
Conchaguita is left astern the flood divides into two streams, one flowing
northward into the bay of La Union, and the other north-eastward between
Punta Sacate and Perez islands. Some care is required to avoid a dangerous
treef extending southward £ of a mile from the south-west end of Punta Sacate;
but which as it is never entirely covered presents no great difficulty. The
channel here is but little more than £ a mile wide, and has a depth in the
middle of 14 to 20 and 28 fathoms ; having passed through this, the bay of La
Union opens to view, and such an anchorage can be selected as may be
convenient.
Farallones.—On the eastern side of the fairway to the bay of La Union,
and just within the entrance to the gulf, is a dangerous group of rocky islets,
named the Farallones, among which are some rocks under water. They lie
with Monypenny point bearing East 5£ miles, and the centre of Coseguina
volcano S.E. by E., 9 miles; close to them all round is a depth of
8 to 10 fathoms.
Manguera.—Of the islands in the gulf of Fonseca this is most to seaward,
it is consequently the first met with in the approach to La Union from southward. It is oval in form, and its extent from N.N.W. to S.S.E. is about
3J miles, its breadth being If miles. Its shores are cliffy, and its summit
has an elevation of about 600 feet. Close to it on the south, west, and north
sides, is a depth of 6 to 8 fathoms;   but its eastern side has a sandy flat of
12 to 15 feet extending from it £ a mile, beyond which are soundings of 4 and
4:£ fathoms. A small rocky island, named Manguerita, lies about £ a mile
from its south-east point;   in the channel between is a depth of 10 to
13 fathoms.
Conchaguita is the name of the island situated 2 miles north-westward
from Manguera. Its extent is If miles and its form is almost circular. This
island rises to the height of about 500 feet, and may be safely approached on
all sides except the north-east, whence a flat, 10 feet under water, extends
halfway over to Perez island, and is succeeded by other shallows of similar
depth. The channel to La Union bay is westward of this island, and has a
depth of 6 and 7 fathoms;   while the channel eastward of it, between it and
F
•66
GULF OF FONSECA.
I*
II
north-easterly direction is
situated on the western edge of a 2-J-fathom flat which extends
Manguera (that which is usually followed by vessels bound to Amapala in Tigre
island,) has a depth of 11 to 9 fathoms.
Perez.—At 24- miles from Conchaguita in
Perez island,
from Conchaguita in a north-easterly direction to Disposicion island, and
thence to the shore. Close to the western side of this island is a depth
of about 4 fathoms, which increases to 9 and 10 fathoms towards the shore of
Punta Sacate.
As Perez island is joined to Conchaguita by a flat of only 10 to 15 feet
water, vessels approaching La Union bay (the eastern side of the approach to
which is bounded by the islands and flat) must take care that they do not get
too far eastward, especially at low tide. The flood hereabout sets north-eastward, and therefore has a tendency to carry vessels towards the flat.
Punta Sacate is the name of the island north-westward of Perez. It
bounds the channel into La Union bay on the east side, and is of irregular
shape. A reef, already mentioned, extends a short distance south-westward
from its south-west point. Between the island and the shore northward of it,
is no safe passage, almost the whole space being occupied by a mud flat which
dries at low water. At a short distance from its east side is an islet named
Chiquito.
Garova, Inglesera, Disposicion, Valasquez and Tigre are islands
eastward of those just mentioned. Of these, Valasquez is the most" extensive;
it is close to the shore, and its summit has an elevation of 2220 feet. These
islands are all, more or less, situated on the extensive shallows which prevail
in the northern part of the gulf, and among them are many islets and rocks
of which special mention need not be made. Disposicion is the name of the
island off the south-west side of Valasquez, and about If miles north-westward from Tigre; it is recognisable from a distance by its rounded summits,
of which the highest has a height of about 650 feet. Tigre the island most
" to seaward, requires some notice on account of Amapala, the port recently
established on its north-west side, which, if the government gave proper
encouragement to merchants,  has conveniences  for  shipping  sufficient  to
render it a place of some commercial importance.
Tigre has an extent of about 3 miles, and is almost circular in form. It
is the highest of the islands of the archipelago just mentioned, as its summit
has an elevation of 2590 feet. A bank of 2£ fathoms extends 2 miles from
its south-west side, in the direction of Manguera, leaving between it and that
island a channel 2£ miles wide, and about 4 fathoms deep; the east side of
the island, in the direction of San Lorenzo bay, is so shallow that it is only for
a short distance that vessels can get near it; its north side is unapproachable;
consequently, it is only along its west side that an approach can be made to
the port of Amapala, mentioned in the preceding paragraph. In this port
vessels may anchor in 6 to 8 fathoms, green mud, and find excellent shelter
from almost all winds; the ground is reported to hold extremely well.
If, when bound to Amapala, it be intended to use the channel between
Concha-guita and Manguera, steer as much as possible midway between these
islands, as thereby the deepest water will be preserved; the depth will be
9 to 11 fathoms. As the north end of Manguera is rounded, the second hill
of the summit of Tigre should be brought on a N.E. by E. bearing and
continued thus until the shore of that island is distant about £ a mile, when
the channel to the port will become open; in this latter course the soundings
will gradually decrease from 10 to 8f fathoms, on mud mixed with sand,—
the lead should be kept going, especially when nearing Tigre.GULF OF FONSECA.
67
The channel to Amapala is along the west shore of Tigre, between it and
the extensive bank of 6 to 15 feet upon which are seated the islands Conchaguita, Perez, Inglesera, Disposicion &c, and which extends northward to the
land. It is not quite f of a mile wide, and in it are soundings of 4£ to 8 and
10 fathoms; as the channel is so limited in breadth, the lead should be freely
used, and especially because the edge of the bank is steep. When running
through the channel, a little islet will be observed close off the west shore of
Tigre, to which it is connected by a sand bank dry at low water; it is named
Caracolita, and upon it are shrubs and a few trees. From this islet to
Amapala the distance is about lj- miles, and the course is along the coast of
Tigre, keeping off it a moderate distance; there is no danger but what is
close in to the shore.*
Arrived at Amapala an anchorage may be selected at convenience, according
to the ship's draught of water. A good berth will be at about £ of a mile
from the sandy beach, with the flagstaff bearing S. 32° E., or a white house
with three doors S. 39° E. From the anchorage the summit of Tigre will
bear S. 41° E.; summit of Valasquez N. 17° E.; summit of Disposicion
N. 53° W.; summit of Conchaguita S. 49° W.; and Amapala volcano
S. 79° W.
The channel eastward of Manguera between it and the bank extending
south-westward from Tigre, is also occasionally used, especially by vessels
under 16 feet draught. From the little islet Manguerita, off the south-east
end of Manguera, steer in a N.N.W. direction and keep the lead-going to
avoid getting on the bank extending from Tigre island, and as soon as
Disposicion island bears N. £ W., steer for it on that bearing until Caracolita
comes into view. When the latter bears N. f E., the channel is open and
may be entered and followed as before.
It is high water at Amapala on the days of full and change of the moon at
2h. 56m.    The rise of the highest tide observed was 11 feet.
At the north end of Manguera the flood flows in an E.N.E. direction with
a strength of about a mile per hour; the ebb, on the contrary, flows between
Conchaguita and Manguera, S.S.W., at the rate of 1T70 miles. It is high
water here on the days of full and change of the moon at 3h. 15m.; the rise
of tide is about 10 feet.
The best time to leave Amapala is at the end of the flood and with a breeze
from the land; no further instructions are necessary than to reverse those
already given for entering.
Provisions of various kinds can be procured at the various ports in the gulf,
but it is only at Amapala that meal, salt meat, wine, and oil can be obtained;
this will, however, in all probability be only in small quantities, and occasionally supplies may fail altogether. Water can be obtained at Amapala from
wells; it is said to be abundant and of good quality.
Mountains.—The mountains around the gulf of Fonseca are very conspicuous from the sea. Some have been mentioned in the course of the preceding
remarks on the gulf, and it now only remains for us to allude to those named
Viejo and San Miguel.
Towering above all other mountains eastward of the gulf, will be seen in
clear weather the volcano Viejo which has an elevation of 5557 feet.    This
* When approaching the port the direction and influence of the tidal stream must not
be forgotten.    The flood sets northward and towards the banks.68
GULF OF FONSECA
I
n mm
mountain cannot be mistaken for others, its height is so great, that it bounds
the view in the eastern horizon; hence in clear weather it is a valuable landmark. When inside the gulf, in the vicinity of Manguera island, it will be
observed over the bay of the Estero Real on a bearing of about S.E. by E. £ E.
San Miguel in about lat. 13° 24£', long. 88° 5', is north-westward of the
gulf of Fonseca. It rises to the estimated height of 6526 feet, and is a
perfect cone having a very large base. Its summit (the crater) is almost a
level, there being only a very slight concavity in the middle. The great
elevation of this mountain causes it to be conspicuous above all the hills in its
vicinity; when viewed from westward it appears detached from the surrounding
land. It was in fall activity in 1852, when its summit was frequently hidden
by a white cloud.
The Coast.—From point Amapala, on the west side of the gulf of Fonseca,
the coast trends in a westerly direction about 26 miles to port Jiquilisco, and
is for a few miles fronted by a sandy beach, which is succeeded for a further
distance of about 10 miles by a bolder coast, cliffy in some places; this
ceases on the bearing of San Miguel mountain N. 18° E., and is followed by
a low shore as far as port Jiquilisco. These sandy beaches give a very
deceptive appearance to the land, especially at sunrise and sunset, at which
times it does not seem to be at the distance from the vessel that it really is,
and the surf also apparently breaks further from the coast than it actually
does; hence it must be approached with extra care, and especially too as it
has not been surveyed, and is almost unknown. The soundings from a
distance of some few miles in the offing are believed to decrease gradually to
the shore, and it is stated that vessels may anchor off the coast if overtaken
by a calm, which it is perhaps most prudent to do,—the currents being variable,
sometimes to eastward and sometimes to westward, with a strength of about
l£ miles an hour.*
A dangerous shoal upon which is a depth of about 12 feet, has been reported
as existing off this part of the coast, in lat. 18° 2', long 88° 19' (approximate).
According to the statement, it is 8 miles long in a N.E. and S.W. direction,
and from its centre San Miguel volcano bears N.N.E. Two vessels are
asserted to have struck on it, at an estimated distance from the shore of about
10 miles. If it really exists in this position, it will be in the direct track
from the gulf of Fonseca to Acajutla.
It would perhaps be imprudent to act as if this danger had no existance when
one considers the difficulty that is sometimes experienced in discovering
sunken rocks, but the following certainly throws discredit upon its existance
in the position stated. M. Lapelin of the French vessel Brilliante, 1852,
says "From the time that we were near the extreme point of the bar of
Jiquilisco until we got San Miguel mountain on the bearing of North (trus),
we steered East to E. by 8., at first running along the breakers and afterwards
along the coast at the distance of 2 miles, and had constantly soundings of 8$
fathoms, fine sand, which decreased to 7 \ fathoms when we were opposite two
small rivers. From the latter to point Amapala we steered on a line oblique
to the coast, a distance of about 12 miles in an E.S.E. direction, and had
soundings gradually increasing from 8|  fathoms to 21
approaching the land again the depth decreased until we
7   iathonis
obtained 4
thence
fathoms
* Voyage of the Scrieuse, in the Annate* Hydrographiques, Vol. 10.PORT JIQUILISCO.
69
on the bank surrounding the coast of Amapala. Our experience is therefore
contrary to what has hitherto been considered, that it is dangerous to approach
this part of the coast, and that the soundings off it are very uneven, and this
has been confirmed by the experience of M. Cosnier of the Serieuse.    To this
1 would add a much more general remark, that until a complete survey of
this coast is made the regularity of the soundings off it make them the best
guide for approaching the coast of Central America, with the exception that in
a few places it will be prudent not to approach the land to a depth of 16 or 13
fathoms, because then the vessel will be too close in. I believe it can be
admitted as certain that, from point Remedios (Acajutla) to point Amapala,
no danger will be encountered while the depth of 11 to 8 fathoms is maintained."
PORT JIQUILISCO, named also Espiritu-Santo and Triunfo de los
Libres, consists of a bay situated in about lat. 13° 10', long. 88° 16'. It has
not been examined, and the few particulars we possess of it are not of a
reliable character. Its entrance is said to be intricate and much obstructed
by sand-banks, upon which the sea breaks heavily ; and, within the entrance
are some islands, one of which, named, Pajaros, divides the bay into two parts.
The average depth in the channels is stated to be about 8 fathoms; hence, if
this be correct, there is water sufficient for large vessels. When intending to
enter, it will be prudent to send a boat ahead to sound the passage, should it
so happen that a pilot cannot be obtained.
M. Jamin of the French ship Genie wrote thus a few years ago | On the
evening of the 25th January we got under way from the river Lempa, with
a good S.S.E. breeze, which enabled us to run along the coast in about 8
fathoms, and at sunset we observed some breakers opposite us which appeared
to extend, a considerable distance from the land; we then anchored in about
8£ fathoms, soft mud. The next day we got under way again, and it was
then easy to see the breakers, which extend across the Estero in the form of a
horse-shoe, in such a manner that the bay can only be entered by going round
them; the sea broke over them with considerable violence, but there are
places among them where in fine weather there are no breakers, which might
consequently be easily traversed by boats.
The depth in the deepest part of the channel at low water is 15 feet; the
rise is about 9f feet. It is therefore possible for vessels of considerable
tonnage, to get within the breakers, where there is a much greater depth of
water, with the exception that in two or three places there are some small
banks; these may, however, be easily avoided.
The ebb current leaving the Estero forms eddy streams in which there is a
good depth of water, and these eddies are also to be seen in the deepest places
on the reef; hence the position of the navigable channel is well indicated.
The current flows in an opposite direction with the flood,—at the rate of
2 or 3 knots at full and change, when the bar is very dangerous, except at the
time of high water."
M. Lapelin of the French ship BnUiante, 1852, says " The coast between
the river Lempa and port Jiqulisco is low and wooded, but the beach, which
in the neighbourhood of the river is of very white sand, becomes here of a well
determined gray colour. The soundings off it at the distance of a mile are
regular, the depth at that offing being 7 fathoms, on a bottom consisting of
sand covered with a very tenacious slimy mud, good for holding; apparantly
there are no sunken dangers.    Near Jiquilisco, the coast (similar in appear-
I
,
5m %
70
RIVER LEMPA AND LIBERTAD.
IIP
111.
II
ance to that immediately westward of it, being backed by some wooded hills,
and fronted by a beach so low as frequently to be hidden by the heavy surf
that breaks on the bar) is intersected by several rivers. The bay of Jiquilisco,
unlike what may be remarked of the rivers Lempa, Paza &c, has not aboutitlarge
mangrove trees so conspicuous with their white trunks, but clumps of thickets
of a dirty paJte green colour, or great bushes comparatively leafless. I regret
much that a long line of breakers in the form of a horse-shoe, which fronted
the half drowned lands prevented an approach to the coast sufficiently near to
permit me to determine the position of the bay with precision, nor was I more
fortunate in finding the channel mentioned by the commander of the Genie, I
am obliged therefore to limit myself to the following remarks:—San Miguel
volcano bearing N. 27° E. leads to the horse-shoe breakers, which are situated
in lat. 13° 8', long 88° 39'.* From these breakers the volcano San Vicente
bears N. 42° W., that of San Salvador N. 58° W., that of Virola N. 3° W.,
and that of Coseguina East.    (Variation 7° 40' E.)
We approached the breakers as near as £ a mile, coasting them from West
to East, and had never less than 6 fathoms. When we were so far from them
as a mile to l£ miles, although the colour of the water was a very marked
yellowish green, we had soundings of 7£ to 8J fathoms. During our running
survey we found the bottom very even, and the neighbourhood of the bar
was always indicated by a gradual decrease of the soundings. The bottom
consisted of a very fine gray sand, which offered but little resistance; hence
if there is an intention to remain here for a short time, anchorage should be
sought at about l£ miles westward of the bar, where is slimy mud mixed with
black sand excellent for holding."
RIVER LEMPA.—The mouth of this river is about 15 miles westward
from port Jiquilisco, and is situated according to M. Lapelin in lat. 13° 12' 20",
long. 88° 51x. From its bar, which extends out a mile or l£ miles from the
land and is said to be almost impassable, the volcano San Salvador bears
N. 50° W., that of San Vicente N. 16° W., and that of San Miguel N. 60° E.
On the left bank of the river are or were, some fishermen's huts.f
LIBERTAD.—From the river Lempa to Libertad, a distance of about
30 miles, the coast is believed to be free from outlying sunken dangers, and
it is said that there are regular soundings off it, which decrease gradually
from the depth of 50 fathoms. At a mile from the land the average depth is
7 fathoms, on fine sand and mud. The land, bordered with a belt of white
sand, consists of an extensive plain, from which rises in the distance the
volcanoes San Vicente and San Miguel; these are of great altitude and visible
from a distance of many miles.
Port Libertad is an open roadstead, with no shelter whatever. The town (?)
consists merely of a few houses or huts, attached to which is the custom-house
* All the longitudes of M. Lapelin are about 10 miles westward of those of Sir E. Belcher, R.N., which have been adopted in the English Admiralty charts,
+ The Lempa is the largest and most important river in the state of San.Salvador.
j Notwithstanding its great length and breadth and the 'immense quantity of water it
* contains, it is not navigable for more than 8 leagues from its entrance,—that is to say
with river steamers. Further up, owing to the numerous sand banks and rapids, navigation is almost impossible. Sand banks also abound in the part most navigable, and render
the entrance very difficult. The mean velocity of the current of the river is 4 to 5 miles
per hour.PORT LIBERTAD.
71
establishment. But very few, if any, supplies can be obtained from it, and
the only reason why it is dignified by the name 'port' is, that ii is the nearest
place on the sea-board to San Salvador (the capital of the state) which is
frequented by vessels, and from which it is distant about 16 leagues. Water
is obtained with some difficulty, from the little river Quelama, situated at rather
less than £ a mile westward from the houses. The port can be considered a
safe roadstead only during fine weather, or when the wind is from northward;
it should not be visited from July to October.
When bound to port Libertad, vessels from southward should sight the
volcano San Salvador, and steer with it bearing N. £ E., as it will then lead
them to the roadstead. If from eastward or westward, a better course cannot
be adopted than to follow the coast at an offing of 5 or 6 miles, supposing the
weather to be favourable for so doing, there being no objects immediately over
the town sufficiently conspicuous to be visible from a distance.
If approaching the port directly from southward, soundings of 27 to 25
fethoms, mud, will be obtained at about 8 miles from the land, which thence
decrease gradually to the beach. A nearer approach will bring into view a
large white warehouse covered with tiles, having on its east side a flag-staff,
and on its west side a large white house ; the house is perhaps more conspicuous than the warehouse. And, when still nearer the land, the cottages
thatched with palmetto leaves will rise into view.
The depth at a mile from the land is about 8 fathoms, muddy sand.
Although this depth is perhaps considerable for some merchant vessels to
anchor in, it is a better anchorage than nearer the shore, the bottom closer to
the beach being not so good in quality, it is however a little too far out for
loading and'unloading cargo. Near the beach the bottom consists at first of
fine sand, and afterwards of pebbles or gravel.
The port was visited in 1837 by Sir E. Belcher, R.N., who has remarked,
'•'One would naturally expect from the title, 'port of Libertad,' something
pretending to a bay, or a deep indentation; but a straight sandy beach between
two slightly projecting ledges of rock, about 1 mile asunder, forms the playa
of Libertad ; it is law and interest only that have made it a port.
At times the bay is smooth, but the substratum.at the beach being of large
smooth boulders of compact basalt, the instant the surf rises, they are freed
from their sandy covering, and a dangerous moving stony bottom left, on which
our boat grounded. We were informed that it is generally violent for three
or four days at full and change, which corresponded with our visits.
The rollers which set in on this beach curl and break at times in 4 or 5
fathoms, at least a £ of a mile off. Those within, which are the most
dangerous, are caused by the offset, or efflux.
The sand beach is composed chiefly of magnetic iron sand, the dried
superstratum, about one inch in thickness, caking in flakes free from
admixture.
The anchorage is uneasy, and, I should think, unsafe, and should be
avoided near the full moon. Sudden rollers come in, which are apt to snap
chain-cables, unless with a long range.
Poultry, bullocks, &c, are to be obtained, but, compared with those of San
Salvador or Realejo, the prices are exorbitant. Bullocks can only be embarked
in one of their bongos."
The Coast.—From port Libertad to Acajutla the distance is about 28
miles, along a coast believed to be free from any outlying sunken dangers,
I
1
il
: i
i II
il'
1. .1     ).'
72
ACAJUTLA.
li
II
ill
III
and supposed to have a bank of soundings from it to the distance of 10 or 15
miles. At from' 1 to 2 miles from the beach the depth has been ascertained
to be 13 to 16 fathoms, muddy sand. At first the land consists of an
agglomeration of very irregular hills or mountains covered with trees or varied
with reddish coloured spots of great barrenness, which terminate at the sea in
cliffs having at their base a beach of shingle or gravel; in the vicinity of
Acajutla the country is less high, more level and well clad with trees.
The volcanoes Virola, San Vicente or Sacatecoluco, and San Salvador,
situated some miles inland, are a great assistance to vessels bound to ports
Libertad and Acajutla, as they are visible from a distance of many miles
at sea.
Virola, situated in lat. 13° 26' between the volcanoes San Miguel and San
Vicente, consists of high lands among which can be distinguished a mountain
with many peaks as well as a cone having the appearance of an old volcano;
this cannot be seen from a great distance.
San Vicente in lat. 13° 35', long. 88° 59' 6" (M. Lapelin F.I.N.) has an
elevation of about 6900 feet. It rises in the form of a truncated cone, the
summit of which, viewed from eastward or westward appears cleft, one summit
being more rounded than the other.
San Salvador in lat. 13° 43' 30", long. 89° 21' 21" (M. Lapelin) has an
elevation of about 6430 feet, and can be seen when at the distance of fully
60 miles from the land. Viewed from the sea it appears behind the mountain
chain in the form of a very large mountain, with a flat summit, in shape not
unlike the back of a tortoise. At its extremity is a peak rather more
lofty than itself.
ACAJUTLA.—The bay of Acajutla is formed on the south side by point
Remedios, which is sufficiently high to be seen from a distance of 10 or 12
miles, and on the north side by a low sandy coast which trends in a N.N.W.
direction from the town. It is an open bay, exposed to all winds from westward ; these occasionally send in a very heavy sea, hence it is not considered
a desirable anchorage, especially in winter. Point Remedios, conspicuous
from the offing by its dark colour, has at its base some rocks above and under
water, which extend out about a mile; as this reef is steep, with a depth of
S£ to 5 fathoms close to it, more than ordinary care is required when entering
the bay from southward or south-westward.* The soundings at about 4 miles
from the shore are 12 and 13 fathoms, thence gradually decreasing to 5
fathoms immediately off the houses,
From point Remedios the coast has a direction of N.N.W. for about 3^
miles to Acajutla, and consists of cliffs intersected with little beaches of white
sand. At the end of these cliffs is the landing place, the town itself being
situated on the summit of the cliff; the town is but a small place defended
by a battery, and conspicuous among the huts will be seen a tiled building
occupied as a custom-house, near which is a flag-staff.
Acajutla is one of the principal ports of San Salvador. At about 4 leagues
from it, in the interior, is the town of Sonsonate, situated at the foot of the
volcano Isalco ; this town has a population of 5000 to 6000.
m
* The reef from Remedios point is represented in the Admiralty charts Nos. 587 and
2148, on the authority of a Spanish M. S. of 1794, as extending out 3 miles in a S.W. £ S.
direction. In the absence of a proper survey of the coast we are unable to say which
statement is correct.ACAJUTLA,
73
When bound to port Acajutla it is recommended to get sight of the volcano
Isalco, and bring it to bear N.E. by N., as that bearing leads directly to the
anchorage. The mountain is situated about 12 miles from the coast, is
4972 feet high, and behind it are others of much greater altitude; it is easily
recognised, for although there are peaks in its neighbourhood very similar in
appearance, as it is an active volcano, the column of smoke and steam
constantly ascending from it and the frequent eruptions of molten lava, render
it conspicuous during day and night,—it is also not of sufficient height to be
so frequently hidden by clouds as are the more lofty mountains in the interior*
From these circumstances it is a very useful landmark to vessels seeking the
ports of Istapa, Acajutla and Libertad.
The usual anchorage in fine weather is in 7 to 10 fathoms, sand, mud and
gravel, which will be at about 2 miles from the shore, with mount Isalco
bearing from N. 33° E., to N. 86° E. and point Remedios S.S.E. to S.E. by S.
During winter, when the swell of the sea is very great and the winds from
S.S.E. to S.W., occasionally very violent, it will be prudent to anchor further
out, in not less than 11 fethoms with point Remedios bearing about S.E.,
and mount Isalco N. 36° E.*
A good mark when running for the anchorage is the flag-staff in one with
the large door of the custom-house store. If it be necessary, vessel&may tack
without hesitation as there are no sunken dangers, with the exception of those
already mentioned around point Remedios, and the soundings are an excellent
guide.}
The anchorage cannot be considered convenient on account of the difficulty
of loading and unloading cargo ; it is however safe in fine weather. Unless
circumstances compel a visit it is as well to avoid it during the months from
Julv to October, because at that time very heavy seas are sent in by strong
winds from seaward. Nor, can the holding ground be considered good, for
the Heroins when anchored in 16 fethoms mud, dragged both her anchors
although the chains were 142 fethoms long. When seeking the inner anchorage,
the flag-staff should not be brought northward of N. 60° E., or the anchors
may be cast upon beds of rocks which may either break them or cause them
to be lost altogether.
It is high water on the days of full and change of the moon at 2h. 85mu
The rise of tide is about 9 feet. During the fine season, the set of the cur*
rent is generally E.S.E., at the rate of T% of a mile per hour.
Water is obtained at Acajutla either from the river Grande, a little westward of the anchorage, or from a cascade which falls upon the beach. The
quality of the latter is very good, but as the brook which furnishes it passes
through the town and is dammed up to ensure a sufficient supply of water for
the inhabitants it is necessary to obtain permission before taking it.
Supplies of fresh provisions, as well as of cattle, wood, sugar, &c. &c, can
be obtained at the town, at reasonable prices.
* The following bearings from the anchorage were taken by the French surveying vessel
Brilliante in 1852, Agua volcano N. 44° 49' W.; left summit of the mountain Esclavos
N. 82° 35' W.; middle of the Table of Apaneca N. 10° 19' E.; Isalco N. 42° 48' E.; point
Remedios S. 32° 9' E.; and the flag-staff N. 72° 27' E. (Variation 7° 11' E.)
♦ The heavy seas which break upon the beach of Acajutla have formed a bar, which
although generally not so bad as that at Istapa, 56 miles westward of this port, is larger
and perhaps more dangerous.   It requires some address to effect a landing.74
ACAJUTLA.
Acajutla bears the reputation of being extremely unhealthy especially
during the winter months ; perhaps there is not a more unhealthy place on the
coast of Central America.
M. Marie * says of this port:—" If you bring Isalco to bear N.E. by N.,
and steer in that direction, you will make this port. The custom-house,
magazines, and the huts of the village are situated on a height that overlooks
the beach, but are not distinctly visible, being surrounded by trees, yet, from
the distance of 4 miles, the harbour flag-staff and a shed having a tiled roof
situated close to the sea, can be distinctly seen. The port is also recognised
by being situated at the termination of a range of rocks, and where the beach
is sandy. The following are good marks for anchoring in summer, in
8 fathoms, mud, point Remedios S.E.; the flag-staff on with the inner angle
of the custom-house store; and mount Isalco N.E. by N.:—in winter, in 12 to
14 fathoms, mud, mount Isalco N.N.E.; point Remedios S.E. by E.; and
the flag-staff in one with the west wall of the custom-house store.
Landing at this place is difficult, and it is even imprudent to attempt to
pass the breakers in a small boat. It is requisite to have a good whale boat,
which, to prevent accidents, should be manned by a competent crew; and a
landing should not be attempted when the sea is rough."
Acajutla was visited in 1859 by H.M.S. Havana, Captain T. Harvey.
| Starting from San Jose de Guatemala on May 24th, we worked down to
Acajutla. Between these places a ship may stand in safely by the lead, as it
shoals gradually and regularly to 10 and 12 fathoms at 8 miles from the
shore. In the afternoon of the 26th we anchored at Acajutla, with point
Remedios and the shoal from it sheltering us from south-eastward. Here we
found a substantially built wharf, at which there is generally a fair landing,
although at times the surf is such as to prevent any- approach. Merchant
ships discharge and receive cargo by their own boats. On the 27th the
breakers on the shore were so trifling that our cutters landed on a wooding
expedition m parts of tjie bay without the slighest difficulty; but on the 29th
the surf was so heavy that it was extremely hazadous even at the wharf, and
four hours were occupied in watching opportunities to embark supplies. Beef,
stock, vegetables and fruits may be obtained in any quantity from Sonsonate ;
but two days' notice must be given to secure any considerable amount. The
pier, happily, is provided with cranes, which we had to use in getting off
bullocks. We anchored in 12 fathoms with the landing place bearing
N. 55° E. A vessel should not stand nearer to Remedios reef than the
depth of 20 fathoms, unless with a good breeze and clear weather. The
volcano Isalco was burning during the whole of our stay,—no lighthouse gives
a better light. This volcano bearing N.E. by N., is a good mark for the
port."
The Coast.—From Acajutla to Istapa the distance is about 56 miles in
a W.N.W. direction. The coast consists of a beach of greyish coloured sand,
backed by a well wooded shore, interrupted in a few places by some rivers
among which are those named Grande, Caota, Santiago, Paza and Esclavos;
the entrances to these are generally indicated by the white trunks of mangrove
i
1823.
Renseignements sur le Centre Amerique reoueillis pendant le voyage de La M6lanieISTAPA.
75
trees, but none are of importance. The land at a few miles from the coast
rises into mountains, among which will be noticed the Table of Apaneca,
5709 feet high, situated a little westward of the meridian of Acajutla, and the
Morro de los Esclavos with its rounded summit, the elevation of which is
estimated to be 4828 feet; between this latter and the meridian of Istapa are
mountains of even greater altitude.
The surf upon all this coast is extremely heavy, especially when a strong
wind has prevailed a few days from southward. It is believed that no sunken
dangers exist off it, and the soundings obtained indicate great regularity in the
bottom, which consists apparently of muddy sand. The depth at about £ a
mile from the beach i§ 13 fathoms, and at from 1 to 3 miles 22 to 28
fathoms; in the neighbourhood of Acajutla the bottom is not so steep. The
usual direction of the current appears to be from West to East, following the
coast, at the rate of a £ to 1 mile per hour.
ISTAPA.—Istapa is a port of very little commercial importance as the
village in 1852 consisted merely of huts used for quarantine purposes.
It is an open roadstead, exposed to all winds from southward, which as
already noticed occasionally prevail with considerable strength, when they send
in a very heavy sea. The usual anchorage is at £ a mile from shore, in 16 to
13 fathoms, on a bottom of muddy sand, with the flag-staff bearing about
N. by E. The Brilliante anchored here in 1852, with the volcano Agua
bearing N. 3° 21' W.; right peak of Fuego N. 15° 31' W.; volcano of
Tajumulco N. 34° 53' W.; left summit of Pacayo N. 12° 48' E.; left summit
of Esclavos N. 79° 16' E.; and the flag-staff N. 8° 12' W., (Variation
7° 39' E.) The depth at 4 miles from the land is 20 fathoms, mud, whence
it gradually decreases to the beach.*
When bound to Istapa from eastward or westward the land for a few leagues
from the port may be coasted at the distance of 3 or 4 miles, as at that offing
it is free from any known sunken reefs. Making the anchorage directly
from southward the high lands in the interior are very useful as marks, for the
volcanoes Agua, Fuego, Atitlan and Tajamulco, are visible when at fully
60 miles from the coast, and those of Pacayo and the Morro de los Esclavos
at more than 30 miles.
Agua rises in the form of a perfect cone to the height of 13,468 feet, and
is apparently connected on its west side to Fuego volcano by means of a ridge
of considerable altitude ; the latter mountain has two peaks at its summit, of
nearly equal size and appearance, one of which is always surmounted by a
panoply of smoke;—the height of this volcano is estimated to be 14,000 feet.
It is only in very clear weather that the lofty volcano westward of Fuego can-
be distinguished; it is either Atitlan or Tajamulco f; if the latter, it has a
height of about 11,480 feet, and its summit forms three peaks, one of which, the
middle and highest, is active. Pacayo, eastward of Agua, is 9594 feet high,
and easily recognised by its jagged and irregular summit, which conveys the
idea of a crater fallen in. The Morro de los Esclavos has been previously
described.
* We believe that Istapa has been closed as a port for foreign vessels since 1853.
anchorage is extremely inconvenient, and unhealthy, especially during winter.
The
Tajamulco is situated in lat. 14° 36', and is about 28 miles westward from Istapa;
an is in about lat. 15° 12'.
Atitlan is76
SAN JOSE.
II
l'g  V»/S;t:
Of the mountains just mentioned, Pacayo and the Morro de los Esclavos,
are generally visible when the summits of the others are hidden by clouds;
hence they are usually more serviceable as marks for the port.
If mount Agua is brought to bear N. £ W., Fuego N. by W. £ W., or
Pacayo N. by E., it will lead directly to the port. When on any of these
lines of direction the depth at a few miles from the land is 80 to 25 fethoms,
whence it diminishes gradually to the beach. A low sandv shore, covered
with wood, at last comes into view; among the trees will be seen some huts,
and soon afterwards the flag-staff and customs establishment. In the event
of the volcanoes being hidden by haze, it is recommended to make the land
between Istapa and Acajutla, and afterwards to steer westward in a depth of
16 to 13 fathoms ; as soon as the flag-staff comes into view it may be run for,
keeping in the same depth, and a berth selected at convenience. If having to
load or unload cargo, it is considered desirable not to anchor eastward of the
bearings mentioned in the preceeding paragraph, because the current then
assists the boats in regaining the shore.
Istapa is visited throughout the year, but the bar is so bad during July,
August and September, as frequently to prevent a landing; hence vessels
should if possible avoid the port during those months. An additional reason
for this recommendation should also be mentioned, namely, that the bottom
at the anchorage is at this season so much influenced by the heavy seas sent
in by the strong on-shore winds, that much dependence cannot be placed upon
the anchor holding. The coast being very steep, the bar is not far from the
beach. With a northerly wind and at the period of full and change of the
moon the bar is frequently impracticable.
The current follows the line of coast, flowing from West to East at a
rate of from T8^- to 1T^ miles per hour.
Water can be obtained at Istapa in small quantity, and of very inferior
quality. Previous to the year 1853 (see the note * page 75), provisions of
various kinds could be obtained at reasonable prices, but many kinds had to
be procured from Guatemala.
SAN JOSE.—From Istapa the coast trends about 8 miles in a westerly
direction to San Jose de Guatemala or Zapote, but which is better known
under the name briefly of San Jose. It is an open roadstead, but little
superior to that of Istapa (by many shipmasters considered to be inferior to it),
affording no shelter whatever, and as an anchorage subject to all the incon-
veniences of that port. A strong wind from southward sends in so heavy a
sea that at times a landing cannot be effected, and at the same time disturbs
the bottom so much that the anchors frequently drag; hence it can be considered a safe anchorage only during the fine season. Communication with
the shore is made with the andarivel.
The usual anchorage is at about £ a mile from the shore in 16 to 10 fethoms,
on fine sand of very indifferent tenacity. Very large vessels anchor further
out in 20 to 16 fathoms. The French surveying vessel Obligado anchored in
1854 with the following bearings, Agua volcano North; Fuego volcano
N. 14° W.; Pacayo volcano N. 15° E.; Atitlan volcano N. 86° W.; and the
flag-staff N. 21° W., (Variation 8° 45' E.)
Approaching San Jose from eastward or westward the land for a short
distance from the port may be coasted at a moderate offing, as it is believed
to be free from sunken dangers, but it must be borne in mind that as it has not
been surveyed, more than usual care should be exercised; giving the shore aSAN JOSE,
n
berth of 2 or 8 miles will be as close to the beach as a prudent shipmaster
should get, and he will then have soundings of 22 to 15 fathoms,—if this
distance be maintained the land breezes will be of considerable advantage. In
the event of the wind prevailing from S.W. or W.S.W., it will be safe in the
boards to get as close to the land as 1 mile, in soundings of 10 or 11 fathoms,
but not nearer. The lead should be frequently hove, the soundings being an
excellent guide, as they shoal gradually. If the sea wind fail without being
succeeded by a strong land wind, it is recommened to anchor for the night,
that the progress gained during the day may not be lost.
If the port be approached directly from southward, the volcano Agua should
be brought to bear North, or that of Fuego N. 14° W., as either of those
bearings will lead to it. When these mountains are hidden by haze, it is recommended to make the land about Istapa, and thence approach the roadstead
until the flagstaff of the custom's establishment bears N. 20° W., when the
anchor may be cast in the depth most convenient.
Although the usual supplies for shipping can generally be obtained at San
Jose in small quantities, reliance should not be placed upon getting them, as
the village consists of but little else than a few huts inhabited bv the staff of
the custom-house; even water (of good quality) has to be fetched from some
distance in the interior.
The winds at San Jose, as on other parts of the coast of Central America,
are, from November to May, generally from S.S.E. by South to West, from
lOh. a.m. to 8h. or 9h. p.m., a short interval of calm then follows, which is
succeeded by a light wind from North to N.E. From June to November a
vessel should not anchor here unless at a distance from the shore sufficient to
permit her to beat off with facility when the winds are from South and S.W.
which often blow with very great force and raise a very high sea. During this
season the bar is often impassable even by the andarivels.
In the narrative of the voyage of H.M.S. Havana, Captain T. Harvey,
R.N., 1859, the following remarks upon San Jose occur; it should be
premised that the port was approached from westward. " On May 11th we
found ourselves inshore looking for Istapa. The Guatemala peaks could not
be seen, and the shore showed us nothing but one unbroken line of beach and
trees, with a heavy surf, but in the evening we had the satisfaction of distinguishing Agua, the east centre peak of the range. The next morning, on
standing in, we observed three vessels at anchor to the westward, and running
down to them, came-to in 18£ fathoms under the belief that we had reached
Istapa. The first visitors informed us of our mistake, and that we were really
at San Jose de Guatemala. The place is utterly undeserving the name of a
port, although we found three vessels at anchor there, and a large French ship
arrived as we left, it being the only landing place for goods for Guatemala.
The anchorage affords no shelter whatever; the surf has its full force. The
only way a landing can be effected is by means of a surf boat, and even this
was capsized four times during our stayl The town of San Jose consists of
some half dozen grass huts, which with the flagstaff, cannot be distinguished
beyond 5 miles from the shore. The best marks for the port are, therefore,
the Guatemala peaks, which are generally visible at dawn. From our anchorage the true bearings of these peaks were as follows :—Agua N. 6° 26' E.;
Fuego N. 7° 8' W.; Pacayo N. 28° 26' E.; and Tajumulco N. 28° 20' W.
We  were  distant   about   3  miles S.   27° E.   from the flagstaff,   and in78
TEHTJANTEPEC LAGOONS AND VENTOSA BAY.
.mi fu. ;
lat. 13° 53' 35", long. 90° 44' 20".* Variation 8° 36' E. The current generally
sets to the westward, and yet a continuation of westerly winds will alter it."
The Coast.—From San Jose the coast trends north-westward and westward 270 miles to the entrance of the great lagoons of Tehuantepec, named
the Boca Barra. Of all this coast we possess no information whatever, and
we believe that it contains no ports that are frequented by foreign vessels. It
is said to be low and sandy, and to contain many lagoons which communicate
with the sea by means of narrow channels navigable only by boats. The
mountains behind this low flat shore rise to a great height, and many of the
volcanic peaks are sufficiently lofty to be visible when at the distance of
40 miles from the land.
TEHUANTEPEC LAGOONS.—These lakes extend into the land
about 12 miles, and have an extent east and west of nearly 40 miles. They
are, we believe, useless for the purposes of navigation and are mentioned
chieflv • because at a few miles westward from them are the thriving towns of
Juchitan and Tehuantepec, having populations respectively of 6000 and
13000; at the latter town are sixteen churches, and a college was established
in 1850. The entrance to the lakes, Boca Barra, is in lat. 16° 13', long.
94° 45' 30", and is too shallow to admit vessels even of moderate size. On
the bar breakers constantly prevail, which add greatly to the difficulty
experienced in running in. Within the entrance are numerous shoals of
shifting sand.
The soundings immediately outside the Boca Barra are 2 J- to 4 fathoms,
fine clayey sand. The current from the lakes through this boca, on 9th Nov.
1850, flowed at the rate of 7£ miles per hour.
From the Boca Barra the coast trends westward about 22 miles to the bay
of Ventosa, and is throughout low and sandy, consisting for the greater part
of this distance of a narrow beach separating the Tehuantepec lagoons
from the sea. The soundings at from 1£ to 2 miles from it are S£ to 8
fathoms, on clayey sand.
VENTOSA BAY is situated in lat. 16° 10£', long. 95° 9', or at about
12 miles south-eastward from the town of Tehuantepec. It is not very extensive, being only 2 or 3 miles across; but it presents some advantages which
the other bays on this coast do not possess. Although open to southward and
eastward, vessels may safely ride at anchor in it, as the holding-ground
is excellent, and the depth of 6 and 7 fathoms which prevails over almost all
the bay, is very convenient. The soundings are gradual from 3 fathoms at
the distance of 100 yards from the beach, to 7 and 8 fathoms at 1000 yards;
and the anchorage is on a muddy bottom extending E.N.E. from Morro point,
its south-west extremity. The western shore consists of low sandy land,
enclosing some lagoons, which receive the waters of the river Tehuantepec.
This bay has been proposed as the Pacific termination of a railway across the
isthmus of Tehuantepec from the Gulf of Mexico, the construction of which is
reported to present no difficulties of greater magnitude than an engineer of
ordinary ability would be able easily to overcome.
Mr. Temple says " I am of opinion that Ventosa bay is not only the best,
but the point for a harbour on the Pacific coast of the isthmus.    It is a fer
* The observations of the French surveying-vessel Obligado in 1854 place the port
in lat. 13° 54' 38", long. 90° 56' 36". It has been already noticed that all the French
positions on this coast are 10 or 12 miles west of the English.VENTOSA BAY.
79
better and safer port than either Valparaiso or Monterey ; ports in constant
use the year throughout. I speak from personal observation, as well as from
an examination of the several charts, and the similarity of outline has suggested the comparison; for, although the indentation of the coast is possibly
a little deeper at each of these places than at Ventosa, yet they are both open
to northward, and as the general trend of the coast is nearly north and
south, the prevailing gales blow directly along shore and into these harbours,
creating a heavy swell, and often forcing vessels to slip and go to sea for
safety: whereas, at Ventosa the trend of the coast is east and west, so that
the " northers'' blow directly off-sliore, and create no swell whatever. The
danger being from the sudden strain brought upon a cable by the surging of a
vessel in a sea-way, and not from the steady strain caused by the wind, it
follows that " northers" maybe disregarded in an estimate of the safety of this
anchorage, as was satisfactorily shown in the case of the Gold Hunter. But
" northers", although frequent during the winter, and seldom occurring at other
seasons, are the only gales that blow in this region. The southerly winds,
characteristic of the summer and autumn, are said to be nothing more than
thunder squalls of short duration, and incapable of raising a sea. Even the
fresh and steady sea-breezes that prevailed during the latter portion of our
stay at Ventosa bay were unaccompanied by any increase of swell."
The following is an extract from the Report on Ventosa bay by the engineer,
P. E. Trastour, Esq. :—
tk The western extremity of the bay is formed by the Cerro Morro, an
isolated rock of oblong shape, rounded at the summit, about 150 feet high
and 2600 in circumference; and a little more to the south by a pointed rock,
separated from the former by an interval filled in with sand, and forming an
angular projection into the sea, known under the name of the point of the
Morro.
On the west-, the point of the Morro is contiguous, by its base, to an
uninterrupted series of rocky hills, lining the beach and covering an extent of
6000 feet. They cut perpendicularly the flank and rear of an agglomeration
of moderate heights, somewhat rugged and precipitous at their summits, and
forming together a thick cluster of granitoidal structure disposed in strata
wherein feldspar] and amphibole are predominant. It is the last link of that
chain which, detaching itself at the north-west from the cordillera of Oaxaca,
descends by an irregular series of decreasing heights, passes to the north of
Huamelula, turning it at the south-east, and terminates at the Pacific ocean,
where it separates the bay of Ventosa from the bay of Salina Cruz.
The sandy strand of Ventosa commences at" the foot of the lateral portion
of the Cerro Morro, facing the east, and describes from the south to the northeast an arc nearly 2£ miles in length; then takes an easterly and almost
rectilinear direction, but drawing a little towards the south, extends on about
6 miles further, where it runs into the sea; after which it turns back again
abruptly and inclines towards the north, though trending all the while in an
easterly direction.
From the summit of the Cerro Morro looking towards the east, the beach
loses itself in a distant horizon, and unfolds to the eye a long belt of white
sand from 200 to 300 feet wide, terminating inland by a vast plain, scarcely
broken upon by the isolated hillocks of Huazontlan. This plain, of a slightly
undulating nature, is composed of sand, clay, and vegetable earth. It is
covered with trees of middling size, which grow both thinner and smaller, as80
VENTOSA BAY.
I
one advances towards the east. But in the direction of the Cordillera which
separates the isthmus into two parts, north and south, this alluvial country is
generally flat, presenting at rare intervals detached heights, easily avoided in
the planning of a road of any character whatever, offering to the view fields of
corn, indigo, sugar-cane, palm-trees, nopals, bananas, orange-trees, cocoanut-
trees, and plants of which the vigour and variety bear witness to the great
fertility of the soil.
The sandy beach of Ventosa itself is cut by lagoons of little depth, having
several outlets into the sea, and by the bed of the Tehuantepec river. At the
time of the periodical overflow, this current flows over a low country before
reaching the Pacific ocean, in which it then empties itself^ not only by its
mouth, but also by means of those lagoons, its sole outlets during the dry
season.
The volume of the water of the river is subject to very great variations in
the course of the year. In the rainy season it reaches 12 feet depth, in years
of an extraordinary character.
The rainy season usually commences in the month of June and finishes in
the beginning of October. The isthmus, in general, offers as many different
climates as localities, differing from one another by their situation, the nature
of their soil, the atmospheric phenomena, and the position of their mountains
in respect to the cardinal points.
Advantages.—The immense basin of Ventosa presents a safe and commodious harbour to vessels of all sizes. Closed at the west by the heights of the
Morro, it is open at the south and east. This configuration of the bay allows
vessels to have ingress and egrees, irrespective of the quarter from which the
wind blows. Throughout its great extent, and on entering it from the sea, no
shoals are to be met with; everywhere a good anchorage is to be found. The
bottom is of compact sand, and a great proportion of it is mixed with clay.
The depth is almost regularly graduated: it presents at from 850 to
8000 feet distance from the shore, a progressive running from 17 to 58 feet,
and averaging, for the first 1000 feet, 2 feet increase per 100 feet, and about
6 inches per 100 feet for the following 1000 feet.
The greatest difference that has been observed in the level of the water was
6£ feet.
Winds.—Besides the variable winds, which are rather light, and the land
and sea breezes of the morning and evening, two prevalent winds, the N.N.E.
and S.S.W. winds, reign during a great portion of the year on the southern
coast of the isthmus. The first of these two atmospheric currents is not felt
at 60 miles east of Ventosa, beyond the Barra de Tonala; nor at 62 miles
west, beyond the mountain of Chahuhe, which bounds on the west the lagoon
of Tengulunda.
The N.N.E. wind usually begins to blow about the 15th of October and
ceases in the fore part of April. In the month of November it blows without
interruption, and at that time it reaches its maximum. Towards the middle
of December it ceases during intervals of from 10 to 12 days, and then begins
anew to blow one or two weeks. These alterations or interruptions and
renewals are reproduced at short and unequal periods. But the length of the
period of discontinuance goes on gradually increasing till the wind only blows
one day, and finally ceases completely.
The Indians of Santa Maria del Mar are familiar with the indications
announcing the coming of the N.N.E. winds.     In the evening at aboutMORRO AYUCA AND GUATULCO,
81
sun-down, if the summits of the mountains of Guichioovi and San Miguel
Chimalapa (seen from the coast) are concealed from the view by quantities of
slate-coloured vapour, it is indicative that the " northers" will blow the day
following, and will last as many days as the summits of those Cordilleras continue to be covered with similar clouds. Vapour of a corresponding hue, seen
at the same hour, at the horizon of the Pacific ocean, announces that the
S.S.W. wind will blow on the day following.
The S.S.W. wind, which in winter succeeds the North wind, during one or
two days at most, is the only general wind prevailing during the months of
June, July, and August. After some gales of more or less intensity, which
may be compared to the violence of the North wind, and not exceeding l£ to
2 hours' duration, the southerly wind is definitely fixed. Towards evening its
intensity decreases till the next morning, when the same phenomenon is
renewed.    Still, this wind is subject to more interruption than the North wind,
passing over the
which at certain
and the intervals of repose last longer.    The S.S.W. wind
ocean, reaches the coast of the isthmus laden with vapours,
hours of the day resolve themselves into abundant.showers.
In winter and in summer, during the prevalence of the southerly and
northerly winds, the current of the sea is from east to west; its greatest
velocity is about l£ miles per hour. This continual movement in the waters
of the Pacific is only discernible at a distance of about 6000 feet from the
shores of Ventosa.
The bay of Ventosa is much safer than the harbour of Vera Cruz. Violent
tempests frequently render the latter inaccessible during several days, and
even when the North wind blows, the communication between the town and the
vessels in the harbour is interrupted. During our sojourn at the isthmus of
Tehuantepec, we never had to record one tempest or hurricane on the
Pacific ocean.
In December 1850, while we were at Ventosa, the N.N.E. wind blew (off
shore) with extreme violence from the 7th to the 17th of that month, and we
remarked, with surprise, that the sea was not agitated.
To enable one to appreciate the condition of the sea at Ventosa, such as it
actually is, it would perhaps be well here to mention that our soundings were
effected by means of an open boat, 5 feet beam by 18 feet long, which we had
brought from New Orleans, and which was conveyed across the cordillera;
with this boat we were able to sail out 8 miles into the open sea."
Morro Ayuca.—From Ventosa bay the coast trends in a W.S.W.-ly
direction, about 40 miles to the Morro Ayuca, and is but little known. This
is the southern point of an open bay, the extent of which is about l£ miles,
and whose shore is low and sandy. Here vessels may anchor in 6 or
7 fethoms, fine sand, at £ of a mile from the land, but only when the wind is
from northward, for a strong wind from southward or south-eastward sends in
so heavy a sea as greatly to endanger the vessel being driven on shore.
A reef, with a depth of 8 and 4 fathoms almost close to it, surrounds the
Morro for a short distance, and extends from its northern side about l£ cables'
length; some of the rocks are, we believe, always visible. The Morro is a
bold clifiy point, and its position, according to Sir E. Belcher, R.N., is lat.
15° 61' 56", long. 95° 43' 56".
Guatulco.—From the Morro Ayuca the coast continues to trend in a
similar direction as that just mentioned, about 25 miles to the little harbour
of Guatulco, which according to Sir. E. Belcher, R.N., is in lat. 15° 44' 24",w§\
82
GUATULCO.
long. 96° 8'. It is formed by a rocky point whioh encloses on its west side a
bay having a width not exceeding £ of a mile, and whioh extends nearly £ a
mile to the north-westward. The soundings are 9 to 4 fathoms, gradually
decreasing to the beach at its head; a flat of 1^ to 2£ fathoms extends from
its north-eastern side nearly a cable's length, so that the deepest water is in
the middle or over to the south side of the bay. A reef, having some rocks
upon it above water, extends out in an easterly direotion from the rooky point
about l£ oables length; and, outside this a short distance, but separated from
it by a narrow channel of 10 fathoms, arc some rocky islets, having sunken
rocks about them.
Port Guatulco affords shelter from all winds except those from south-eastward, whioh blow directly in; hence it is a convenient anchorage in the
summer months.
Mr. Masters says of Guatulco and the ooast eastward of it* " On entering
the gulf of Tehuantepeo, near the shore, we found the current setting to the
W.S.W. 1$- miles per hour. As the wind was easterly and light, we made a
stretoh to the southward, and in lat. 16°, long. 95° 80', I had a boat lowered
and tried the current, and found it setting S.S.E., 1 mile per hour; there had
been a fresh breeze from the eastward the day previously. The following
afternoon we were close in-shore, and found, as we approached the land, that
the current had gradually altered, and was setting to the W.S.W. We came
to an anohor the same evening in the bay of Bamba, whioh is to the southwest of Morro de Zipegua, the current setting to the W.S.W. nearly 2 miles
per hour. After a fresh S.W. or southerly sea breeze, the current close inshore has run to the S.E., but this is not general, and does not last a long
time.
Whilst we were getting to the eastward in the gulf of Tehuantepeo, we
experienced a slight cl norther" ; as we stretched off-shore it hauled into the
N.E.; a disagreeable short sea arose, the wind blowing in gusts, and the
weather hazy.
Santa Cruz, port of Guatulco, in lat. 15° 51', long. 96° 17', is very diffioult
to make. It is situated in a small bay, about £ a mile wide at its entrance,
and runs in northward upwards of 1A miles. At the bottom of the bay is a
sandy beaoh, and on its eastern side are two huts whioh cannot be seen unless
olose in-shore. About $• of a mile E.S.E. from the eastern point of the bay
is the Piedra Blanca, a root' of rooks extending east and west about a £ of a
mile. The western part of the reef is about 40 feet high, and for about one-
third of its length it is of the same elevation, but the remaining two-thirds to
the eastward is low, and in places level with the water. When abreast of it,
and off shore a few miles, it appears to be a part of the coast. Although it is
called Piedra Blanca, it is a dark irregularly-shaped reef of rooks.
The anchorage in Santa Cruz is said to be good. It is well sheltered from
all winds except between East and S.E. by S.; but, as the strongest winds
blow from northward, exoept in the rainy season, it may be considered a very
safe port. It is the only place that can be considered a harbour, eastward of
Aoapulco ; and even in the rainy season, I was informed, a vessel might lie
* Nautical Magazine 1839.—The positions of Mr. Masters are about 7 miles northward and 9 miles westward of those by Sir E. Belcher. The whole of this ooast is vow
imperfeotly known, and many of the places mentioned by Mr. Masters cannot be recognised
on existing charts.GUATULCO.
83
there in perfect security.    The depth of water in the bay is from 7 to 9
fathoms, with a clear bottom.
About 3 miles E.N.E. from Santa- Cruz, is the island Tangolatangola,
which is separated from the main by a channel a. £ of a mile wide. This
makes from the westward as a part of the main land; the outer part of it is
quite bluff, or rather a cliff of a brownish stone, the strata of which are horizontal, and have the same geological appearance as the land on the main
nearest it towards the N.E., and of the same height, namely, about 150 feet.
Within the island and round the western side, is the entrance of the bay of
Tangolatangola; it runs in about N.E., 2 miles. At the bottom of the bay
is a fine sandy beach. The anchorage is said to be very good in it, but not
equal to Santa Cruz. Its entrance is nearly a mile across, and continues
nearly the same to the bottom.
Westward, £ a mile from the head which forms the western part of the bay
or harbour of Santa Cruz, is a bluff point or head, under which is a good
leading-mark for knowing the harbour. There is a cave in one of the rocks,
level with the water, and close in-shore, and every swell that heaves in throws
a quantity of water into it, and as the cave has a small aperture in the upper
part of it, the water flies up resembling the spout of a large whale. It has
often been taken for one by strangers, and deceived us by its appearance.
In the night time, or foggy weather, when it is calm, or blowing a light breeze,
the sound can be heard at some distance, like a whale blowing. This place
is called the Bufadero.
When about 5 miles off the shore from the Bufadero, the western extreme
point of land has a broken rocky appearance, and is not so high as the land
adjoining. When about 2 leagues off-shore from the Bufadero, another cape,
farther westward, can be seen. Its extreme point is rather low, but rises
gradually inland to a moderate elevation.
Westward of Santa Cruz are two bluff heads, which, when abreast of, might
be taken for islands. The first is about 3 miles from the port; the other is
2 miles further westward, and has a white sandy beach on its western side.
On the eastern side of the eastern head there is also a small sandy beach,
from which to the Bufadero the coast is rocky. The land which crowns this
part of the coast is covered with stunted trees and brushwood. About 4 or 5
leagues N. 8° 30' W. is the Cerro Zadan, having a bell-shaped top, and a
ridge on the north-east side connecting it with the higher range of the Cordilleras. The Cerro Zadan is elevated above the sea rather more than 6000
feet. The mountains further inland, a few leagues, cannot be much short of
10,000 feet high, as they can be seen over the Cerro Zadan.
The port of Guatulco is so bad to make, that vessels have been upwards of
a fortnight in searching for it; and it was by the greatest chance possible
that we had not passed it, although we were not l£ miles from the shore.
The two huts, which were on the beach, can scarcely be distinguished from
the trees near which they are built.
From Morro de Ystapa the coast runs about E.N.E. to Punta de Zipegua,
in lat. 16° 1', long. 95° 28' 30". Between these points are several
bluff headlands, which do not project far out from the general line of
the coast, and afford no shelter. Punta de Zipegua forms the eastern
part of what is called the bay of Bamba, and is a very remarkable headland. From the westward it shows itself with a bold dark cliff to the sea,
about 400 feet high. It projects out from the western line of coast nearly a
g 25
84
GUATULCO
mile, making like a double head. A short distance within the outer
bluff is a peaked hill, with the appearance of a ligh-coloured sandstone, and
quite bare of vegetation. Further inland, between 1 and 2 miles, the ground
rises higher, in small hummocks, a few of which are quite bare, and others
have a small quantity of stunted trees and bushes scattered over them.
The head, forming the western side of the bay of Bamba, is not so high,
nor does it rise so suddenly from the sea as Punta de Zipegua. It is also
covered with bushes. The eastern side of Punta de Ziqegua is covered with
bushes and trees, the sand only showing through the soil in a very few places.
When abreast of it, and off the shore from 2 to 8 miles, the current was
running to windward W.S.W., from 2£ to 3 miles an hour. About N.E. from
Punta de Zipegua, 4 or 5 miles, is a high reef of rocks called Piedra de Zipegua, or Machaguista, in the chart island of Eschevan. Its greatest elevation
is from 60 to 70 feet; and its length is about £ of a mile in an E.S.E. and
W.N.W. direction. It is said that there are no dangers near it but what can
be seen. Between it and the main, from which it is about 4 miles distant, in
a N.W. direction, is good anchorage; the best anchorage is close to the reef.
The pearl oysters are plentiful near this reef; they are caught by the divers
in the rainy season. The general line of coast, from Punta de Zipegua towards
Tehuantepec, runs about N.E. by N. easterly.
As I had now passed northward and eastward of the position where, by my
instructions, I was led to believe our cargo was, we hauled to the wind, with
a fresh breeze from the southward, and made a tack or two to fetch the bay of
Bamba. At 4h. p.m. we came to anchor abreast the western part of the
beach, in 9 fathoms, sandy bottom, off-shore l£ miles. As soon as we
anchored, I went on shore to ascertain where the wood was cut for our cargo,
and, with difficulty, got to speak with an Indian, who was greatly alarmed at
seeing such a large canoe (as he called the brig), and thought we were come
to plunder the coast. His companion ran off to the woods, and he appeared
likely to follow; but, when I got within speaking distance, regained his confidence, and replied in answer to my enquiry—? What made them afraid ?' ' My
companion, who is gone, is afraid; I am a valient fellow!' He certainly
appeared to have the valour of a goose; his heart was beating against his
sides, as if they would burst. We had not been many minutes together when
he wanted to go aboard, and engage himself as my servant, that he might see
the world; but then, said he, 'I am in debt to my master, so I can't go.' It
is a common practice with the landholders of Mexico to get their workmen in
debt, particularly if he is a good man; which secures their services equally,
or probably more than if they were slaves, as they are compelled, if they have
no cash to work it out.'
Shortly after I landed, the proprietor came down on horseback, and stated
that he believed there was some Brazil wood at a place called Rosario, (in my
instructions it was called St. Francis de Guatulco), and that Rosario was
several leagues nearer Guatulco. He said that ours was the only vessel larger
than a canoe, that had been on this part of the coast for a great number of
years. No vessel had ever loaded hereabouts. The beach, or Playa de
Bamba, is about 5 miles long, and must be very bad to land on, with a fresh
sea breeze. There was more surf on it when we landed than was quite
agreeable; and the boat was half-filled, although the wind was blowing along
the coast. We remained at anchor until the morning, and got under way
with the land breeze, keeping at about £ a mile from the shore, exceptingGUATULCO.
85
when abreast of the headlands. In the evening we came again to an anchor,
in 9 fathoms, sandy bottom, opposite a small sandy beach, 1^ miles from the
shore; having seen nothing during the day like wood piled up, or anything in
the shape of a signal. In the morning we again got under way, and stood to
the westward; and at lOh. a.m. were off the port of Guatulco. I sent the
boat on shore to enquire for the place where our cargo way lying; an Indian
got into the boat, as they were shoving off, with the intention of seeing the
vessel; from him I learned that we had passed it, and, as he knew the place,
I kept him on board, and made all sail, with the wind S.W., for the place,
and at 6h. p.m. came to an anchor in the bay of Rosario. The consignees
came on board before we were at anchor, and, by their talk, I expected to get
loaded in a week; instead of which we lay there three weeks before the canoes
arrived, or before they were prepared for shipping the wood off.
The town of Guatulco is 8 leagues from the port, and this is the only port
in the state of Oajaca, where goods can be imported. Its commerce can be
easily imagined, when the person who is administrator of the customs, is also
captain of the port, &c.; indeed he is the only individual, both in the marine
and custom-house departments, with the exception of an old man, who lives at
the port, and sends him information when there is any arrival. Mexican
vessels can load on the coast by having an order from any custom-house in
the Republic where they may have touched at; but foreign vessels are compelled to touch at Santa Cruz to pass the custom-house visit.
From the island Tangolatangola to the bay of Rosario there are several
small headlands, which do not project much beyond the general line of coast,
with the exception of Morro de las Salinas de Rosario. Most of them have a
steep cliff facing the sea, with fine sandy beaches between them, at the back
of which are scattered a few small trees and bushes; the land rising in very
irregular-shaped hills towards the cordilleras. Abreast of the beaches,
between the heads, I found the anchorage quite clear; and when in 9 to 12
fathoms water, the distance off-shore is about a mile, with sandy bottom.
The west side of the bay of Rosario is formed by the Morro de las Salinas
de Rosario, and is in lat. 15° 50' 25", long. 96° 2'. It projects about a mile
beyond the line of coast. On its western side is a beach 4 or 5 miles in
length to the next head. When abreast of Morro de las Salinas, it appears
like an island with two large rocks abreast of its eastern and western part, but
the whole is connected with the main. What appears to be the eastern rock,
is a broken rocky head, about 160 feet high. The western is about half that
elevation. Both these heads terminate with a broken cliff; the tops of them
are bare and of a greyish colour, but the lower part is quite black, caused by
the sea breaking against them. Between these heads is a small sandy bay, at
the foot of the Morro, which rises gradually from the beach to the top of the
hill; this is about 180 to 200 feet high, and presents a very barren appearance, having but a few straggling bushes on it. The beach of Rosario is 10
miles long, from Morro de las Salinas to Morro de la Laguna Grande, which
is its eastern extremity. At about half the distance between the Morros, is a
rock on the beach, about 40 feet high, and nearly the same diameter at spring
tides.    The water flows round it.
During the time of our lying in the bay of Rosario, which was from the
12th of February to the 1st of April, we had three smart | northers," which
came on at the full and change of the moon. At this time the surf runs very
heavy on the beach.    Our boat was capsized several times while we lay here,
tffl
m86
GUATULCO.
in landing and coming off. At times the sea broke very heavily in all parts of
the bay, that is, on the beach. I was caught on shore, a few days after
arriving here, during the first " norther", which came on suddenly, with a
parching hot wind. A cross confused sea hove in from the south and northeast. The wind must have blown strongly out in the gulf, from the same
direction; and, though it blew heavily for three days, with the wind at times
to the westward of North, the sea kept up until some time after the " norther"
had ceased blowing. This is not generally the case, for a strong " norther" (and
particularly if it veers round to N.N.W.,) beats the sea down; at which time
the landing is attended with little or no risk, which was the case when we had
the last two "northers". I was informed (and, judging from appearances, I
think correctly,) that very often when the wind is in N. or N.N.W., close inshore, it is N.E. in the offing, which makes it impossible to land on the coast.
I remarked, whilst lying here, at the full and change of the moon, and when
no "norther" was blowing, that, although the surf ran so high that no boat could
land, the vessel lay without any motion. We were moored at less than 300
fathoms from the shore. The surf appeared not to be caused by a swell
rolling in and agitating the sea at the surface, but to rise from below, and
without any apparent cause, as we had light winds and fine weather the most
of the time we lay here. On another occasion, I was caught on shore with a
boat's crew for three days. In attempting to get off to the ship, the boat was
capsized and stove. It was then, and had been for a week previous, nearly a
calm. The heavy ground-swell invariably hove in from the S.S.W. We
fortunately escaped from this beach without losing any of our people, which
was more than I expected, having had three laid up at different times, who
were saved from being drowned by a mere chance.
In addition to what has been said about this part of the coast, it can be
known by the low land at the back of the beach of Rosario, which runs in
from 1 to 2£ leagues before there is much rise in it, and is thickly covered
with trees. From North to N.W. of Morro de las Salinas, nearly 2 leagues
from shore, the rising ground is formed by a number of small barren hillocks.
From our anchorage, at the place were we loaded, the following bearings were
taken, lying in 9£ fathoms, sandy bottom. There are two large patches of a
whitish appearance, the farthest range of the Cordilleras; the eastern is the
lowest, and bore N. 59£° W. The appearance cannot be seen, unless from a
little to westward of Morro de las Salinas. This has every appearance of
being a waterfall, and rises from the other patch in a N.W. direction, at
about an angle of 45°. It issues from a small valley in the Cerro del Chonga.
The highest point of this range has but a small elevation above it, and is
covered with trees. The waterfall inclines towards the south, and can be
seen for several hundred feet descending, before it is lost sight of amidst the
forrest below. Cerro de Zadan bore N. 89° W.; the extreme bluff of Morro
de las Salinas, S. 86° W., S£ miles; the eastern point well within the bearings, and Punta de la Laguna Grande, N. 71° E., 6 fa
7 miles; the rock on
the beach, mentioned as being 40 feet high, N. 65° E.; and the galena or
shed, under which the cargo was piled, N. 26° W., £ a mile.
At the western part of the bay are four palm-trees, close to the beach.
The distance from the Morro de las Salinas is about £ a mile, and between
these trees and the Morro is a larger cluster of palms. Between these two
clusters is, at all times, the best place to land, as a boat can beach here with
comparative safety, when, at every other part of the bay, the sea runs verySACRIFICIOS.
87
heavy. At the neaps we found the place quite smooth, with the exception of
a sea heaving in about every 10 or 15 minutes; but it causes no risk to a
boat, provided she is kept end on.
At the south-western part of the beach, and where a small pathway leads
to cross the Morro de las Salinas, close to the sea side, in the cliff of a rock
is a small spring of excellent water. We always found it clear and cool, even
at noon; my consignee said we could fill the ship's stock of water from it
with dispatch, but I soon found out that he knew nothing about it. The
quantity that could be filled in a day did not exceed 30 gallons; and, after
having landed all our water-casks, we had to re-ship them, through a great
deal of surf, and land them at the galena, abreast of the ship. We filled our
water at a well about a mile from the beach, but the supply was very limited,
it being the only well that had water in it up to the day of our sailing. We
did not complete our stock.
A captain of a ship should trust to no promises when he comes here, either
with regard to supplies or anything else, no matter by whom made; and, as
water and fuel are indispensable articles, the filling the one and cutting the
other, should be commenced immediately on arrival, by some of the crew.
It is useless to employ Indians to work for the ship (that is, on shore), as the
greatest part of them will neither be led or driven. On board they answer
better (that is, a few of them), to haul the wood about in the hold. I found
the promises of Indians, and, as they call themselves, j Gents decente y civila-
zado,1 on a par.
Near the Morro de la Laguna is a large lake, from which the headland
takes its name. A few miles farther eastward is the Morro de Santiago de
Ystapa (in the chart it is called Morro de Ayuta), near which is the entrance
of the small river Ayuta, the stream that runs by Huamilulu and Ystapa.
There is a bar across,the entrance. The canoes land on the beach in prefer-
*ence to going over it, as it is attended with danger."
Sacrificios is a little port situated about 10 miles south-westward from
Guatulco, In front of it is a small islet, about f of a mile across, which
shelters the bay from easterly winds. The depth is about 4 fathoms on sand.
The position assigned to the bay is lat. 15° 44', long. 96° 19' 7". It is high
water on the days of full and change of the moon at 3h. 15m. p.m. ; the rise
of tide is about 6 feet.
The Coast.—Acapulco is distant about 210 miles westward from port
Sacrificios ; the coast between has not been surveyed; it is consequently but
little known, and should have a wide berth given to it. A sunken rock is
inserted in some charts opposite the river Dulce, on the authority of the ship
Clio, at about 3 miles from the shore, in lat. 16° 28', long. 98° 44'; the
depth around it is stated to be 6 fathoms.
Captain Miguel Garcier, coast pilot at Acapulco, states, that from 2 to 3
miles off Cuacaul point (which is about 12 miles S.E. of the river Dulce and
the first break in the sandy head to the eastward) there is deep water and
anchorage in 8 to 10 fathoms; thence a shoal extends upwards of 4 miles
seaward, breaking in the rainy season with S.W. gales, and having as little as
10 feet water on it,—and this information has been corroborated by the
evidence of the captains of several coasting schooners. H.M.S. Tartar, when
standing along this part of the coast on the 4th of March 1863, grounded on
a shoal south-east of the river Dulce, in lat. 16° 11', long. 98° 32'; the
vessel's draught was 18 feet, but the least water obtained was S£ fathoms.it  . ■",*•!;
I
88
ACAPULCO.
ACAPULCO.—The port of Acapulco consists of a bay about 1£ miles
deep and having an extent from East to West of about 3 miles, in which are
soundings of 20 to 10 and 7 fathoms. It is considered to be the finest harbour in Central America; and, for its size, one of the most complete in the
world. It affords sheltered and land-locked anchorage in 16 fathoms and
under in an extent of about 1 mile square; which, allowing for moorings, would,
at half-a-cable range, or one cable asunder, accommodate 100 sail of vessels,
even of the line. The bottom is sandy at its surface, but clayey beneath, and
holds well,
All round the harbour, on every side, are high mountains, which, on the
north and east sides, range from 2000 to 2700 feet in height, and on the
west side from 300 to 500 feet. They afford considerable shelter to the harbour, and may be seen at a great distance at sea.
Eastward of the port, and just outside the entrance, is a little bay named
port Marques, having an extent of about l£ miles in an easterly direction.
The soundings in it are 20 to 5 fathoms, mud, sand and rock, and there is
good shelter from all but westerly winds, which blow directly in. Its southern
point, named Diamante, has a reef extending from it a short distance; there
is also a small islet or rock on the north side of the bay at about a cable's
length from the shore, and at nearly the head of the bay is a sunken rock;—
these can be easily avoided. Vessels seldom enter port Marques, the bay of
Acapulco possessing superior advantages.
Westward of the port and also immediately outside the entrance, is an
island named Roqueta or Grifo, which extends nearly East and West 1 mile
and is of very irregular shape, but is about £ of a mile across in its broadest
part, the middle. Its eastern and western extremities have each a reef
extending seaward nearly l£ cables' length, parts of which are above water;
in other respects the island is clear of any known sunken danger beyond a
moderate offing. At a £ of a mile from the island, there is a small islet or rock,
50 feet high, named Morro, outside of which is a depth of 20 fathoms. The
passage between Roqueta island and the shore is about two cables' length
wide, in its narrowest part, and has a depth of 16 to 20 fathoms; it is known
as the Boca Chica, while the channel between the east and west points of the
harbour is termed the Boca Grande.
At £ of a mile almost due East from the Morro islet, is a rock only 4 feet
above the water, and having a depth close to it of 10 and 12 fathoms. Its
position is a dangerous one to vessels making Acapulco from westward, and
rounding Grifo island rather closely.
The town of Acapulco is on the west side of the port, and has long been in
a state of decline, owing to the bad custom-house regulations, which cripple
the energies of its merchants. Its market is but indifferently supplied; but
fowls, and excellent fruit and vegetables, are readily obtained. Its position,
from observations taken at the fort by Captain Beechey, R.N., is lat. 16° 50' 82",
long. 99° 50' 44".
In the north part of the bay are some rocks, named San Lorenzo, situated
at a short distance from the shore, between which is no safe passage. About
£ a mile eastward of these is another rocky islet, called Obispo, of a white
oolour, and about 148 feet high. The depth on the seaward side of these
rocks is 7 to 10 fathoms.*
* A rock, nearly awash at low tide, was discovered some years ago in the northern part
of Acapulco hay by the French ship Seriease striking upon it.   The depth over it wasACAPULCO.
89
Some mountains north-westward of Acapulco bay, named the Paps of
Coyuca, are considered to be a good mark by which the situation of the bay
may be known. The following remarks are by Captain G. H. Richards, R.N.,
of H.M.S. Hecate 1863 :—
" The port of Acapulco is 90 miles in an E. by S. £ S. direction from Mangrove bluff, subsequently mentioned. In approaching it from westward the
Paps of Coyuca are a good guide; they are two distinct conical summits, and
the mountain is about 4000 feet high; it lies N.W. by N. nearly 30 miles
from Acapulco, and 20 from the coast. The land westward of Acapulco is
high. At the distance of 10 or 12 miles from the coast two distinct ranges
are seen ; the nearer one about 2500 feet high ; and the more distant one, of
which the Paps form a portion, over 4000 feet. When the Paps of Coyuca
bear N. by E. £ E., a red stripe, or land-slip will be seen on the coast right
under them. A square table-topped mountain rises just westward of Acapulco,
to between 2000 and 3000 feet. When within 8 or 10 miles of the port,
Roqueta island is seen, which has a high, yellow, cliffy coast; as also the
point of the main land northward, forming the entrance of the Boca Chica.
Diamante point, which appears as the eastern extreme of the land, shows
as an island at the distance of 7 or 8 miles; the head of port Marques, of
which it forms the south point of entrance, being low. Making Acapulco,
from the south-west or southward, the entrance is remarkable, from the
yellowish cliffs of Diamante point, and Roqueta island which may be seen at
a considerable distance. The Paps of Coyuca are also seen, but the eastern
peak appears cut off. There is also a white wooden tower on the summit of
Roqueta island, which is used for a lighthouse and seen 6 or 7 miles off. The
light is only exhibited when the Pacific mail steam company's vessels are
expected."
Sir Edward Belcher, R.N., says " I cannot persuade myself that the Paps
of Coyuca are useful for making the harbour, although in the offing they may
be if not obscured. Acapulco may be approached from southward or westward, by keeping the western cone open of the land, which will lead up to the
Boca Chica entrance, or until Acapulco port is so close under the lee, that no
further marks are necessary. There is not any hidden danger in the entrance
to Acapulco. Keep a moderate distance from either shore; 5 fathoms will be
found alongside all the rocks, and 25 to 30 in mid-channel. Round point
Grifo (the western point of the harbour) sharply, rather than stand over to
San Lorenzo, as the wind, generally westerly, heads on that shore. If
working, tack when the rocks on the south point of Town bay show in the gap.
The two best berths are off the rocks alluded to ; that outside is preferable,
but in either case let the outer rock bear W.S.W. or W.N.W., so that a
hawser fast to the rock may keep your broadside to land or sea breezes, and
prevent a foul anchor.
It would naturally be inferred that, as the harbour is surrounded on every
side by high mountains, the breeze would scarcely be felt and the heat be
intolerable. This is confined to the town limits; at our observatory, and at
the port, San Carlos, we enjoyed a constant breeze.
In all harbours there may be objectionable berths, but in that of Acapulco,
if care be taken to keep in the line of what I have designated the ' West Gap,'
15 feet (?) and the position assigned to it was, 1000 metres or 1093 yards N. 76° E., true
from fort San Diego, which places it nearly on a supposed line from the fort to Obispo islet.90
SIHUATANEJO.
I
I
ii
J
t is
or neck of the peninsula, open of the south point of the town bay, both land
and sea breezes will be felt in their full strength, and free from causes which
would heat them before entering the port, the neck being but a few feet above
the sea-level.
Water of good quality was found at several points between the fort and
Obispo rock; but the two best streams are between the fort and San Lorenzo."
M. de Petit-Thouars of the French surveying vessel Venus, 1888, says
" The currents are not felt in the road, but, outside it they run to the S.E.
with a strength varying from a £ to 2 miles. This current is more rapid
during the ebb.
In the fine season, that is to say, from December to May, the land and sea
breezes are regular enough. They are feeble during the night, coming from
N. to N.E. and E.; and from S.W. to W.S.W. and to N.W. in the day. In
the other months of the year this coast is dangerous, and but little frequented.
The usual anchorage is to the south of the fort, and before the town, in
11 to 13 fathoms, muddy bottom; it is perfectly safe. In case of necessity,
anchorage can also be obtained in the Boca Grande."
It is high water at Acapulco on the days of full and change of the moon at
3h. 6m.; the rise of tide is about 1£ feet. We believe that a small light is
shown on point Grifo, and another on the south-east end of Roqueta island,
when the steamers of the Pacific Mail Company are expected.
The Coast.—From Acapulco bay the coast trends about 80 miles in a
W. by N. £ N. direction to point Tequepa, on the eastern side of which is the
river Coyuquilla. We have no information of this part of. the coast until we
get to Morro Petatlan, 20 miles further to the north-westward, off which are
some rocks named the White Friars, from their supposed resemblance to a
cross.    They have been described by Lord Anson, in the following manner:—
" The hill of Petatlan may be at first mistaken for an island, although it is
in reality a peninsula, joined to the continent by a low and narrow isthmus,
covered with shrubs and small trees. The bay of Sihuatanejo extends from
this hill a great distance to the westward, and has, at its entrance, just off the
hill of Petatlan, an assemblage of rocks, white with the dung of boobies and
other tropical birds. Four of these rocks are high and large, and, together
with several smaller ones, are, by the aid of a little imagination, made to resemble the form of a cross, and hence are called the White Friars."
SIHUATANEJO, is about 7 miles westward of Petatlan. It is a small
but excellent harbour, of about a mile in extent, and open to all winds from
south-westward. At its entrance are soundings of 10 fethoms, decreasing
gradually towards the head of the bay, where there are 2£ to l£ fathoms. It
has been surveyed by Captain Kellett, R.N., who places it in lat. 17° 88' 8",
long. 101° 30' 52".    Lord Anson has described it in the following terms:—
" It is about 30 leagues westward of Acapulco, and may easily be found by
keeping well in with the land, especially if sailing down the coast from
Acapulco. There is a beach of sand extending 18 leagues from Acapulco to
the westward, against which the sea breaks so violently that we found it impossible to land with our boats ; but yet the ground is so clean, that, during
the feir season, ships may anchor in great safety, at the distance of 1 or
2 miles from the shore. The land adjacent to this beach is generally low,
full of villages, and planted with a great number of trees. On the tops of
some small eminences there are several look-out towers, so that, altogether,
the face of the country presents a very agreeable aspect; for the cultivatedSIHUATANEJO
91
part, which is the part here described, extends some leagues back from the
shore, where it seems to be bounded by a chain of mountains, which extends
a considerable distance on either side of Acapulco.
The beach described above is the surest guide to those seeking Sihuatanejo;
for 5 miles westward of the extremity of the beach there is a hummock, which
at first makes like an island, and is in shape not much unlike the hill of
Petatlan, though much smaller. Three miles westward of this hummock, is
a white rock near the shore, which cannot easily be passed by unobserved.
It is about 2 cables' length from the shore, and lies in a large bay about
9 leagues over, the west point of which is the hill of Petatlan.
The harbour of Sihuatanejo is easily distinguished by a large rock, l£ miles
S. £ W., from the middle of the entrance. I may add that this coast is no
ways to be dreaded between the middle of October and the beginning of May,
nor is there any danger from the winds. In the remaining part of the year,
there are frequent and violent tornadoes, heavy rains, and severe gales, in all
directions of the compass.
' These are the marks by which the harbour may be known by those who
keep well in with the land; but there is no mark for those who keep at a
considerable distance at sea, who must, consequently, make it by the latitude;
for there are so many ranges of mountains rising one upon another inlaad,
that no drawings of the appearance of the coast can be at all depended on,
every little change of distance or position bringing new mountains into view,
and producing an infinity of different prospects, which render all attempts at
delineating the appearance of the land impossible.
The entrance of the harbour is but £ a mile broad; the points which form
it, and which are faced with rocks almost perpendicular, bearing from each
other S.E. and N.W. The harbour is surrounded on every side, excepting
the western, with high mountains' covered with trees. The passage in is very
safe, on either side of the rock that lies off the entrance, though we, both in
going in and out, left it to the eastward. The ground without the harbour is
gravel mixed with stones, but within is soft mud. It is necessary, when
coming to an anchor, to make a good allowance for a great swell, which frequently causes a great send of the sea; as, likewise, for the ebbing and
flowing of the tide, which we observed to be about 5 feet, and to set nearly
East and West.
The watering-place is at the head of the bay. During our stay it had the
appearance of a large standing lake, without any visible outlet into the sea,
from which it is separated by the strand. The origin of this lake is a spring,
which bubbles out of the ground nearly £ a mile inland. We found the water
a little brackish, but more considerably so towards the sea-side ; for the nearer
we advanced towards the spring-head, the softer and fresher it proved. This
laid us under the necessity of filling our casks from the farthest part of the
lake, and occasioned us some trouble; and would have proved still more
difficult, had it not been for our particular management, which, on account of
its convenience, deserves to be recommended to all watering at this place.
Our method consisted in making use of canoes drawing but little water ; for,
on loading them with a number of small casks, they easily got up the lake to
the spring-head, and the small casks being there fillled, were in the same
manner transported back to the beach, where were some of the hands to put
them into casks of a larger size.92
SIHUATANEJO.
Though this lake, during our visit, appeared to have no outlet to the sea,
yet there is reason to suppose that in the rainy season it overflows the strand
and communicates with the sea, for Dampier speaks of it as a large river.
Indeed it is necessary that a vast body of water should be amassed before it
can rise high enough to overflow the strand, since the neighbouring lands are
so low that a great part of them must be eovered with water before it can run
out over the beach."
Tlte Coast.—From Sihuatanejo harbour the coast trends north-westward
and westward about 56 miles to a low, well-defined point of land, named
Mangrove bluff, situated in lat. 17° 54' 5", long. 102° 12' 41", and forms
thereby a large open bay, at the head of which are what are termed in the
charts, the Canuta or Salt-pits. Over the east side of Salt-pit bay is a high
and very remarkable mountain.*
At a short distance from the north-west side of Sihuatanejo harbour, are
three white islets or rocks, known as the Blancos islets, of which the easternmost, is the largest; they are square in form and not unlike a haystack in
shape; and are very conspicuous from the ofling.
The depth at nearly 2 miles immediately south of Mangrove bluff, is only
14 fathoms, on a shingle bottom, and this depth continues eastward of the
bluff at the same distance from the shore, for about 8 or 4 miles, when it
suddenly deepens. At 8 miles westward of the bluff, singularly enough there
is a depth of 132 fathoms, on mud, at scarcely 2 miles from the beach.
From Mangrove bluff the coast trends W. by N. i N., nearly 50 miles to a
low cliffy headland, named Lizard point, situated in lat. 18° 11', long. 108° 5',
and is throughout nearly straight and without any remarkable feature. Some
of the mountains close to the sea are 1100 feet high, and at 6 miles eastward
from the point is one which rises to the height of 1500 to 2000 feet. The
soundings at 6 miles westward from the bluff, and 8 miles off shore, are 60 to
70 fathoms, mud, which soon decreases to 40 and 85 fathoms, and this latter
depth is maintained for about 8 miles eastward from the point at a
corresponding distance from the land,—namely 8 miles.
From Lizard point, the coast (which is generally steep and rises abruptly to
the height of 2000 feet) continues to trend W. by N. ^ N., a distance of
26 miles to Tejupan bluff, a bold cliffy point, having two small rocky islets off
it. At 10 miles before reaching the bluff there is a bold projecting point of
land, known as White Rock point, from the circumstance that three white
rocks lie off it in an E.S.E. direction; inside of these rocks is a fertile looking
spot with a village, and probably binding and shelter for boats.
At about 11 miles from the sea, and nearly midway between Lizard point
and Tejupan bluff, is the mountain named the Paps of Tejupan. It is 6800
feet high, has a double nipple summit, and appears conspicuously to a vessel
passing up or down the coast, but not so distinctly when viewed directly from
seaward, as it is then overshadowed by the ranges of more lofty mountains
behind it.
From Tejupan bluff, the coast, composed alternately of sandy beach and
high cliff, trends about N.N.W. to Black head, a distance of 18 miles.    The
» A little river, the Sacatula, is represented in an old chart as falling into the sea on
the east side of Mangrove bluff, but Captain Richards, B.N., says that if there is a stream
it most be a very small one, for nothing of the kind could be distinguished from the masthead at the distance of 1J miles.MANZANTLLA BAY.
98
hills rise in successive ranges parallel with the coast-line ; those near the sea
have an estimated height of 1500 to 2000 feet, while those further in land are
much higher. Black head, in lat. 18° 36' 18", long. 103° 41' 51", is a cliffy
peninsula, connected to the shore by a sandy neck. A small white rock,
47 feet high, lies ^ a mile N.W. of the northern extreme of the peninsula, and
a bay (where there is anchorage in fine weather in 14 fathoms at l£ miles
from the shore) lies northward of the rock. There is also anchorage in
16 fathoms at about 7 miles south-eastward from the head, at 1 mile from
the shore.
The depth at 3 miles off Tejupan bluff is very great, as the bottom was not
reached by the surveyors with a line of 172 fathoms, and this deep water was
found to exist, at a similar distance from shore, for 26 miles eastward of the
bluff or as far as Lizard point. Northward of the bluff, this deep water is
succeeded by soundings of 55 to 40 fathoms, decreasing as Black head is
approached, off which, at 2 miles due West, is a depth of 33 fathoms, sand.
The mountains in the interior of this part of Central America are very lofty.
That named Colima, 12,003 feet high, the summit of which is estimated to be
in lat. 19° 24' 42", long. 103° 33' 1", is very remarkable when seen distinctly;
but the haze, which generally hangs over the distant land, renders this seldom
the case, and it therefore cannot be counted upon as a land-mark. It is a
saddle-shaped mountain, having two sharp conical summits, of apparently
nearly the same height; the horizontal measurement between them from off
Tejupan bluff is 45 miles.
From Black head to the Sail rock, off point San Francisco, the eastern
point of Manzanilla bay, the distance is about 40 miles in a W.N.W. direction.
The coast between is low, being not more than 15 to 20 feet high, and is
fronted by a sandy beach.
MANZANILLA BAY.—Manzanilla and Browning bays (the latter a
small bay immediately north-westward of Manzanilla bay, from which it is
separated only by a little narrow projection of coast, named Pelican point)
have an extent together of about 5 miles in a north-westerly direction ; from a
supposed bine connecting the outer points of these bays the coast recedes
3^ miles. The soundings at the entrance are about 40 fathoms, and these
decrease gradually to the beach, off which at a moderate distance is a depth
of 5 to 8 fathoms. The village of Manzanilla is in the south-east part of the
bay, and consists of only a few huts. Behind it is a large lake which, with
the marshy land surrounding it, makes the port very unhealthy, especially in
the fine season.
In Manzanilla bay there is good shelter from southerly winds but not from
those directly from westward. Browning bay is open to southward, and is
consequently safe only with off-shore winds. The anchorage in Manzanilla
bay is at about i of a mile northward of the houses, in 9 to 10 fathoms, and
it is said that the ground holds well. When approaching either of the bays
from westward, a good look-out must be maintained for the Sisters, a cluster
of rocks above and under water, situated rather more than \ a mile S.S.E.
from Oowlland point, the west extremity of Browning bay.
Manzanilla is the port of Colima, a large city about 90 miles in the interior,
which is reported to have 30,000 inhabitants. It has been open to foreign
vessels a great many years, but is still far from prosperous.
Manzanilla bay was surveyed by Captain G. H. Richards, R.N., in 1863,
and the west end of the village ascertained to be in lat.  19° 3' 13", long.94
MANZANILLA BAY.
in
104° 17' 41". He observes " The bay may be known by the white islet
2£ miles westward of its west point of entrance.* A high rock lies close off
this point; and another white rock (100 feet high) resembling a sail, at a £ of
a mile off the eastern point. From the westward they are both remarkable.
Approaching Manzanilla from westward, the Vigia Grande, a remarkable cone-
shaped hill, will also be seen just inside the Sail rock; it is 740 feet high, and
rises immediately over the anchorage. As neither the houses nor shipping
can be seen from seaward, this is a good mark to steer for, passing from
1£ to 2 miles outside the White islet, and the same distance from the west
point of entrance, when the Vigia Grande will bear E. £ N., and may be
steered for.
This course will lead more than a mile southward of or outside the Sisters,
a group of five rocks, the largest of which is 10 feet high. They lie in a
direct bine between the west point of entrance and the Vigia Grande, distant
from the former 2f miles. A very remarkable table-topped mountain, 2600
feet high, rises over the western point of the bay, and is an excellent guide
for the port. The anchorage is immediately under the Vigia Grande, about
£ of a mile from the village, in 9 or 10 fatboms water; over mud, and good
holding ground.
The bay is safe with all winds except gales from West or S.W., which do
not occur between the months of November and June,—the dry season, and
singularly enough, the least healthy; fevers and ague prevail, more or less, at
all times, but are more fatal during the dry season. It is not recommended
to lie here more than four or five days at a time, and to take an off-shore
berth, where the sea breeze will reach.
Fresh beef and vegetables, as well as other necessaries, can be obtained
here. Fresh water should on no account be received on board; it is
desirable that the crews of vessels should land as seldom as possible, and not be
exposed in boats when avoidable."
The following remarks are by Mr. G. H. E. Horn, of the Hamburg barque
Colima, 1860. " When making the port of Manzanilla, the white rocky
island of Piedra Blanca is an excellent mark, as it is seen from a considerable
distance, standing out in contrast with the darker hue of the coast behind and
of the rocks near it. Having sighted this islet, bring it to bear about
N. by W., when a lofty peak in the interior will bear N. £ W., you
then have Manzanilla, behind point San Francisco, about N. 30° E., on which
course steer for the port. Approaching the coast you will observe the heads
of several islets and rocks that lie about 1 or 2 cables' length off shore and
around which is deep water. From off point San Francisco, the bay has a
regular decreasing depth from 27 fathoms outside to 5 fathoms within a cable's
length of the shore. Give this point a good berth, as off its extremity, at the
distance of about 30 yards, there are several rocks, above and under water ;
it is also advisable not to carry more sail than necessary to keep steerage way
on the vessel, for the harbour of Manzanilla being small you must anchor
* Known as Piedra Blanca, an islet 300 feet high, and in lat. 19° 6', long. 104° 27' 30",
according to the chart of Captain G. H. Richards, R.N. It is 9 miles westward from the
anchorage in the bay, and lies about 1 mile from the shore. It is a J of a mile long,
appearing wedge-shaped when seen from westward, and remarkably white, being the resort
of numerous sea birds. This islet is the mark for Manzanilla bay, and may be seen from
westward immediately on rounding Navidad head, a distance of nearly 20 miles ; it then
appears just inside the extreme of the land. It can be seen easily from a vessel's deck at
a distance of 15 miles, when bearing from E. £ S., round by north to W.N.W.I*.
NAVIDAD BAY.
95
almost immediately you have passed the point. When at the anchorage
vessels can moor in perfect safety within £ a cable's length of the beach;—
it will be much in your favor to bring up as near the shore as possible, as you
can then discharge and load with greater rapidity. Making the bay you must
not expect to see an inhabited place of importance ; to the westward, in the
small harbour of San Antonio,* there is a rancho of eight or nine huts, while
to the eastward, in the harbour of Manzanilla, is the town of the same name,
containing a few houses and about fifty huts, but these are not visible until
you have rounded point San Francisco. The harbour is quite safe in both
seasons.
The crews of vessels frequently suffer from sickness here, occasioned by
exalations from the great swamps near Manzanilla; added to which there is
no good water to be procured in the harbour. By taking a little trouble,
however, as there is a small brook across the bay, about N.W. from the
anchorage, this most necessary article may be procured of tolerable quabity by
persuing the following directions:—
Every vessel bound to Manzanilla ought to be provided-with several strong,
heavily iron-bound hogsheads, fitted with staples for ropes to be made fast to ;
hire in Manzanilla a canoe to land the crew as well as to carry the utensils to the
brook, which is very shallow at the entrance, not allowing an ordinary ship's
boat to enter. For the purpose of filling water you ought to choose, if possible, a very calm day, and stowing the casks to be filled into a long-boat or
launch, moor near the brook, at the back of the surf, as near the shore as
possible, land the men and utensils,—leaving a few hands in the launch to
hoist in the casks ; then fill the hogsheads in the brook and roll them across
the strand into the proximity of the launch; with a running line to the boat
haul the hogsheads alongside through the surf, and start them into the large
casks. It would be advisable to fit the launch with sails, the distance across
the. bay being considerable. Good sport is to be found on the bank of the
brook; wild ducks, geese, snipes, &c, being very abundant. There are also
many aHgators about, but they are very shy, and easily frightened away; with
a little precaution there is nothing to fear from them."
The Coast.—From Manzanilla bay the coast trends W. by N. about 20
miles to cape Graham, the south point of Navidad bay, situated in lat.
19° 10' 30", long. 104° 40' 30". Throughout nearly the whole of this distance
(for 13 miles eastward of the cape), it consists of a low shore, not more than
15 or 20 feet high fronted by a sandy beach, and having behind it a lagoon.
In the interior the land rises in distinct ranges to between 3000 and 4000
feet. On this sandy beach boats may generally land during fine weather, and
there is safe anchorage in 18 fathoms at i a mile from the shore.
Cape Graham is about 700 feet high and has a high peaked rock close to
it, as well as a smaller one, which, however, do not readily appear as detached
from the land from any position that a vessel would be in. There is also a
small rock, (12 feet above low water and always visible, being a few feet above
the surface at high tide) at about \ a mile S.W. from the cape; on account of
this rock, some care is required when approaching Navidad bay from southeastward.
NAVIDAD BAY is formed by cape Graham and a very white projecting
point of land, named Harbour point, 2£ miles N.N.W. from it.    It has sound-
* We suppose that this is Browning bay of Captain Richards' chart.96
NAVIDAD BAY.
ings shoaling from 25 fathoms at the entrance to 6 and 5 fathoms at a short
distance from the beach, or sand. The anchorage is in the north part of the
bay, in 6 to 7 fathoms, under Harbour point which protects it from southwest winds. At nearly 6 miles westward from the anchorage is a bold headland, named Navidad head, which is a conspicious point of land especially
when viewed from north-westward. Navidad head and bay are thus described
by Captain G. H. Richards, R.N., " Navidad head is a wedged-shaped summit,
about 400 feet high, falling in shore to a low neck, and is remarkable when
seen from any direction. On approaching it, within 3 or 4 miles, it is seen
to be an island, separated from the main by a low rocky ledge, which the
water rises over. Off the head are three remarkable rocks, extending in a
south-west direction; the centre one being white, with a smooth round top,
covered with vegetation, and about 70 feet high. These rocks give the head
some slight resemblance to Farralone point, with the Frailes rocks, (9 miles
westward from it) when seen from the north-westward ; but the pecuHar shape
of the wedge island would prevent the possibility of a mistake after the first
glance.
The white rock of Navidad has been mistaken for the white islet of Manzanilla by strangers, and accidents have occurred in consequence, but this
mistake could only have arisen in the absence of any chart. The Navidad
rock is small, the centse of three, and stands off a prominent headland. The
white islet of Manzanilla, 20 miles to the south-eastward, is very much larger,
remarkably white, and stands alone, a mile from the shore, but, being rather
in a bight, cannot be seen projecting from any position a vessel would be in.
Besides the three high rocks off Navidad head, there is a sunken one, which
occasionally breaks, and lies S.E. \ E. from the white rock, distant a short
mile.
After rounding Navidad head from the northward, at the distance of 2
miles, the white sandy beach of Navidad bay will be seen, bearing E. by N.,
distant 7 miles. At 2 miles southward from the white rock of Navidad there
are 60 fathoms water, and steering thence for the anchorage it gradually shoals
to 40 and 30 fathoms. The north beach of Navidad bay is in lat. 19° 18',
long. 104° 41' 25".
As the bay is approached, Harbour point, a very remarkable high white
point, will be seen on the northern shore. Immediately round and inside
this is the anchorage, a very fair stopping place during the fine season, but it
is not recommended for a sailing vessel at other times, as there is a difficulty
in getting out with a S.W. wind;—the best berth is in 7 fathoms water, sandy
bottom, with Harbour point bearing S.S.W. a J of a mile, and the same
distance from the eastern shore of the bay,—sailing vessels may anchor
farther out, with the point bearing West, in 10 or 11 fathoms, but there will
be more swell.
A single house stands in the north hook of the bay, and a la£
oon
within a
few yards of the beach, where the water is fresh, and the natives say good, but
it is not recommended to use it unless a vessel is in distress. At the southeast end of the bay is the north-west end of a long lagoon which here opens
into the sea; a strong stream runs out of it, and there is sufficient depth for
boats at half tide. There is a small village here, and some supplies of fresh
provisions may be obtained. The anchorage off this end of the bay is not
recommended."TENACATITA AND PERULA BAYS.
97
TENACATITA BAY.—From Navidad head the coast turns sharply
northward for nearly 3 miles, and then trends north-westerly for about 5 miles
to Brothers point, the coast between these headlands forming a large bay
named Tenacatita. The direct bearing and distance of Brothers point from
Navidad head are N.W. by W. i W. 5 miles. Brothers point has a rather
remarkable double hill immediately over it, which from northward appears
Hke an island; off the point is a high, square, perpendicular rock, and there
are also some smaller ones about it above water, and others further out which
from their position are dangerous. The most dangerous of the known rocks
are the Porpoise, 7 feet above water, lying l£ miles W. by S. from the point;
and another, upon which the sea breaks, S.E. by S. 3£ cables' length from
the point. On account of these rocks, Brothers point should have a berth of
2 miles.
Tenacatita bay is about 2£ miles deep, and is said to contain one or two
rocks in its north-west part. It has not been examined, and should consequently be entered with caution. It is asserted that there is good anchorage
in its north-west corner, where protection may be obtained from winds from
north-westward.
PERULA BAY.—From Brothers point the coast trends about 18 miles
in a north-westerly direction to Flat Top point, the south extremity of Perula
bay, which may be easily recognised by the remarkable flat-topped mountain,
1100 feet high, which rises over it and is conspicuous from northward and
westward. When running along this shore, the Frailes, situated about 5 miles
from Brothers point, will present themselves to view as two needle-shaped
rocks from 80 to 100 feet high; and at 8 miles from these is a low projecting
point named Farralone.
Perula .bay is formed by Flat Top point and a projection of the coast nearly
7 miles north-westward from it, named Rivas. In its north-west corner there
is excellent anchorage in 8 to 9 fathoms, sand, but unfortunately it is directly
open to southerly winds, which frequently send in a very heavy sea. According to Captain G. H. Richards R.N., whose description of the bay we subjoin,
the position of Rivas point is lat. 19° 34' 31", long. 105° 6' 33".
" Perula bay, a spacious and convenient anchorage, is easily recognised
from any direction by two islands, which lie in the centre of it; the northernmost of which, Passarera, 130 feet high, is remarkable from its perpendicular
white cliffs which are seen from a long distance. Colorado, the southern island,
is rather lower, and has a sfightly reddish appearance. The best anchorage
is in the northern part of the bay. The entrance is between Rivas point and
Passarera island, and is a mile in breadth; the depth of water from 15 to 18
fathoms.
Rivas point is bold and cliffy, with some detached rocks 1$ cable's length
off it, the outer one of which is 30 feet high. From this rock a reef, 2 feet
above high water, and on which the sea always breaks, lies East, distant
l£ cables, with deep water close to it. There is anchorage anywhere within
a bine between Rivas point and Passarera island, in from 10 to 14 fathoms
water, but the most sheltered is with the high rock off Rivas point, bearing
S.W. by S., distant about i a mile, or midway between it and the sandy beach
on the eastern side of the bay, where there are 4 and 5 fathoms at l£ cable's
length from the beach. Small vessels may anchor in the northern bight of
the bay, and be more out of the swell.
At the south-east end of the bay, nearly 4 miles from Rivas point, is theIf
Hi!
98
CAPE CORRIENTES, VALLE DE BANDERAS BAY.
ft;s
village of Chamela. Vessels wishing to anchor near it should enter between
Colofado island and the small islands to the south-east of it; this channel is
f of a mile wide, and free from danger. Large vessels may anchor in 8
fathoms, with the south point of Colorado island bearing S.W. by W., and
the village of Chamela just open of San Pedro island, midway between the
island and the shore of the bay. Small vessels may anchor in 4 fathoms
inside Coeina island, where they will be f of a mile from the village ; inside
this it shoals rapidly,  and off the village there is only 1 fathom of water.
From Passarera island a bar extends to the opposite sandy point of the bay,
distant f of a mile; the least depth of water on it is 3 fathoms, so that
vessels of greater draught cannot pass from the northern anchorage to the
southern part of the bay, but must go outside the islands. The bottom is
sandy, but good holding ground. During the fine season; from November till
June, the sea breeze from N.W. is regular during the day, and the land wind
at night, and the anchorage is perfectly safe; but with S.W. or S.E. winds a
heavy swell sets into every part of the bay.
Supplies of fresh beef, pumpkins, and water-melons may be had at the
village, by giving a day's notice ; there is also good water from a stream close
to it.    Dye-wood is exported, but of an inferior quabty."
The Coast.—From Rivas point the coast trends N.W. $ N. about 60
miles to cape Corrientes, and the land throughout is lofty, rising into peaks of
500 to 1100 feet elevation. When sailing down this coast from north-westward, it will be observed that a sandy beach commences immediately southward
of the cape. Soundings of 45 to 55 fathoms may be obtained at 3 miles from
the land, when 4 miles southward of the cape, and whenever a sandy beach
line is met with, a depth of 19 or 20 fathoms water will generally be found
within a mile of it, where vessels may anchor if necessary. This coast is not
considered safe between June and the end of November, during which time
S.E. and S.W. gales are prevalent, bringing in a heavy sea.
CAPE CORRIENTES is a bold and lofty headland, with rather a flat
summit, which rises to the height of between 2000 and 3000 feet; hence it
is visible from a great distance at sea. Its extreme point is estimated to be
in lat. 20° 25', long. 105° 39' 21". From northward and westward it does
not present a remarkable appearance, but from southward it is bold and projecting. There are no known sunken dangers off it,* and the sea is very deep
in its immediate vicinity as the surveyors when 4 miles westward from it
failed in touching the bottom, although sounding 106 fathoms.
CAPE CORRIENTES TO CAPE SAN LUCAS,
INCLUDING    THE    GULF    OF    CALIFORNIA.
VALLE DE BANDERAS BAY.—From cape Corrientes the coast
suddenly turns to the N.E. by E. £ E. for a distance of about 28 miles, then
* A sunken rock, named Richmond, has been stated to exist at about 13 miles W. } S.
from cape Corrientes, and such is inserted in some old charts of this coast, but upon what
authority is unknown. As the part in question is constantly traversed by the coasters,
who are ignorant of its existance, and the sea is never observed to break there as if over, a
submerged reef, it is believed that the statement has no foundation in fact; there has
been no systematic search for the rook.MARIA ISLANDS.
99
trends Northerly 8 miles, and afterwards almost.due West about 16 miles to a
narrow projecting point of land, known as point Mita; the space included
within these limits is the Valle de Banderas bay. From the cape to the
point the bearing and distance are N.N.E. 24 miles. Off point Mita are
numerous rocky heads, eastward of which, in the northern part of the bay,
there is anchorage in from 6 to 8 fathoms. In the eastern part of the bay
is the mouth of the river Piginto; and in the western part, at the distance of
4 miles, S.S.W. from point Mita, are two small islets, named Marieta surrounded by numerous rocky heads; and westward of these, at the distance of
6 miles, is a small island, rocky on the western side. The outermost of the
islets facing the bay is the Corvetena, a bare rock 25 feet high, situated about
20 miles N.W. i N. from cape Corrientes; when seen from southward, it
appears as three peaked rocks. The Valle de Banderas bay should be
approached and navigated with extreme caution, as it has not been surveyed.
The Corvetena, just mentioned, is estimated to be in lat. 20° 44', long.
105° 46' 30". Vancouver describes it as follows, "Much to our surprise, in
the afternoon we approached a small black rugged rock, or, more properly
speaking, a closely connected cluster of small rocks. The space they occupy
does not appear to exceed the dimensions of a large ship's hull, nor are they
much higher. They are at a great distance from any land, and, so far as we
could perceive in passing them,—at the distance of about -J- a league,—the
water near them appeared to be deep in every direction. We could not gain
soundings close round them with the hand-line, nor did this small rocky group
seem to be supported by any bed of rock or shallow bank. The shores of the
main land, eastward of them, at the distance of about 8 leagues, appeared to
be broken, and about 10 miles within them are two small islets. These rocks,
according to our observations, He from the southernmost of the Marias,
S. 36° E. (true), at the distance of 12 or 13 leagues."
The Coast.—From point Mita the coast trends easterly about 6 miles,
and afterwards N. £ E. 34 miles to the mouth of the river Custodios, and
includes within it a little bay, named Taltemba, in the northern part of which,
and also round its N.W. point to about as far as the mouth of the river Chila,
11 miles from the river Custodios, are numerous rocky heads. The land
northward of this latter river runs out westerly about a mile, and forms a
small projecting point, from which to Santa Cruz point, the southern point
of the roadstead of San Bias, the bearing and distance are about N.N.E. £ E.
7 miles.
MARIA ISLANDS.—These islands lie before the port of San Bias
between latitudes 21° 16' and 21° 46', and are three in number,—but four in
number, if San Juanito, a large low rock of table form situated about 4 miles
northward of the northern island, is included. They are known to the coasters as the Tres Marias. Among and around them are many small rocks,
whose heads are just above the water.
The northernmost and largest of the islands, Maria Madre, is 11
miles long, and about 7 miles broad. It bes in a S.E. by E. and N.W. by W.
direction,—which is also nearly the line in which the islands lie from each
other. Its height is sufficiently great to render it visible at the distance of
nearly 18 leagues. Its highest part is towards the south, whence it gradually
descends and terminates in a long low point at its north-west extremity; a
small low detached islet named San Juanito, and a remarkable steep, white,
cliffy rock, lie off this—the north-west point of the island, whose shores are
H 2100
SAN BLAS.
also composed, but particularly so on its south-west side, of steep, white,
rocky cbffs. Its south-eastern extremity, which likewise descends gradually
from the summit of the island, terminates also in a low projecting point, with
some rocks lying off from it. On either side is a small bay; that on the
eastern side is bounded by a beach, alternately composed of rocks and sand,
and very probably good anchorage may be obtained in it, if the bottom should
be good, as it is protected against the general prevailing winds. Between
this island and Magdalena island, the next. to the southward, is a passage
about 6 miles wide, with soundings of from 20 to 40 fathoms, sandy bottom,
which is bebeved to be free from sunken dangers.
Magdalena island is about 16 miles in circuit, and is bounded on its southwest side by detached rocks. The shores, in general, but more so on its
northern and eastern sides, descend gradually from the centre of the island
(whose summit is nearly as high as that of the Maria Madre), and terminate
at the water-side in a fine sandy beach. This island is more verdant than
the other, as its vegetable productions extend from the more elevated parts to
the sea, and grow with some luxuriance, although its soil is principally of a
sandy nature. The chief valuable production is bgnum vitse ; besides which
there is an almost impenetrable thicket of small trees and bushes of a thorny
nature, together with the prickly pear, and some plants of the orange and
lemon tribe; the whole growing as close to the water-side as the wash of the
surf permits. A variety of fish, common to the tropical regions, abound about
the shores.
Cleopha, the south-easternmost island is only about 2 miles in diameter.
When navigating around these islands, some detached rocks are visible
about their shores, but all are sufficiently conspicuous to be avoided; and
there is reason to beheve, from the regularity of the soundings, that secure
anchorage may be obtained against the prevailing winds, at a convenient
distance from them.
Of these islands, Captain Beachey R.N. says:—
" The Tres Marias, situated 1° 15' west of San Bias, consist of three large
islands, steep and rocky to the westward, and sloping to the eastward, with
long sandy spits. Off the S.E. extremity of Magdalena island (the eentre of
the group), we found the soundings decreased rapicbUy from 75 fathoms to 17;
and that after that depth they were more regular. At 2rmiles from the shore
- we found 10 and 12 fathoms, bad holding-ground. There is nothing to make
it desirable for a vessel to anchor at these islands. Upon Magdalena there is
said to be water of a bad description; and the landing is in general very
hazardous.
There are passages between each of the islands. The northern channel
requires no particular directions; that to the southward of Magdalena is the
widest and best; but care must be taken to avoid a reef lying £ of a mile from
its S.W. point, and a shoal extending l£ miles from its south-eastern extremity. I did not stand close to Cleopha island, but could perceive that
there were breakers extending fully % of a mile from its S.E. extremity; and
I was informed at San Bias, that some reefs also extend 2 to 4 miles from
its south-western point. There is an islet off the north-west part of this island,
apparently bold on all sides; bat I cannot say how closely it may be approached."
SAN BLAS.—The town of San Bias is situated in about lat. 21° 32',
long. 105° 16'.    It is seated on the summit of a rather steep hill, and ia ofSAN BLAS.
101
but bttle commercial importance, the increasing trade of the neighbouring port
of Mazatlan having caused the principal merchants to remove thither.* Eastward and westward of it is a stream ; that westward of it, known as the Estero
del Arsenal, is fronted by a bar of 7 to 8 feet, immediately within which is a
depth of 12 to 15 feet, and it is here that small vessels occasionally anchor,—
that eastward of it, the San Christoval, is almost dry at low tide. The west
point of the Estero del Arsenal has a reef off it, which extends along the coast
nearly f of a mile in a north-westerly direction; a few of the rocks are above
water, and as there are soundings of 2 to 3 fathoms close to the reef some
care is required to avoid it when running down the coast in the approach to
San Bias from north-westward.
Piedras Islets.—At about If miles from the town' of San Bias in the
direction of S.W. % W., is the rock Piedra de Tierra, which is 55 feet high,
and has soundings of 5 fathoms close to it; and at llf miles W. % N. from
this, is the Piedra de Mer, about 130 feet high and 420 feet long, which has
a depth of 12 fathoms in its immediate vicinity. As both rocks are white,
they are very conspicuous and form useful marks for making the port of San
Bias. The Piedra de Mer is in lat. 21° 34' 45", long. 105° 27' 30", and is
distant 30 miles N. 77° W. (true) from mount San Juan, eastward of San
Blas.f
The usual anchorage at San Bias is in 4£ fathoms, sand, at nearly £ a mile
eastward of the Piedra de Tierra, or further out in 5J fathoms at about the
same distance south-eastward from that rock. If the former anchorage be
preferred, a good spot is at J a mile S. i W. from the low rocky point of
the harbour, with the two Piedras in one. The roadstead is very much
exposed to winds from S.S.W. to N.N.W.; hence ships should always be prepared for .sea, unless it be in the months in which northerly winds are settled.
■In the event of the wind veering to westward, and a gale from that quarter
being apprehended, no time should be lost in slipping and endeavouring to
get an offing, as a vessel at anchor is deeply embayed, and the holding-ground
is very bad, In case of necessity, a vessel may cast to westward, and stand
between the Piedra de Tierra and the Fort Bluff, in order to make a tack
westward of the rock: after which, it will not be necessary again to get northward of a Mne connecting the two Piedras.
The anchorage should not be frequented between the months of May and
December, because, during that period, the coast is visited by storms from
southward and westward, attended by heavy rains, and thunder and lightning.
It is, besides, the sickly season, and the inhabitants having all migrated to
Tepic, no business whatever is transacted at the port.
Approaching San Bias from southward, it is recommended to keep westward
of the Corvetena rock, already noticed, the islands and rocks eastward of it,
which face the entrance to Valle de Banderas bay, not having been closely
examined. Approaching from riortii^tmestwird, pass lie Piedra de Mer on the
south side, and steer thence direct for the Piedra de Tierra, which also pass
on its south side ; the anchorage will now be reached, and a berth may be
* The town and population had almost disappeared in 1865.
+ Mount San Juan is 6230 feet high, and its summit is in one with the Piedra de Mer
when on the bearing of E. by S.
somewhat the shape of a saddle.
it then appears to have two summits, which give it102
SAN BLAS.
selected at convenience. It will not be prudent to go northward of a supposed
fine connecting the two Piedras, because a shoal is reported to extend a considerable distance from the main land in' this direction, to about half way
between them, on the end of which is a depth of only 2] fathoms.
It is high water at San Bias on the days of full and change of the moon at
9h. 45m.    Spring tides rise about 6-i feet.
Mr. Masters * says '' In the rainy season, when the wind blows strongly
from southward, a beavy swell sets in at San Bias; and, as there is nothing
to protect the anchorage, it must be felt very severely; but I never heard of
any damage being done to the shipping in consequence.
There is some advantage in a vessel lying outside in the roads during the
rainy season, for there the crew will have purer air to breathe; and, probably,
it might be more healthy than that of the port, besides being partially clear
of mosquitoes, and other tormentors of the same class, which are very
numerous.
There are 18 feet water on the bar of San Bias, in the shallowest part of
the entrance, and very seldom less even in the neaps. By giving the point
which forms the harbour a berth of 15 or 20 fathoms, you will avoid a large
stone, which is awash at low water, and is about 8 fathoms from the dry part
of the rocks or breakwater. As soon as you are so far in, that the innermost
or eastern part of the breakwater is in a line with the outer part of it inside,
which runs to the N.N.E., it may be approached to within 10 or 15 fathoms,
and by keeping well off from the low sandy point, which is on the starboard
hand as you warp up the harbour, you will have the deepest water. But, as
the sea sometimes in the rainy season (although but seldom) breaks over the
breakwater which forms the harbour, it would be best to moor close under the
high part of the land on which the ruins of a fort stand, with the ship's head
up the river, and a bower laid off to the eastward, and an anchor from the
starboard quarter, making fast on the port side to the shore, either by taking
an anchor out or by making fast to the rocks. It would be next to impossible
that any accident could happen to the ship-"
The following notes, made on a passage to the port of San Bias, are by
Lieut. Sherard Osborn, R.N. :■—■
" Supposing a vessel, bound to the western coast of Mexico, safely round
Cape Horn, and rounding before the southerly gale whioh almost constantly
blows along the shores of South America, she ought to shape a course so as
to cross the Equator in about 98° or 99° W. long., so that when she gets the
North-east Trade she will be at least 6° or 7° eastward of her port,—San
Bias or Mazatlan; and have at the same time a sufficient offing from the
Galapagos islands to avoid their currents and variable winds.
We crossed in 105° long., having been recommended to do so by some old
merchants at Valparaiso, and were consequently, although a remarkably fast-
saibng ship, a lamentably long time making the distance. Several days' log
of the ship show as follow:—
March 24th San Bias 672 miles distant
25th
26th
646
667
* Journal of Captain Masters of Liverpool, in the Nautical Magazine 1837.SAN BLAS.
103
Our track led us to bj exxetly in tb.3 same longitude as our port, when we
got the Trade, and it hanging well to the northward, we were constantly
increasing our distance, until in the latitude of San Bias, when an in shore
tack, of course, shortened it. But, by the course I have recommended, the
first of the North-east Trade will drive the vessel into the meridian of her
port, and she will thus daily increase her distance.
Care must be taken when standing in for the land not to go to leeward of
San Bias, as there is a strong southerly current along the coast, especially off
cape Corrientes. If possible keep San Bias on an E.N.E. bearing. The
Marias islands, off the port of San Bias, are convenient points for making ;
and here a master could leave his vessel in perfect safety to water, while he
communicated with his consignees, or got his overland letters from his owners
at home. There is a safe mid-channel course between the middle and southern islands ;—we brought a saddle-shaped hill on the main, a little south of
San Bias, one point open of the south island, and steered by compass
N.E. by E.
The two Piedras, are excellent marks for the roadstead, which, by Beechey,
is in lat. 21° 32' 20"., long. 105° 15' 15". A good anchorage for vessels
awaiting orders (for which purpose San Bias is now almost alone visited,
except by Engbsb men-of-war, and Yankee clippers for smuggling purposes),
will be found with Piedra de Mer, N. 70° W.; Piedra de Tierra, N. 43° W.;
and the village in the Estero, N. 26° W.
Since the days of Hall and Beechey, the town of San Bias has very much
changed. Its population of 20,000 has dwindled to 3000 residents, and their
unwholesome appearance, fully accounts for the decrease of residents; and
nearly all its trade has been transferred to its rival—Mazatlan.
The large town of Tepic, in the interior, with a small factory, owned by an
Engbsh merchant, causes a small demand for European luxuries, and a cargo
or two of cotton ; which petty trade is carried on during the six healthy months
in the year. A great deal of smuggling is carried on from the neighbourhood
of this port, the extensive bay, to the southward, affording great faculties to
the men-of-war's boats in that employment.
The town is built on the landward slope of a steep hill, which is almost
perpendicular to seaward, and has its crest crowned by the ruins of a customhouse ; but as this is about f of a mile from the beach, a large assemblage of
huts has been formed at the landing-place, in the Estero del Arsenal, for the
convenience of supplying the shipping; the occupants being, for the most
part, grog-venders, fishermen, and an agent to the harbour-master.
In the Estero del Arsenal, small craft, of less than 10 feet draught, will
find convenient anchorage, means of heaving down, &c. The watering-place
is, at least, 3 miles from the above anchorage; and to assist the boats in this
heavy work, it is always advisable to shift the vessel into such a position that
they may make a fair wind off and on whilst the daily sea-breeze blows.
The watering-place is at the northern extremity of a large open bay, south
of San Bias; the beach is shoal, and the casks have to be rolled 300 or 400
yards through the jungle to a stream of water. This stream, during the
spring tides, is occasionally brackish ; but we succeeded in obtaining suppKes,
by immersing the empty cask with the bung in such a position that only the
fresh water (which, of course, would be on the surface), could enter.
By rigging triangles with spars in such a position that the boats could go
under them to load, we succeeded in embarking daily 32 tons of water.104
SAN BLAS.
Many useful and ornamental woods are to be procured on shore, for the
mere trouble of cutting, especially lignum vitfe. Fresh beef we found good
in quabty. Game moderately plentiful; oysters good and plentiful; vegetables
scarce and expensive.  The climate may be summed up by the word ' execrable.'
On November 1st, the dry season commences; the temperature rises
steadily, and the land yields all its moisture, until, by the month of May, the
heat of the atmosphere resembles that of an oven, and the air swarms with
musquitoes and sandflies. The sky cloudless, the land and sea-breeze regular,
but not refreshing.
Early in June, heavy banks of dark, lowering clouds, charged with electricity, collect on the high lands in the interior, lowering masses of clouds
hang to seaward. The change is fast approaching, and before the 16th of
June the rains commence and deluge the land, accompanied by heavy squalls
and a tumbling swell from seaward. All vessels now leave the coast unless
able to take shelter in the Estero ; though of late, men-of-war, in eager search
for freight, have held on, and found that the gales do not, in the winter, ' blow
home.' At this Season all the inhabitants, whose means afford it, quit the
coast for the interior.
For the first month, or six weeks, the parched land absorbs the rain; but,
by the middle of August, it becomes moist and swampy; the haunts of albga-
tors and aquatic birds. In September the action of the sun on water-soddened
land, generates fever of the most violent nature, and it behoves those who
arrive early in the dry season to be careful of exposure to the malaria."
Isabel Island.—This is a small island, about a mile in length and
having two remarkable needle rocks near its eastern side, situated in lat.
21° 51' 15", long. 105° 51' 45", or about 40 miles from San Bias in a
W.N.W. direction. It is high and steep, and believed to be clear of sunken
dangers beyond the distance of a J of a mile ; but as it has not been closely
examined it is advisable to give it a berth of at least 1 mile. The soundings
in its immediate vicinity are stated to be 18 to 30 fathoms, the latter being
westward of it.
The Coast.—From San Bias the coast trends about N.W. i N.,
120 miles to Mazatlan, and is throughout low, excepting near the entrance to
Tecapan river, in lat. 22° 23', and covered with trees. It is believed to be
clear of sunken dangers beyond a moderate distance from the beach, as the
depth south of that river, at a mile out, has been ascertained to be 4£ to 5£
fathoms,—and north of the river at the same distance from the land, 6 to 10
and 12 fathoms, fine sand. In the vicinity of Mazatlan the sea is said to be
deeper at a corresponding distance from shore than it is near San Bias.
The Tecapan is barred, and we believe can be entered only by boats.
Northward of the Tecapan river is another named Chamatla, in lat. 22° 51',
on the bar of which there is usually a depth of 4 feet at low tide, and this
increases within to 6, 9 and 12 feet; hence it can be entered by vessels of
very light draught only at high water. The country behind the Chamatla
rises into lofty -hills.
When beating up the coast between San Bias and Mazatlan, the lead should
be frequently hove as the soundings are an excellent guide and give a good
indication of the near vicinity of the land. Some of the low hills upon the
shore, 27 miles from Mazatlan, are shaped bike cones. The current has a
southerly set, at the rate of 18 to 20 miles per day, but its direction and
velocity are much affected by the prevailing wind.105
ride at the
1 vessels at
e the depth
to 12 feet,
which the
n is on the
d with the
"us chart we
so good an
the mouth
ird, is more
o the shore,
3 moor here
30se go well
r here or at
,3e roads are
Oestin and
sst of these,
t, having a
and a small
anchor bund the bluff
of a cable's
it in every
an the bluff,
to go much
rater shoals
gent of the
as that will
a, with only
round it. I
.tion may be
-rooky island
ssels) being
the northern
-t of the high
rock off the
ud will also
)f mountains
m tile spot,
the evening;
' until 2h. iu
spring tides
itlan, are by
J of the land
i a course as
. the morrow,—
MAZATLAN.
105
MAZATLAN.—The river Mazatlan is about £ of a mile wide at the
entrance, and so very shallow that it can be entered only by small vessels at
high tide. The sands are nearly all dry at low water, at which time the depth
over the bar is only about 2 feet, and in the channel within 9 to 12 feet.
Fronting the river are some islands of considerable height, by which the
locality of the port can be recognised from a distance. The town is on the
west bank. Shipmasters bound to the port should be provided with the
Admiralty chart by Captain Beechey, R.N., (No. 1876), and to this chart we
must refer our readers, as a written description will not convey so good an
idea of the port as an inspection of the chart.
Captain Beechey says, 1828 " The anchorage at Mazatlan, at the mouth
of the gulf of California, in the event of a gale from south-westward, is more
unsafe than that at San Bias, as it is necessary to anchor so close to tbe shore,
that there is not room to cast and make a tack. Merchant-vessels moor here
with the determination of riding out the weather, and for this purpose go well
into the bay. Very few accidents, however, have occurred, either here or at
San Bias, as it scarcely ever blows from Ithe quarter to which these roads are
open between May and December.
Having approached the coast in about the latitude of 23° 11', Crestin and
some other steep rocky islands will be seen. Crestin is the highest of these,
and may be further known by two small islands northward of it, having a
white chalky appearance. Steer &r Crestin, and pass between it and a small
rock southward of it, and when inside the bluff, luff up, and anchor immediately in about 7£ fathoms, the small rock about S. 17° E., and the bluff
W. by S. Both this bluff and the rock may be passed within a J of a cable's
lengtb; the rock has from 12 to 15 fathoms within 30 yards of it in every
direction. It is, however, advisable to keep at a little distance from the bluff,
to escape the eddy winds. After having passed it, be careful not to go much
northward of the before-mentioned bearing (W. by S.,) as the water shoals
suddenly, or to reach so far eastward as to open the west tangent of the
peninsula with the eastern point of a low rocky island S.W. of it, as that will
be near a dangerous rock, nearly in the centre of the anchorage, with only
11 feet water on it at low spring-tides, and with deep water all round it. I
moored a buoy upon it, but should this be washed away, its situation may be
known by the eastern extreme of the before-mentioned low rocky island
(between which and Battery peak, there is a channel for small vessels) being
in one with a wedge-shaped protuberance on the western hillock of the northern
island (about 3 miles north of Crestin); and the N.W* extremity of the high
rocky island eastward of the anchorage being a Httle open with a rock off the
mouth of the river in the N.E. The south tangent of this island will also
be open a bttle (4°), with a dark tabled Mil on the second range of mountains
in the east.    These directions will, I think, be quite intelligible on the spot.
The winds at Mazatlan generally blow fresh from the N.W. in the evening;
the sea-breeze springs up about lOh. in the forenoon, and lasts until 2h. m
the morning.
It is high water at this place at 9h. 4Qm>, full and change; spring tides
rise 7 feet."
The following notes made on a passage from San Bias to Mazatlan, are by
Lieut. Sherard Osbom, R.N., " Leave San Bias with the first of the land
breeze, and after passing Piedra de Mer, endeavour to steer such a course as
to be enabled to make a good in-shore tack with the sea-breeze on the morrow,106
MAZATLAN.
taking care not to stand closer to the shore than 8 fathoms in a large vessel,
or 5 fathoms in a smaller one ; or, should the sea breeze be found to have
much northing, stand well off, when a continued wind instead of the land and
sea-breezes will be obtained, and the strong southerly set in-shore be avoided.
The Collingwood made the in-shore passage in April, 1846, and had Ught airs
with frequent calms, being generally too far off shore at night to benefit by
the land breeze ; she consequently was five days going 120 miles, whilst the
Spy did it in two and a half days by going well to seaward.
The misnamed port of Mazatlan is easily recognised by the two bluff headlands which form the entrance to the river, the northern and more conspicuous
of the two, Crestin, being an island, and affording a little shelter from the
northerly breezes which prevail from January to May. To the westerly and
southern breezes it is perfectly open, and has the only recommendation of
being good holding ground. The coasters run up the river off the new town
of Mazatlan, which has risen to considerable importance within a very recent
period, notwithstanding the disadvantages it labours under from the paucity
of suppHes, both animal and vegetable; and from water being both bad and
scarce.
Mazatlan is now the outlet for the products of the valuable mining district
of San Sabastian, and imports directly and indirectly large cargoes of Engbsh
goods. The general healthiness of the climate, as compared with its more
ancient neighbour San Bias, has materially tended to an increase of its
population. The town, from being built on the crest of some heights, clear
of mangrove and swamp, had an air of cleanliness and pure ventilation rare
in this part of America.
Vessels must invariable moor in the roadstead, open hawse to the W.S.W.;
and too close a berth to Crestin island is not advisable, as the squalls sweep
over it with great strength. The Collingwood drove, though she had 50
fathoms on each cable.
Watering is attended with great risk at all times at this place, especially at
full and change, the boats having to cross the heavy surf of the bar, formed
between a long spit which runs down the centre of the river, and a bank
joining it from the south shore. Several boats and Uves are annually lost
here. When pulling in care should be taken to cross the surf pretty close to
the middle ground; and when through the first rollers, to pull over to the
south shore, and keep it on board up to the watering place. In coming out,
no casks ought to be allowed in the head sheets, everything depending upon
the buoyancy of the boat; inattention to this point, caused the loss of two
bives, to my own knowledge.
The water is procured from a number of wells dug by seamen, on a low
alluvial island, formed on a quicksand in the bed of the river; none of them
are consequently more than 10 feet deep. The water is by no means sweet,
being merely sea water, which undergoes a partial purification in filtering
through the soil.
Supphes of all sort come from the neighbourhood of San Bias; and as
the bullocks are driven that long distance, and as on arrival they are instantly
killed, from the want of grass, the beef is necessarily lean and bad. Pork,
fish, and oysters are however plentiful; vegetables are scarce. The river
abounds in turtle of excellent qualify; wood of various descriptions, principally
hard, was plentiful, and at a short distance oak and cedar might be obtained.
Old Mazatlan, which lies about 20 miles up the river, was well known toALTATA.
107
ancient navigators, as far back as 1587. " Master Thomas Cavandish in the
talle shippe Desire, 120 tons? refreshed his gallant company before cruising
off cape Lucas, for a Spanish galleon; and Don Sabastian Vizcaino, in an
expidition to convert the Californians to the Catholic faith, recruited his
squadron in the Bahia de Mazatlan."
The Coast.—The westernmost of the rocky islets off the entrance to
Mazatlan river are named Hermano; at 3£ cables' length westward of these is
a rock, known as the Tortuga, which has a depth of 9 to 12 fathoms close to
it. The soundings between these islets and Crestin island are 6 and 7
fathoms.
At rather more than 3 miles north-westward from Crestin island is an
island named Venado, of irregular shape, and distant about f of a mile from
the shore to which it is joined by a flat of 2| fathoms. Venado is not so
lofty as Crestin, but has a very similar appearance, and both islands can be
seen from seaward a considerable time before the land behind the towers of
Mazatlan comes into view; hence they are good marks when approaching the
port directly from southward. An island, named Paxaros, lies about a mile
N.N.W. from Venado, and is also connected to the shore by a flat of 2£
fathoms or less.
All the coast within the islands just mentioned, Venado and Paxaros, is low
and sandy. The low beach commences at the bluff point of Mazatlan river,
and extends to some miles north-westward from the islands, but how far has
not been ascertained, the coast northward of Mazatlan not having been surveyed.
Until the Mazatlan river was constituted a port, it was usual to land cargoes
on the beach between the river and Venado island; the risk was however very
great, the anchorage being exposed to the full force of the south-west winds.
Panama Rock.—A rock, awash or nearly so, is inserted in the Admiralty
chart No. 2323, in about lat. 23° 15', long. 106° 34', or 10 miles W.N.W.
from Mazatlan. The American steamer Panama is reported to have struck
on it in 1864. It is said that there are breakers over it at low water when
the sea is high.    No further particulars of it are known.
Piastla River.—From Mazatlan the coast trends N.W. i W. 74 miles to
Piastla river and is entirely unknown, but bebeved to have a depth off it at a
moderate distance of 5 to 7 fathoms. The entrance to this river is in about
lat. 24° 10', long. 107° 15', and is barred. From it two remarkable peaks in
the biterior are stated to bear N.E. £ N,, and these are asserted to be a good
mark for the roadstead in the offing. We possess no description nor particulars
of this river, and only know that it is occasionally visited by small vessels for
Brazil wood.    The lead should be freely hove when in its vicinity.
ALTATA.—From Piastla river to the river CuHacan, the entrance to
which is in about lat. 24° 40', long. 107° 55', the coast (entirely unknown)
trends N.W. by W. 48 miles. Altata, a village near the north side of the
river, is visited by small vessels for Brazil wood. The Cubacan is barred,
and facing it are some shoals which it is said extend out fully 10 miles from
the land. The river has not been surveyed. The following instructions for
Altata are very imperfect, and are added because they may be of use in the
event of the services of some one having a knowledge of the locality not being
obtainable;—a pilot should be got if possible.
Captain G. H. E. Horn of the Hamburg barque Colima, 1860, says* "As
* Mercantile Marine Magazine, Vol. for 1860.1
I
Still
n»::
i'Hr
108
ALTATA.
it is difficult to recognise the locabty of Altata, particularly in the dry season,
a coaster with a dull craft, web acquainted with the coast, may possibly make
a quicker passage than a stranger in a fast dipper. Leaving Manzanilla in
the dry season, which is best done with the land breeze, it is advisable to
make long tacks and carry as much canvas as possible to Btem the current,
not doubling cape Corrientes too closely, the current there being very strong.
Having reached the parallel of 21°, stand in for the coast, and make the land
in the vicinity of Piedra de Mer, in order to anchor, if it should fall calm, as
it generally does at night. In the Cotima'(860 tons) we brought up with the
small kedge (2£ cwt) and a 5 inch warp. The depth of water between Tecapan
river and Mazatlan, at about a mile from shore varies from 9 to 12 fathoms;
there are no known dangers but what are visible, the lead showing the distance
from the land;—the vessel, beating to windward, should never leave anchoring
ground, as the current runs southward at a rate of 30 to 40 miles in 24 hours,
and it would in a calm, drift back a considerable distance.
On leaving Manzanilla in the rainy season, a passage to Altata is very easily
made, carrying a fair wind all the way; but in the dry season when the N.W.
wind is blowing, much difficulty is experienced, as strong winds and currents are
against you at that time. It is advisable to hug the Mexican coast, in order
to anchor, in case it should fall calm, as it generally does at night;—by
standing out of anchoring ground it is probable that the vessel will drift back
in the calm, nearly as much distance as was gained when beating up. On the
passage, sight will be obtained of the Sierra de San Sebastian, the position of
which, assigned to it on the charts from the Spanish survey, may be depended
on. Having approached about lat. 24° 89' or 24° 40', long. 108° 10', the
saddle-shaped hill of Tamasula will bear N.N.E. £ E. and the vessel will then
be W. by S. from the anchorage, distant 7 miles. Steer E. by N. and anchor as
soon as in 8 fathoms water, muddy bottom. On steering for the anchorage of
Altata, if the lat. of 24° 85' be passed, take care not to approach the shore
too much, as there are reefs stretching out several miles to the southward.
It is by no means safe to anchor too near the shore. In case it should come
on to blow it is requisite to slip anchor and stand out to sea until the weather
moderates The filling and procuring water at Altata is difficult and expensive ; it cannot be done with the ship's boats and crew, but it is necessary to
employ men from shore, who fetch it in small kegs on mules from a plain
inland where it is dug for. Thirty hogsheads cost me while I was there $20,
and $30 more for bringing on board.
The position of the anchorage, from good observations, is bit. 24° 41' 42",
long. 108° 8' determined by 84 chronometrio sights corresponding with four
lunar-distances. Position of Altata distant 5 miles, E. $ S., lat. 21° 40' 12",
long. 107° 57' 41".
By attending to the following directions, a shipmaster unacquainted with
the place will be enabled from the roadstead to find the boat-channel leading
to Altata. From the anchorage, a conspicuous white house in Altata will bear
E. f S., this is also the bearing of the bar from the boat channel, which lies
beyond a low lagoon island, the N.W. extreme of which has to be rounded to
gain the entrance. From the anchorage steer for a white sandy height, westward of Altata; as the surf is approached you will perceive, a little westward
of several small hillocks forming a part of the above mentioned height, the
trunk of a broken tree, which must be brought on the starboard bow, and
standing on in that direction smooth water will be seen through the surf.—ALTATA.
109
Run in till within a boat's length of the beach, when the rollers will be passed,
after which turn along the beach towards Altata river; further directions are
now unnecessary, the eye being the best guide. Should the broken tree be
6anded over or taken away, it will be difficult for a stranger to find the boat-
channel, and it is then recommended to steer direct for the white sandy height,
and wait at the back of the surf until, as is commonly the case on the arrival
of strange vessels, some person on shore by motions points out the entrance."
Captain Clemenceau says of this river,* " The anchorage of Altata is hi
lat. 24° 42', and a little north of the entrance to the river CuUacan, When
approaching it from seaward, the first land seen is the mountains of Agua-pepe,
whioh are situated some miles in. the interior of the country; these present
four detached summits, and it is the most northern of them that has to be
kept in view when running for the bind,—it should be kept eastward of N.N.E.
in order to avoid the banks southward of the anchorage, which are said by the
coasters to extend 8 miles to seaward, but this distance there are reasons for
beheving is exaggerated.
As all this coast is excessively low, it would be impossible at night to see
any part of the shore before striking on the banks just alluded to ; hence the
lead must be freely hove, especially if there be reason to suspect that the
vessel is in their proximity. The soundings are an excellent guide, and it
is recommended notto get into a less depth than 15 or 13 fathoms.
The coast at the anchorage trends S.E. and N.W. inclining a bttle to westward. At a bttle more to the north it forms a point known as point Baradeta,
off which are some shoals which extend out a considerable distance, perhaps
5 or 6 miles. The anchorage of Altata is between these shoals and others
situated 4 miles to the southward.
The.fine season for visiting this coast commences in November and continues
till June.    During this time, vessels are in complete security."
The Coast.—From Altata the coast trends 90 or 95 miles in a W.N.W.
direction to Ignacio point, situated in about lat. 25° 41', long. 109° 25'.f It
is almost entirely unknown, but is said to receive the waters of several rivers,
of which that named Sinaloa in about lat. 25° 28' is probably the most important ; facing this river is an extensive shoal, and its north shore is conspicuous by a white rocky point. Near all this shore there is probably a channel
for coasters.
Ignacio point is represented in the charts as having a reef from it to the
distance of 3 or 4 miles, close around which are soundings of 8 to 17 fathoms.
At about 18 miles almost due South from it, is a small rocky island (perhaps
1$ miles long) of the same name which rises to the height of about 200 feet,
and is the resort of numerous seals, sea-hons and birds; its position is about
lat. 25° 27', long. 109° 27', and its situation in the gulf makes it a prominent
object to such vessels bound northward as may get too far over to the eastern
shore.f
» Annates HydrograpMques, Vol. for 1858.
+ The positions here given for Ignacio point and island may be about 5 miles too far
westward. We would here observe that very little is known of the hydrography of the
gulf of California, and that its eastern shore especially, is represented to be low and dangerous, upon which account the greatest attention to the lead is necessary when standing
towards it.
+ Captain A. H. "Wilcox, of the U.S. Transport Invincible, in his exploring voyage up
the gulf in 1850 to survey the entrance of the Colorado river, made Ignacio island in lat.
25' 39' 30", when it appeared to be about 5 miles long and 2 or 3 miles in width.110
GUAYMAS.
8!
From Ignacio point to Guaymas, upwards of 150 miles distant in a direct
line to the north-westward, the coast is almost unknown, and as it is said to
be very low, with but few objects sufficiently prominent to be seen from a
distance, the utmost care is necessary when approaching it. It is beheved to
be fronted throughout by an extensive bank, which shoals gradually to the
land, and it is asserted that the soundings (with the exception perhaps of the
immediate vicinity of Guaymas, where the depth close off cape Haro is 40 to 45
fathoms) are generally a good indication of its proximity.
A small harbour, named Jiabampa, situated in about lat. 26° 16', long.
109° 18', is reported to have a depth of 8 fathoms on its bar, and 6 to 7
fathoms at the anchorage inside. At nearly 80 miles northward of this harbour is the outlet of the river Mayo, which is fronted by a bar; all the shore
in the vicinity of this river is very low, and Mr. Allan of H.M.S. Conway,
1885, particularly mentions that he tacked off some very low land in lat.
26° 52', about long. 109° 35', (4° 16' 33" W. from San Bias), and that no
high land was to be seen behind it, but some very lofty hills were visible to
the E.N.E.
Lobos point, placed by Mr. Boxer E.N., in lat. 27° 17', long. 110° 39', is
very low and dangerous; hence the greatest circumspection is necessary when
in its vicinity, and aUowance should be made for the south-easterly current
which flows past it, usually with considerable strength. ' From Lobos point
to Guaymas the distance is nearly 40 miles.
GUAYMAS, the most important harbour in the gulf of California, is situated
on the north-east side of a billy peninsula, of which cape Haro 5 miles South
(true) from the town, is the extremity. Cape Haro by Capt. Kellett's observations is in lat. 27° 50' 30", long. 110° 51' 40". The harbour is about 8 miles
in extent, is protected by several islands, and has a depth of 6 to 2 fathoms,
the latter being immediately off the town. The outermost island, Pajaros, is
212 feet high, and connected on its northern side to a low sandy neck of land,
the Playa de los Dolores, by a shallow flat of 15 feet; the proper passage into
the harbour for large vessels is consequently westward of this island, between
its southern end and the coast, through a channel ■£ a mile wide and about
6 fathoms deep. When within, vessels are sheltered from all winds, and
anchorage may be selected according to the ship's draught of water. It is
high water on the days of full and change of the moon at 8h. and the rise of
tide is 4 feet, but dependent upon the winds which sometimes increase it to
10 and 12 feet.
Some of the hills immediately over the town are lofty, of these mount Vigia,
having an estimated height of 1585 feet, is considered to be the highest.
Mount San ftafael over cape Haro is probably 1316 feet high.
Guaymas was visited in 1850 by Captain A. H. Wilcox, of the U.S. Transport Invincible, who anchored in 4-J- fathoms; his remarks on the harbour are
as follows. " The harbour is one of the best upon the coast; it is perfectly
land-locked and protected by its numerous islands from every quarter. It has
been so often and so well surveyed, that it is unnecessary for me to enter into
a minute description of its merits. It is to be regretted, however, that it has
not more water, from 4 to 5 fathoms being the average depth, which is insufficient for a ship of the bine, or even a first class frigate. We found
Guaymas a dirty place, with a duty population of about 1500 or 2000. The
houses being built of adobe with the roofs sloping towards the interior, have a
very unfinished appearance, and from the harbour the town presents the0UAY1EAS
^#?^^   Estero ddBaadio   V%*:
.!i!a ^.'JlSl'ff KM'"1-.
JS^mtie Miles
!* iaauiL-^..2tni!aiuanrjitiiU)uuui
Ji
s>- -*%
27°50'30 fl.
\4.
SyrIS
II is i
1
ill
110
From
bine to t
be very
distance, i
be front(
land, an
immedia
fathoms)
A sm
109° 18
fathoms*.,
hour is 1
in the '
1885, j
26° 52'.
high la
the E.J
Lobe'
very loin its
which
to Gua
GU
on the
(true):
tions i
in exti
the la
212 f<
tbeP
the hi
its so-
6fatl
anchc
high
tide i
10 at
So
havii
Mom
G
port
as fc
land
beer
a mi
not
suffi
Gut
houses uem
very unnnis
hed appearance, and from the harbour tne wnm-pw«»„GUAYMAS.
Ill
appearance of having been abandoned when half built. There are two small
piers in a ruined condition; and near the landing a large pile of earth,
surmounted by two or three crumbling walls, over which floats from a lofty
staff the flag of Mexico, marks the site .of the adobe fort knocked down by the
guns of the Bale during the late war. There are several wealthy individuals
in Guaymas, who monopolize the whole of the business with the interior of
Sonora, but the mass of the population are in a state of wretched poverty.
One or two small vessels from San Francisco were lying in the harbour, the
proprietors of which had purchased everything in the shape of fresh provisions
to be obtained. Sheep in large numbers they had purchased from the interior
of Sonora with the intention of landing them at Molexe, on the California
coast, thence driving them overland to San Francisco. Fowls, turkeys, ducks,
goats, everything that could be purchased for one real and sold for twenty had
disappeared, causing us no little difficulty in obtaining fresh provisions, even
at comparatively high prices. The water at Guaymas is obtained from wells,
and is sbghtly brackish. Excellent oysters are brought from the river Yaqui,
which empties into the bay about 20 miles south of the town, and sold to the
shipping at a dollar a bushel; the Mexicans, however, make no use of them.
The time of high water at full and change of the moon, at Guaymas is not
very accurately determined ; it is, however, between 8 and 9 a.m. The
ordinary rise of spring tides is 6 feet, neap tides 4 feet. The phenomena of
four tides in 24 hours has repeatedly occurred here, as I am credibly informed.
The prevailing winds in May, June and July, are from the South-east and
South-west. The thermometer during the summer months ranges from
92° to 98° Fahrenheit, the maximum 119°; during winter from 56° to 60°,
minimum 45°.    Guaymas is in lat. 27° 54', long. 110° 49' 10".* "
The description of Guaymas by Lieut. Hardy, B.N., 1826, appbes to the
town with equal force at the present time. He says " The harbour is, beyond
all question, the best in the Mexican dominions ; it is surrounded by land on
all sides, and protected from the winds by high hills. It is not very extensive, nor is the water above 5 fathoms deep abreast of the pier; but there are
deeper soundings further off. It would shelter a large number of vessels.
The entrance is defended by the island Pajaros, on which, at the proper
season of the year, is found a prodigious quantity of eggs, deposited by gulls,
so that its surface becomes completely whitened by the vestiges which they
leave behind them.
During the dry season, the hills surrounding the harbour present a sterile
appearance, truly unpleasing to the eye, and give but a bad idea of the prosperity of the town; while the size of the houses, the number of its inhabitants,
or the want of cattle in its neighbourhood, do not tend to remove that
impression.
The town is but a miserable place, that is, as far as regards the houses,
which are built of mud, having flat roofs, covered with mould, so that, during
a hard rain, the inmates may take a shower-bath without going out of doors.
The rafters are whole palm-trees; and there is a large kind of humble-bee
which perforates them with the greatest ease, so that, by degrees, these great
bores, which serve the insect for. a nest, so weaken the rafters, that the lodger
* This almost exactly agrees with the observations of M. Fisquet of the French corvette
La Danaide, 1840, who places the island Almagrito, opposite the town, in lat. 27° 53' 50",
long. 110° 49' 26".I
112
GUAYMAS.
may sometimes find a grave without going to the churchyard, the roof falling
for want of due support, which has since happened to every house wherein we
then resided."
The Coast.—The gulf of California northward of Guaymas is but little
known, and very few foreign vessels ascend it higher than that port; the only
particulars of it that we are able to give are by Captain Wilcox, U.S. Navy,
1850, whose remarks we subjoin.* In this part of the gulf the currents are
said to set with the wind during the prevalence of the ' northers', from the
latter end of October till the month of May. The tidal influence is also felt
as far as its head, the river Colorado. Southerly winds commence at about
May, and almost always cause a strong current, influenced, however, very
much by the locabty.
Captain Wilcox says " We sailed from Guaymas on Friday, the 6th December, 1850, and for three days experienced a very heavy gale from the N.E.,
against which the vessel struggled under double-reefed sails without making
much progress northward. We passed the small islands of Nolasco, situated
about 20 miles west of Guaymas, on the 6th, and on the 7th were within
10 miles of the island of Tortuga, bearing from us S. $■? W. This island is
about 6 miles in length, and bke most others in the gulf appears rocky, barren,
and uninhabited by animals.
The violence of the wind abated on the 8th, and on the 9th we found ourselves off the large bay represented on the chart as lying between capes
Trinidad and San Miguel, on the California shore. Here we observed with
glasses a very extensive plain, covered with cactus. On the 10th we passed
the island of San Pedro Martyr, the longitude of which we determined to be
111° 54'. The island is a barren rock, about 5 miles long, situated nearly in
the middle of the gulf. Far beyond, to the north-east, we saw the rugged
outline of the celebrated island of Tiburon. This island has long been known
as the abode of the Ceres Indians, a small tribe of about 500, who are
represented as extremely hostile, and invariably opposing any attempt at
landing; they are said to be armed with poisoned arrows. A rich bed of pearl
oysters is said to exist between this island and the coast of Sonora, and there
are accounts of rich gold mines upon the island ; but as no one is ever known
to have landed there, it is difficult to understand how the fact was ascertained.
We should have landed and attempted an examination of the island, but the
wind being contrary compelled us to lay over to the California shore, and we
passed it in the night.
San Estccvan Island.—On the 11th we passed the island of San Estavan,
which presents an exceedingly wild and sterile appearance, resembling the
generahty of the gulf coast on the California side. The appearance of the
water between this island and that of San Lorenzo led us to suppose that we
were on soundings, but on trying the deep sea lead we found no bottom at
100 fathoms.
On the 12th we passed near three small islands (southward of the large
island of Angeles,) which are not put down on the chart, and of which we had
no previous information. They are composed of coarse clay slate, coloured
trap, and trap tuffa, and covered with cacti. Immense quantities of seals
are found upon these, as well as most of the other islands in the gulf. I
named this group Allen's islands, as a compliment to Major Robert Allen,
* See Mercantile Marine Magazine, Yol. for 18GG. This work is strongly recommended
to Navigators as being the only publication (issued monthly) which confines itself to
Nautical matters.GUAYMAS.
11?
chief quartermaster of the
28° 55', longitude 112° 40',
fathoms.
Angeles Island, which we
California shore by Whale
division.    The latitude of the group is about
and the soundings in the vicinity from 4 to 17
also passed on the 12th, is separated from the
channel, which is about 10 or 15 miles wide.
The island is about 80 miles in length, mountainous, rocky, and uninhabited;
it hies between latitudes 29° 10' and 29° 50', and in longitude about 113°.
We had received information in Guaymas of a small bay somewhere upon
the California coast, in this vicinity, where fresh water could be obtained, and
on the 18th, having rounded the northern extremity of Angeles island, we ran
before the wind down Whale channel (where we observed a southerly
current of about 3 miles per hour) in search of it.
We discovered a large island close to the California shore, off the southern
extremity of Angeles island, in lat. 29° 8', long. 112° 59', which, not being
put down upon any chart, I named Smith island, in compbment to the
General commanding, by whose order the expedition was undertaken. This
island is about a mile north of Angeles bay, which we found and entered on
the 14th. This is a small indentation in the coast, about 4 miles in width,
slightly open to the eastward, with a sandy bottom in about 10 fathoms water.
The adjacent country is extremely wild and rugged. The hills are covered
with hugh boulders which are coarsely aggregated masses of quartz, mica, and
feldspar, and I noticed several isolated blocks of grey granite and sienite.
There are three springs of sbghtly brackish water at the foot of the highest
hill, and a bed of most exceUent oysters is exposed at low tide. The water
may be found by noticing the reeds which grow about it, and which are the
only green things to be seen in the vicinity.
The deep and rugged channels running down the sides of the-mountains,
and the immense pile of boulders forming their sides, would seem to indicate
that at certain seasons of the year great quantities of water must fall here ;
but at the time of our visit everything appeared dry and parched. There are
many varieties of cactus in the vicinity, but no nourishing herbs or grasses,
and we saw no traces of game, but a few tracks of coyotes and wild goats near
the spring. The bay is probably well known to the people inhabiting the
interior, as we found many traces of old encampments, piles of oyster shells,
heaps of ashes, and many mule-tracks leading to the southward. There are
plenty of turtle in the harbour, but we did not succeed in taking any.
We remained at Angeles bay until the 18th, when, having filled our water-
casks, we weighed anchor and stood out into Whale channel. It being low
tide we noticed several sunken rocks at the entrance, which we had not perceived on coming in. The rise and fall at Angeles bay is about 15 feet. Its
latitute is 29° 5', longitude 113° 25' 80". We had ram on the 19th in
squalls, and on the 20th a gale from the north-west, against which we steadily
beat up for the head of the gulf. On the 21st we sounded when about 5 miles
from the California shore, and found the depth from 20 to 25 fathoms. On
the 22nd we passed within 4 miles of a very remarkable rock, which at a
distance has the appearance of a ship with all sail set. I named it Ship rook,
but am inclined to think it identical with Hardy's Clarence island, although
20 miles westward of the position in which he lays it down. We sailed over
the latitude and longitude of his Clarence island, but saw nothing of it.
Ship rock is apparently a mile in circumference, about 200 feet in height,
and perfectly
i
w
lute with guano.    We sounded continually on the 22nd, and111?
Ill
II
fit
Si
:
«!
114
GUAYMAS.
found a depth of 20 fathoms, with a sandy bottom. In the afternoon we
observed a column of smoke in the distance, bearing N. 60° W., which we
afterwards ascertained to be caused by the Indians burning reeds on the river
Colorado. On the 28rd the land was plainly discernible on both coasts of the
gulf; on the California side bold and mountainous, but on the Mexican low
and sandy.* Sounding continually, we found but about 18 fathoms water,
and we noticed constantly masses of reeds, trunks of trees, &c, floating past
us, and at 6h. p.m., the wind having died away, we dropped anchor in
6 fathoms water. We found by throwing the log, a current setting southward
about 1^ miles per hour. The soundings from the 21st had shown us that
the bottom was a fine blue pipe-clay, which (mentioned by Hardy) indicated
our approach to the mouth of the river. On the 24th we weighed anchor and
ran over to the California shore, the water shoaling gradually from 6 fathoms
to 10 feet, and at night we anchored between Montague island (which we
readily recognised by Hardy's description,) and the main land. The country
here is low, flat, and covered with dwarf reed and coarse grass. Thousands
of trunks of trees be scattered over its surface as far as the eye can reach,
showing that it must be entirely overflowed at the season of freshets.
River Colorado.—We landed on the 25th, both on Montague island and the
main, and found the soil clay detritus, and the vegetation scanty. The two
islands situated in the mouth of the river, called by Hardy, Montague and
Gore, are low, flat and sandy. They are separated by a channel about 1 mile
in width, and extremely shallow. They are evidently formed by the accumulation of the sand and detritus from the river, and are gradually increasing
in size. We commenced the survey of the river upon the 25th, which we
continued from day to day as we ascended. On the 27th, by taking advantage
of the tide, we had succeeded in reaching Unwin point, off which we anchored.
The log gave us at this point a current at ebb tide of 4^ miles per hour,
which we found to be the average velocity, except at spring tides, when it is
much increased.
On the 28th we left our anchorage at 7h. a.m., and beat up with the flood
tide until about 9h., when we grounded off Charles point. The soundings
had been from l£ to 3 J fathoms. At this point we found the water devoid of
any brackish taste, but extremely muddy, resembling in its character that of
the Mississippi river. We continued daily up the river, sounding the channel
at low water, and marking it by stakes, starting with the flood tide and
floating with it until the ebb set in, when we anchored and went on shore to
continue the survey. The shores of the river (here from 2 to 4 miles wide)
continue of the same character, the grass growing somewhat more thickly as
we ascended, however, and upon Greenhithe point, off which we anchored
upon the 1st of January, we found a thick growth of artemisia. We had
experienced no bttle difficulty in crossing from Charles point to Greenhithe
point; the channel is extremely narrow, and nearly at right angles to the
direction of the river, and we had twice been swept from it by the tide, and
grounded upon the bank above. Upon the 1st, however, we were favoured
with a strong breeze, taking advantage of whioh we soon crossed and anchored
* The coast on the western side of the entrance to the Colorado, for a very considerable
"distance before reaching the river, appears to be composed of a loose sandy soil, easily
raised by the wind. It has, in consequence, been named ' Smoky Coast.' Lieut
Hardy, B.N., 1826.GUAYMAS.
1X5
in the channel upon the southern side. We landed upon Greenhithe point,
(formed by two small indentations in the crumbling clayey bank,) and found
the land on the south bank to be a perfectly level plain, (the soil clay detritus,)
extending to the south and west for miles, and intersected by numerous
sloughs, apparently filled by every spring tide. The river westward is bounded
by the high hills of the Lower California chain, at the distance apparently of
15 or 20 miles. Trunks and limbs of large trees, some recently deposited,
others in an advanced state of decay, are thickly scattered about, evidently
left by the spring freshets. The river bank is abrupt, and about 20 feet in
height; the water is gradually undermining it, and large pieces are continually
dropping off, falling into the water with a sound as loud and not unlike the
distant report of a musket. We discovered two new islands in the reach
above Greenhithe point; they are low and sandy, separated by a small channel
and covered with coarse grass; they have undoubtedly been formed within a
few years. The bed of the river is filled with quicksand, and its current at
the time of spring tides is so strong that the channel is continually changing.
I named these islands Gull and Pelican respectively! from the numerous
flocks of these birds continually hovering or afloat in their vicinity. We
discovered the remains of a rude Indian hut near the shore, and observed
many tracks of horses in the vicinity. During the night of the 1st the vessel
grounding at ebb tide, swung around upon her heel, and thumping violently
was carried by the tide (draging her anchor) some 2 or 3 miles, grounding
finally upon the shoal of Gull island; at flood tide sail was made on her as
soon as she floated, and we succeeded in getting her back into the channel.
As the vessel grounded at every ebb tide, and on the return of the water was
violently swung around, thumping on her bottom, and swinging on her anchor,
I began to see that it would be neither prudent, or in fact possible, to ascend
the river much higher, and we accordingly commenced making preparation
for a boating expedition; the tides were now on the increase and on the 2nd
I observed, with the log, the velocity of the current at ebb tide to be 5£ miles
per hour. We observed on the 2nd, for the first time, the singular
phenomenon of the tide coming in, in a bore or wave, while the ebb was still
rushing past the vessel towards the Guff. On looking in the direction of
Greenhithe point, a bank of water some 4 feet in height, extending clear
across the river, was seen approaching us with equal velocity; this hugh
comber moved steadily onward, occasionally breaking as it rushed over the
shoals of Gull and Pelican islands; passing the vessel, which it swung around
on its course, it continued up the river. This phenomenon was of daily
occurrence until about the time of neap tides, and shows the truth of Hardy's
assertion, that " there is no suck thing as slack-water in the river Colorado."
I took the whale boat on the afternoon of the 2nd and proceeded up the river
with the flood-tide; rounding Howard point, (so called by Hardy) we found
ourselves in a broad but shallow bay about 4 miles in width. At the northeast and north-west extremities we found the two branches of the river, the
former of which he mistook for the Gila; this is in fact the main channel of
the river, the other being merely a slough which divides the river, about a
mile from its entrance, into two branches, one of which terminates in a small
lagoon about 4 miles from its mouth, the other communicating with the river
above. As there is not water enough in either of these branches to float a
whale boat at low tide, it is evident that the river must have altered entirely
since Lieutenant Hardy's visit, or that he never ascended it as he says he did
i 2116
GUAYMAS.
ill
with the Bruja, a schooner of 25 tons. We sounded clear across the bay
and found from 2£ feet to 1£ fathoms. As the schooner was drawing 8 feet,
this settled the question as to her navigating the Colorado above this point."
After some interesting remarks upon the Indians who inhabit the country
bordering on the river, Captain Wilcox continues " The bar at the mouth of
the Colorado is about 10, possibly 15 miles in width; the soundings upon it
are from 10 feet to 4 fathoms; it is a very loose, muddy bottom, and with a
stiff breeze a vessel could force her way over it, even if drawing a foot or more
than the lead would indicate. The distance from the junction of the Gila and
Colorado to the mouth of the latter, by water, is about 104 miles, owing to
the many bends of the river, though the difference of latitude is but Uttle
more than half that distance.
The navigation of the gulf of California presents none of those difficulties
which we had been led to anticipate. The wind we found invariably from the
north-west, which, at this season of the year, is its prevailing direction ; it is
only during the months of June, July, and August that the gales from the
south-east are prevalent; except in Whale channel we noticed none of the
strong currents so frequently mentioned as existing in the Guff.
It would be difficult to mistake the entrance to the Colorado, it being in
fact the head of the Guff, which gradually narrows from 40 to 3 miles when it
is joined by the river, whose turbid stream discolours the Gulf for many miles
to the southward, in soundings of 12 and 14 fathoms. On the Sonora coast,
however, exists an indentation some 15 or 20 miles in depth, called by Hardy,
Adair bay; the shoals of this can be seen from the mast-head, a view from
which would prevent one falling into the error which be did of supposing it a
mouth of the Colorado. The angle at the junction of.the slough and the main
river is called Arnold point, and from the mouth of the river (after crossing
the bar) to this point, the channel varies in depth from 15 to 30 feet, at
ordinary high tide, and may, as we have practically demonstrated, be ascended
by a vessel having a draught of 8 or 9 feet, by taking advantage of the flood,
which has a velocity of from 3 to 5 miles per hour. It is impossible to sail
up, however, for although the river varies in width from 3 miles to 600 yards,
the channel is narrow and the navigation elsewhere obstructed by the numerous
sand bars. The proper method, after passing Gore and Montague islands
through the western channel of the river, is that which we adopted, to drift
with the flood tide, keeping close to the highest bank, sounding continually,
and anchoring before the time of high water; in this way we progressed slowly
but steadily, making, perhaps, 4 or 5 miles per day, until we arrived at the
peint where we finally landed the stores-, and which I have named Invincible
point.
Above Arnold point the river is very circuitous, the swell of the tide
rapidly decreases, the channel becomes narrow, and the water has less depth.
At this season, therefore, Arnold point may be considered the head of
navigation for vessels of 9 feet draught; above this point we found always
from 3 to 15 feet of water in the channel, whose width varied from 50 to 800
yards; and as the river at that time was at its lowest stage, I have no hesitation in saying that it may be navigated at any season of the year by a
steam-boat of 18 or 20 feet beam, drawing 2£ to 3 feet of water. A small
stern-wheel boat, with a powerful engine and thick bottom, I would respectfully suggest to be a proper description of vessel for this navigation, where
a strong current has to be contended with, and the channel, (somewhatCAPE SAN LUCAS.
117
obstructed by small snags and sawyers,) is quite narrow in several places.
At the present season (January, February, and March,) supphes from vessels
arriving from the Guff may be landed near Arnold point, upon the eastern
bank, and a road being made from the post (a work of bttle difficulty over a
level sandy plain) they might be transported by waggons across in three days.
It would be preferable, however, to estabbsh a depot by anchoring a hulk
near Charles point, laden with stores, from which a small steam-boat could
carry more to the post in 24 hours than a hundred waggons could transport in
a week. Either of these methods would be far preferable to the present slow,
laborious and uncertain mode of supplying by waggons and pack mules across
the desert from San Diego.
The time of high water at full and change at Arnold point is 3h. 20m. p.m.,
and the rise of ordinary spring tides about 12 feet; but during the
season of freshets the river throughout its extent (judging from the statement of the Indians and the indications upon the banks) is at least 15 feet
higher than at the time of our visit, and the velocity of the current which,
above the effect of the tide, was from 1 to 3 miles an hour, is nearly doubled;
the action of the tide ceases about 40 miles from the mouth; the banks of
the river are low, flat, and either sandy or of crumbling clay whioh appears to
have been deposited in successive strata. Near the mouth there is no vegetation, but higher up the shores are thickly lined with cane, rushes, small
willows, acacia and cotton wood, and the country in the interior covered with
a coarse sharp grass.    Invincible point is in lat. 31° 50' 26", long. 114° 46' 43".
The large shoal south of the point is an island, except at spring tides, and
is gradually increasing in size and height."*
CAPE SAN LUCAS is in about lat. 22° 52', long. 109° 53'. It is of
moderate height, and a few leagues northward of it the land rises so high as
to be seen at the distance of 20 leagues. When in this neighbourhood, it is
recommended to keep the lead constantly going, because the low shore is
occasionally hidden by the haze which frequently prevails even when the
weather is clear out at sea. At the distance of 27 miles from this coast, the
depth is about 70 fathoms.
From cape San Lucas the coast trends westward about 8 miles to cape
Falso, which is so named because at a distance it bears some resemblance to,
and has consequently been frequently mistaken for, cape San Lucas.
Captain Wilcox, U.S. Navy 1850, rounded cape San Lucas at the distance
of about 15 miles. When the cape bore N.E. by E. and cape Falso N. by W.,
the land appeared high, bold, and in the vicinity of the capes, mountainous.
He remarked especially that the white chalky cbffs rendered the coast easy of
recognition as they are visible at a considerable distance. The harbour he
alludes to, we consider can scarcely be the well known bay of San Lucas on
the east side of the cape, as that bay is sheltered from northerly winds and
exposed to those from south-eastward, but must be on the north side of the
* San Francisco merchants are much interested to secure the trade of the Upper
Colorade, whioh opens a navigable route to Colville, 420 miles from Salt Lake, and is fast
acquiring commercial importance. Two different companies, each owning three steamers
are engaged in a brisk business. Cargo for the Colorado river is delivered from San
Francisco at fort Isabel, at the head of the Gulf of California, where it is taken up by the
small steamers and carried to its different points of destination.
Between Colville and Salt Lake is a good waggon road, along which there are no less
than forty-two thriving towns and villages. New York Journal of Commerce, April 24th,
1867.Ill
118
SAN LUCAS BAY.
cape; it is not mentioned on any charts of the coast we have met with. He
says " We ran into the little harbour of cape San Lucas, anchoring in 16
fathoms water, within a cable's length of the shore. The harbour is but 2
miles in width, protected from the south-east by a high rocky bluff, bat
perfectly exposed to the north and west. It is an extremely dangerous
anchorage, as a heavy surf is continually rolling in, and no bottom is found
at 100 fathoms, till close into the beach."
SAN LUCAS BAY, on the east side of the cape, affords good anchor*
age, and shelter from north-westerly winds, but it is exposed to a dangerous and
very heavy sea from S.W. by southward to East. The soundings are very
irregular, and the anchorage, by reason of its great depth in the centre, is
completely on a lee shore. At the village a small quantity of provisions may
be obtained.
Captain Sir E. Belcher R.N., observes " they were nearly making a sad
mistake, after shortening sail, by finding after they cast in 10, they had no
bottom with 88 fathoms, just as they were about to let go the anchor. This
shows the necessity of keeping the lead on the bottom before letting go an
anchor.
This bay was first named Aguada Segura by the Spaniards, and afterwards
altered by Vizcaino to that of San Baraabe, it being the festival of that saint
when this navigator entered it, in 1602. It is the same bay in which
Cavendish landed his prisoners, 190 in number, when he anchored there with
his prize, the Santa Ana, taken from the king of Spain, in 1587. Some
Americans and Cabffornians now reside there, who supply the whalers whioh
annually resort there with water, wood, cattle, vegetables, and fruit. The
country is mountainous and sterile about the cape, and the supplies are
brought from the valley of San Jose, about 20 miles-to the northward, which
is well cultivated. The water, which is procured from the wells, is sweet
when drawn, and is very bright, but is impregnated with muriate of soda and
nitre, which pervade the soil.   It consequently soon putrifies on board."
It has been remarked in Captain Rogers's account of his voyage round the
world, in 1710 :—"This port is about a league eastward of a round, sandy,
bald headland, whioh some take to be cape San Lucas, because it is the
southernmost land. The entrance into the bay may be known by four hi^h
rocks, which appear like the Needles at the Isle of Wight, (England) when
seen from westward. The two westernmost are in form of sugar-loaves, and
the innermost of them has an arch, through whioh the sea makes its way.
Leave the outermost rock about a cable's length on the port hand, and steer
into the deepest part of the bay, being all bold, where vessels may anchor in
from 10 to 25 fathoms depth. Here you may ride land-locked from all winds,
save those between E. by N. and S.E. by S. Yet it would be but an ordinary
road if the wind should come strong from the sea. The starboard Bide of the
bay is the best anohoring ground, where vessels may ride on a bank that has
from 10 to 15 fathoms depth. The rest of this bay is very deep; and near
the rocks on the port side going in there is no ground. This is not a good
recruiting place."
San Jose del Cabo Bay.—From cape San Lucas the coast trends northeastward about 15 miles to an open bay, named San Jose del Cabo, where is
anchorage in 25 to 20 fathoms at a short distance from the shore, opposite
the little river San Jose. The village, called Salatea, is considered to be in
lat. 28° 8' 15", long. 109° 87' 52".    As this bay is exposed to all windsLA PAZ BAY.
119
between South by south-eastward to E.N.E., and the anchoring ground is very
limited, it must be considered only a temporary stopping place.
Ceralbo Island.—From San Jose del Cabo bay to the great bay of La
Paz, a distance, following the land, of about 100 miles, the coast trends
northward and north-westward, and is quite unknown. As La Paz bay is
approached, a large island named Ceralbo will come into view, the south end
of which is estimated to be in lat. 24° 9', long. 109° 50', and the north end
in lat. 24° 22', long. 109° 56'. This island is sufficiently lofty to be visible
from a considerable distance, and its western shore is reported to be bold and
cliffy;—as it has not been examined, it must be approached with considerable
care. A rock 10 or 12 feet high, is inserted in the charts in lat. 24° 30',
long. 110° 2', or at about 9 miles north-westward from the north end of
Ceralbo, and about midway, between is a rock under water named the Queen,
and another upon which the sea always breaks ; the positions of these rocks
have not been absolutely determined, and there may be others in their
vicinity.
ESPIRITO SANTO ISLAND.—In the direction of W. by N. f N. from
Ceralbo island, about 22 miles, is the island of Espirito Santo, situated in the entrance to the great bay of La Paz. Its south end is separated from the shore by a
channel, said to be 3 miles wide, and having in nearly midway a reef under
water; this channel is but bttle known and requires careful navigation.
Northward of the island are other islets, divided from each other by narrow
channels which are beheved to be shallow and intricate.
At the south-west end of Espirito Santo island there is a bttle bay named
San Gabriel, in which vessels may anchor in about 10 fathoms, and obtain
shelter from northerly and easterly winds, but they must not go far in because
the depth suddenly decreases to 3£ and 2 fathoms, whence to the shore it is
very shallow. In the middle of this shallow part there is a ledge of rocks,
which extends out T% of a mile from the beach. The south end of the bay is
in lat. 24° 25', long. 110° 19'.
At about a mile northward of Gabriel bay, and on the same side (the west)
of Espirito Santo island, is an anchorage in what is known as port Ballena.
It consists of an open bay fronted by two small islets, named Gallo and
Galbna, of which the first mentioned is the larger and most northward. The
anchorage is at about midway between the islets in 5 £ to 6 fathoms, and
shelter is afforded against easterly winds. Gallo island is considered to be in
lat. 24° 28', long. 110° 21'.
LA PAZ BAY.—From the island Espirito Santo, just mentioned, the
bay of La Paz extends in a southerly direction about 20 miles. It is perhaps
about 12 miles wide at the entrance, thence gradually decreasing in width as
its head is approached, and is almost unknown, but is said to have a bold
shore on each side, with a depth at a very moderate distance off of about 20
fathoms. As its shores have not been examined, it must be navigated with
very great care. At about 5 miles mthia the bay on its east side is the
harbour of Pichilinque; and further on, near its head, is the harbour of
La Paz.*
* Lieutenant S. Oshorn E.N. has observed that a vessel anxious to keep on the coast of
Mexico, or its neighbourhood, -during the bad season,-eannot do better than run over to
the bay of La Paz; he speaks of it as ft splendid harbour.SI
120
SAN JOSEF ISLAND.
PichiUnque Harbour is formed by the island of San Juan Nepomezcino,
which is about IV miles hi extent N. by W. and S. by E. and about a \ of a mile
broad. The island is distant from the shore only about ;. of a mile, but in
this space there is a depth of 4 \ to (>• fathoms on mud and sand; hence it
forms an excellent harbour, where shelter may be obtained from almost all
winds. The entrance is from southward, because the north end of the island
is connected to the shore by a shallow flat of less than 10 feet at low water;
in this entrance the depth gradually decreases from 10 to 6 fathoms. Old
writers speak of the excellent pearl beds to be found hi this harbour. The
south end of San Juan Nepomezcino is estimated to be in lat. 24° 16' 5",
long. 110° 16' 15".
La Paz Harbour is formed by a projecting point of low marshy bind from
which a reef runs off in a northerly direction, and leaves between it and the
eastern coast a narrow channel where small vessels may anchor. We possess
no particulars of this harbour, further than that it can be used only by ships
of very bight draught which anchor within i a mile of the village. At the
village of La Paz suppbes of various kinds may possibly be obtainable in
small quantities.
SAN JOSEP ISLAND.—From Espirito Santo island to the south end
of San Josef the bearing and distance are about N.W. by N. 20 miles. This
island has an extent of about 18 miles in a direction parallel to the coast,
nearly N.W., from which it is separated by a deep channel 4 miles wide.
Some islets the largest of which is named San Francisco, bie off its south end,
and it is here where the principal anchorage (in Amortajada bay) is to be
found. Some small rocky islets also be about 7 miles eastward from the
island; they are known as the Animas rocks, are only about 80 feet high, and
then: estimated position is lat. 25° 6', long. 110° 27'.
Amortajada bay is about 4 miles in extent in a W.N.W. and E.S.E.
direction, and only about a mile deep. The soundings in it are 22 to 7
fathoms, and there is shelter from almost all winds. Fresh water may be
obtained here. The position of the north end of the bay is considered to be
lat. 24° 54' 30", long. 110° 85' 28".    (See the Admiralty chart No. 2824).
San Diego and Santa Cruz Islands.—At about 5 miles northward
from San Josef island is a small rocky islet named San Diego, and northward
of this at about the same distance is an island 3 or 4 miles in extent called
Santa Cruz. The only landing place on Santa Cruz is at its south-west end ;
its eastern side consists of an inaccessible cliff.
Catalina and Montserrate Islands.—Of these islands but bttle is
known. The south end of Catalina is about 17 miles from Santa Cruz in a
N.N.W. direction, and the island thence extends 7 miles almost due North
(true), its north end being in about bit. 25° 42', long. 110° 47'; it is reported
to be a rocky cliff only 2 miles wide, having deep water at a very short
distance from it.
Montserrate is nearly midway between Catalina and the coast, but nearer
the latter; it has an extent of perhaps 3 miles, and its centre is considered to
be in lat. 25° 41', long. 111° 8'.
Some rocky islets named Galeras are inserted in the chart at nearly 2 miles
northward from Montserrate; and a short distance northward of these is a
dangerous rook nearly awash, as it is only 2 feet above the surface at high
tide. The coast southward and westward from Montserrate is very imperfectly
known, and is bebieved to be by no means free from detached sunken reefs.lat 2-4*54.3tfK
mMAo^ e m
10   s 'vBBSESB^Sg
I    I
'Vn»mk.
BSAHGLES RQAB
Uacriic 3Ele
'^^r- "iP^gii
iNacaticlKles
5 J»      js
%Rocks
vefSttdboye water!
S"?Tr aucisco
+ TslaniLj
Lgt,.24'16'5"N.
Bbce-Page-120.IE &
Pich
which if
broad,
this sp:
forms t
winds. *
is conn
in this
writers
south i
long. 1
La.
which
easteri
no par
of ver
village
small i
SA
of San
island
nearly
Some
and it
found,
islandf]
then: $
Am
direct
fatho;_
obtai—
lat. jj
Si
from
of tl
Santfl
its ell
C
kno1
N.N
(tru
to 1
dist ;
I
the
bei
c
k
northwara n&3
torwsm
■^Sf\
NM
m
j^^jggjg,.
dangerous rock nearly awash, as it is only 2 feet above tne 8unwct£&oJ3igj*ei
tide.    The coast southward and westward from Montserrate is very imperfectly
known, and is beUeved to be by no means free from detached sunken reefs.CARMEN ISLAND.
121
CARMEN ISLAND.—At nearly 10 miles north-westward from Montserrate is the south end of Carmen, situated in about lat. 25° 49', long.
111° 12'. The island thence extends 16 miles in a northerly direction, and
its breadth gradually increases until it becomes 3£ miles at a short distance
from its extremity. Its shores are steep, there being a depth of 7 to 10
fathoms at a very moderate ofiing, which increases to 40 fathoms at about a
mile from the cliffs. On its east side there is a fine bay named Salinas, where
protection may be obtained from northerly and westerly winds, but it is
entirely open to all blowing from South to East; soundings of 6 to 10 fathoms
will be obtained at a mile from its head, whence in the direction of seaward
the depth very rapidly increases, there being at 2 miles from the shore no
bottom when sounding 50 fathoms ;—the head of the bay is considered to be
in lat. 25° 59' 34", long. 111° 5' 45".
The channel between the south end of Carmen and the shore is believed to
be 4 miles wide; it contains an island, known by the name of Danzante, and
a nigh rock called the Pinnacle, besides several rocks above and under water.
A bttle bay, port Escondido, situated on the shore almost due West from the
south end of Carmen, is said to have a depth of 5 fathoms and to be capable
of accommodating vessels of a moderate draught of water in perfect security.
Loreto is a bttle village about 11 miles northward of port Escondido, its
estimated position being lat. 26° 1', long. 111° 20'; from it the north end of
Carmen island is distant 10 or 12 miles in an E.N.E. direction. In former
days it was a place of considerable trade, but this was many years ago, and
it is now in a state of decay. It was founded in the year 1698, by Don Juan
Caballero y Osis, who wrote a long account of it, and considered its locality
as one of great importance, and subsequently it became the capital of Lower
California. The anchorage is open to winds from North, N.E. and S.E., and
when these prevail with any strength, so heavy a sea is sent in, that it is
rendered by no means safe for a vessel not well found in ground tackle.
Carmen island affords shelter from eastward, and the mainland from westward.
The following description of Loreto was written in 1826 by Lieutenant
Hardy, R.N.
" Loreto stands in a valley of about 2000 or 3000 feet wide, surrounded by
wild and sterile mountains, of which that called La Giganta is the highest
and least picturesque.* There are two gardens in the place in which the vine,
peach, fig, quince, and date, are cultivated. A considerable quantity of wine
is annually made, notwithstanding the fruit is common property to all the
inhabitants. Peaches and pears are dried as well as figs ; the dates are preserved ; and these fruits are afterwards exchanged for wheat and Indian corn,
brought to the mission in small schooners from the port of Guaynms.
The situation of Loreto is in a valley of very bmited extent, in which there
is space only for the town and two gardens; and there being in consequence
no possibility of raising either wheat or maize, the inhabitants are obliged to
depend upon Sonora, almost for existance. Another circumstance renders
the tenure upon which they exist very precarious. I remarked that the bills
which surround the town are chiefly composed of primitive rock, granite,
and hard sand-stone, all mtermingled, with scarcely any appearance of soil
SIB
* This mountain is estimated to be 4560 feet high.    It is of volcanic origin, as is all
the rest of the chain which runs through the Cftlifornian peninsula.122
MULEGE   BAY.
upon them. ' They are thus capable of absorbing but little moisture; and
during the heavy rains, which happily do not occur more frequently than once
in 5 or 6 years, the rush of water through every part of the town, as it
comes down the ravine, is so great, that instances have been known of some
of the houses having been actually carried away.
To prevent the recurrence of this danger, the former Franciscan friars, many
years ago, erected a stone wall, to break the force of the water, and give it a
new direction towards the sea. In successive years the rains washed this
barrier away; and another was built, which by the returning floods was
washed down also, and at present there is but a slight trace of its ever having
existed. No attempts have been made to restore it; and on some future day
it may be expected that the inhabitants will be seen floating down the Gulf I
Although the natives are perfectly sensible of their perilous situation, the love
of their dwellings is so great as to extinguish all fear for the future, and all
desire to change their residence.
The inhabitants of Loreto are of a dingy, opaque, obve-green, whioh shows
that there is no friendly mixture in the blood of the Spaniard and the Indian;
or it may be, that by degrees they are returning to the colour of the aborigines.
They appear to be the same squalid, flabby, mixed race, which is observed in
almost every part of the Mexican coasts. I did not see a good-looking person
among them, always excepting the commandant and ci-devant deputy!"*
From Loreto to Mulege bay, a distance of about 65 miles, there are soundings near the land of 20 to 80 fathoms, and the coast offers several good
anchorages. At 7 miles northward of Loreto is the bttle island of Coronados,
under whioh there is shelter from north-eastward. Hence, following the coast
northward, there are several small bays in which anchorage and protection
from westerly winds may be obtained at a moderate distance from the shore.
MULEGE BAY.—The entrance to this extensive bay, situated in about
lat. 26° 58', long. 111° 49', is only about 8 miles wide and faces the North.
In front of it, in nearly mid-channel, are two rocks with deep water of 16 to 22
fathoms close to them ; on account of which some care is required when running in. Thence the bay extends southward probably a distance of 15 miles,
at the same time continuing to increase in breadth. In this latter part
the depth varies considerably, less than 6 fathoms being found in some places
and considerably more in ethers. Within it are numerous islands and small
harbours, and it is said that there are also many shoals scattered over its
surface, and that in no part is there good holding ground; yet that, a small
vessel may be lashed alongside some of the islets with perfect safety. In
the bay, there is asserted to be an excellent pearl-bed, but its existence wants
confirmation.
On the western coast of the bay there is a well of fresh water, remarkable
for the water rising and falling with the tide. It was examined by Lieutenant
Hardy, in .1826, who ascertained that there was a communication between the
* The Placeres de Perla, or Pearl beds, is the neighbourhood of Loreto, are the follow-
yjg. foe south-west point of Carmen island, port Ballandra (north-west side of Carmen
island) port Escondido, Arroyo Hondo, Coronados island, Tierra Finne, San Bruno, La
Piedra Neeada, and San Marcos island. The four first are situated south, and the latter
five northward of Loreto, at whioh place, says Lieutenant Hardy, in 1826, the Virgin and
the custom-house receive their proportion of the pearl fishery, which for the last 80 years
has not exceeded, as I am informed, the value of 70 dollars annually.MULEGE   BAY.
123
mountain and the well, which is merely a hole of 12 inches (?) diameter, and
of the same depth, situated close to high water mark. It is naturally formed,
and is a great accommodation to travellers, being the only fresh water between
the missions of Loreto and Mulege; so that it serves as a sort of half-way-
house. Its rise and fall depend on the elevation of the sea, which, when it
ebbs, allows the fresh water (which is of excellent quahty) to filter through
the porous sand-stone in whioh the well is formed.
A little to the north-westward of Mulege bay, is the mission of Santa Rosaba
de Mulege, which can only be discerned from the sea by a small hill on the
coast named Sombrerito, from its resemblance to a hat. The entrance to the
harbour is very shallow, and will only admit very small vessels. The coast
is whitened with surf, and the shallow water extends about 2 miles from the
shore. Lieutenant Hardy R.N., 1826, says that "being abreast of Sombrerito, with the wind easterly, we bore up, and stood directly for the coast, with
\pur head about a quarter of a point to the southward of that hill, in order to
avoid a reef of rocks that runs off from it for some distance. When within
150 yards of the shore, Sombrerito then bearing off us N.N.W., and being inshore of the reef, we hauled up, and stood for the centre of the hill, till within
85 yards of it, when we dropped our anchor, and ran out warps to the shore
on both sides of us, to prevent the vessel from either drifting or swinging, for
which there is no room.
The water on the bar is so shallow, that we touched twice in going over it;
but as it was composed of only soft sand, the vessel received no injury,
although it blew fresh from the eastward, with a heavy swell on the shore*
In the situation were we ultimately moored, there are 8 fathoms close by the
hill, and it is well sheltered from wind and sea.
There is a small rivulet here, extending above the mission, which is at the
distance of 2 leagues from the ooast. From the sea, the hill of Sombrerito
-hides all appearance of the ravine; but from the shore, the date, olive, and
peach-trees, as well as plantations of vines and maize, present a chearful show
of verdure by no means common in Lower California. About the distance of
a league from the mouth of the rivulet, the water is fresh, and I took
advantage of it to re-fill our empty casks."*
This mission of Santa Rosaba de Mulege was estabhshed in the year 1700
by the Marquis de Villa Puente, as it is supposed, and its distance from
* It appears from the following that Lieut. Hardy experienced some difficulty in leaving
the harbour of the mission of Mulege " Not having been successful in my search for divers,
I determined to proceed to sea. The wind was still dead upon the shore; and as it was
not possible to attempt taking the vessel out through the channel, without her being
inevitably driven on to the beach, I sent the boat ahead with a rope, and we succeeded in
towing the Bruja through the midst of the rocks, which were perfectly distinguishable at
intervals by the heave and fall of the waves, whioh enabled us to avoid them. Having got
fairly outside of them, we clapped on sail, shaped our course along shore, and in two hours
time went through the passage formed on the left; by the low point of Santa Inez, and on
the right by the island named after the same saint, carrying 4 and 6 fathoms water.
Having doubled the point, we came to anchor on the south-west side of the island of San
Marcos, round whioh I had been given to understand pearls had been formerly fished. We
found, however, only a few unproductive shells. On this island there are numbers of wfld
goats, and I sent the captain and a part of the brew to hunt them."
This part of the gulf of California is so rarely visited that it is but little known ;■—there
has not been even a running survey of the coast. Northwal-d of San Marcos island the
Gulf is quite unknown, and its delination on the chart has no pretensions to accuracy.III!
: li
124
SAN MARCOS ISLAND.
Loreto is about 45 leagues. It produces wine, spirits, and soap, which are
exported chiefly from the capital; besides grapes, dates, figs, and obves, all
of good quahty.    These form the principal branches of its commerce.
About 6 or 8 leagues from Mulege, at some distance from the shore side,
is the mission of La Madalena, estabbshed about the same period as the
former; but by whom is not known. Its productions are the same as those
of the Mulege; but the quabty of the spfrits which are made from the mezcal,
growing wild about the mountains in its neighbourhood, is said to be the best
of any made in Lower California. Its pupulation is about equal to that of
Loreto.
From Mulege bay the coast trends northward 10 or 12 miles to cape
Barracas, off which at a short distance in a south-easterly direction is a cluster
of small islets named Santa Inez; these have several sunken rocks about
them. Vessels may occasionally anchor under cape Barracas in 10 to 4£
fathoms, and obtain shelter from north-westerly and westerly winds.
San Marcos Island.—From cape Barracas foUowing the coast in a
north-westerly direction about 7 miles, we come to the island of San Marcos,
the centre of which is in about lat. 27° 12', long. 111° 57'. This island is
5 miles long N.N.W. and S.S.E., and 2 miles broad. The channel between
it and the shore is 3 miles wide and has a depth of 4 to 7 fathoms. A reef,
with some rocks named Lobos, extends from the south end of the island,
nearly half over to the coast. It is stated that from this island may be
obtained abundance of talc, soft marble, and pumice-stone of excellent quabty.
There are two kinds of the latter, white and yeUow ; but only the former is
good. One of the hills is almost entirely composed of talc. At the northern
extremity of the island there is good fresh water.
In the vicinity of San Marcos island is a pearl fishery which in former times
was fished with considerable success. Opposite the island, or in the vicinity
of cape San Marcos, (which cape is in latitude about 27° 28',) and at the distance of two leagues from tie coast, are what remains of the mission of San
Ignatio, estabbshed in the year 1725. At 80 or 40 miles north-westward of
this mission there is said to be an exhausted volcano, on one of the hills
named Las Tres Virgines, from which sulphur may be obtained.
The coast of the main land, northward of San Marcos island, is stated to
be iron-bound, and it is also asserted to afford no shelter whatever. At about
40 miles from Mulege mission, is" a small bay, named Thomson, in which
vessels may occasionally anchor, but it is open to every wind except those
from south-eastward.
A bttle northward of Thomson bay are some islands named Sal si Puedes
(Get back if you can), in the vicinity of which the current runs strongly,
sometimes south-eastward, and occasionally in the opposite direction. The
larger island is about 7 miles in circumference, and very mountainous. The
hills are chiefly composed of a red stone, which has very much the appearance
of cinnabar. Near these islands are others, named Las Animas and San
Lorenzo, by which a very dangerous passage is formed.
In about lat. 29° the long and narrow island of Del Angel de la Guardia,
forms in conjunction with the western coast, a channel in which numbers of
whales have been seen, hence this passage is named the Canal de BaUenas.
Opposite the island, and 9 leagues inland, is the mission of San Francisco de
Borja.u.
mSm
jft.il:(
'£*
Sf Maria
Bay
BBB5B
MMmMMMABE
Nautio Miles
teiEiEC
o        x        s        a
A
OffiiSSBSSWiffll
j 9l.MAGDALENA BAY.
125
CAPE SAN LUCAS TO POINT CONCEPCION.
The Coast.—Cape San Lucas has been already mentioned in page 117.
From it the coast trends' in a north-westerly direction about 140 miles to the
island Santa Margarita, bay of Magdalena, and is quite unknown. The
navigator Colnett speaks of it in the foUowing terms in 1794, " Our cruising
ground was between latitudes 23° and 25°, and longitudes 112° and 118°, off
a remarkable mountain near cape San Lazaro, to which I have given the same
name,—I make it to be in lat. 25° 15', long. 111° 20'. Southward of it is
very low land, till within a very few leagues of cape San Lucas, which is the
south point of California, when the land rises to such an eminence, as to be
seen at the distance of 20 leagues, but the cape itself is of very moderate
height. Though the weather was fair and pleasant, it was so hazy while we
were on this low and dangerous coast, as to require a continual employment
of the lead. We frequently got soundings with 70 fathoms of line at the
distance of 9 leagues from the shore. I made the cape by means of a
number of observations of sun, moon, and stars, to be in lat. 22° 45',
long. 110°."
MAGDALENA BAY.—This extensive inlet bes between longitudes
111° 80' and 112° 15'. It is protected from the sea in a south-westerly
direction by the large island of Santa Margarita, and has soundings over
nearly the whole of its extent of 20 to 10 and 4 fathoms. Its principal
entrance is at the west end of this island, through a channel 8 miles broad,
and here the width of the bay (from the entrance to the main land opposite it)
is about 12 miles ; consequently there is ample room for the accommodation
of almost any number of vessels. Santa Margarita is a lofty island, one of its
bills near the east end being probably not less than 2000 feet high; the
narrow neck of land on the west side of the channel also rises to a considerable
height, mount Isabel having an elevation of 1270 feet. Cape San Lazaro,
which may be considered the north-western boundary of the bay, is 1800
feet high.
Magdalena bay was surveyed in 1837 by Captain Du Petit Thouars of the
French Navy, and in 1839 by Captain Sir Edward Belcher, R.N. To the
chart of the latter officer, published by the Admiralty (No. 1980), we must
refer our readers, as a written description of the bay will necessarily convey
a very inadequate idea of the advantages it possesses.
The entrance, as already stated, is about 8 miles wide ; rocks bine the shore
on both Bides, so that it is recommended to keep as near the middle as
possible, where will be found from 12 to 18 fathoms, rocky bottom, with
shells. When within, there is a similar depth on sand and shells. At the
head of the bay in its north-west corner, are numerous sand-banks having
between them a channel 5 fathoms deep, which runs up the coast past cape
San Lazaro as far north as lat. 25° 30' or even further; northward of the cape
this channel is divided from the sea by a very narrow belt of low land covered
with sand bills. The land forming the north side of the bay is so Httle above
the sea level that when off the north-west end of Santa Margarita island it
cannot be seen from the deck.126
MAGDALENA BAY.
Captain Du Petit Thouars says:—"The high land of cape San Lazaro
affords an excellent mark for making the land, as it can be seen at the distance
of 10 or 12 leagues. The entrance of the bay is 8 miles wide and very brief.
It presents no difficulty, if only care be taken not to go too near the south
point, because of a detached rock, on whioh the sea breaks, situated about £ a
mile from the point. In tacking, when within the bay, care must be taken to
avoid the Venus bank; it is necessary also to keep sufficiently far from the
low land to the East and N.E.
Anchorage can be obtained hi the north-west part of the bay, or in the
south part of it, according to the prevailing winds. The holding-ground is
moderately good.
The bay offers no resources, as there are neither houses,  wood, nor water.
Outside the bay, the current runs southward, with a strength of about £ of
a mile per hour.
The tides are regular, and occasion very strong currents at the entrance of
the bay. It is high water, on the days of full and change of the moon, at
7h. 87m.    The tide rises about 6j feet.
Sir Edward Belcher, R.N., observes, " I was fully prepared to have found,
as the name imported, an extensive bay; but on entering the heads, which are
about 2 miles asunder, no land could be discerned from the deck, from N.W.
to N.E. or East; and even after entering, it was quite a problem in this new
sea where to seek for anchorage, our depths at first, even near the shore,
ranged from 17 to 80 fathoms. However, as the prevailing winds appeared
to be westerly, I determined on beating to windward, in which it eventually
proved I was correct. About 4h. p.m., we reached a very convenient berth
in 10 fathoms, with a very sheltered position for our observatory. Preparations were immediately made for the examination of this extensive sea, or what
I shall in future term the gulf of Magdalena.
It is probable that this part of the coast formerly presented three detached
islands ; viz., San Lazaro range, Magdalena range, and Margarita range, with
one unnamed sand island, and numerous sand islets. It is not improbable
that its estuaries meet those from La Paz, forming this portion of southern
California, Into an immense archipelago.
The first part of our expedition led us up the northern branch of what held
out some prospect of a fresh water river, particularly as frequent marks of
cattle were noticed. In the prosecution of this part of our survey we noticed
that the San Lazaro range is only connected by a very narrow belt of sand
between the two bays, and that the summits of some sand-hills were covered,
in a most extraordinary manner, by piles of fragile shells, which resembled
those found recently in the guff. At elevations of 50 and 60 feet, these
minute and fragile shells were found perfect; but on the beaches, either
seaward or within, not a shell was visible. This is the more extraordinary,
as these sand wastes are constantly in motion, and drowning everything else,
and yet these shells are always exposed ! On digging beneath them to erect
marks, no beds of shells occurred, nothing but plain sand. It was farther
remarkable that they appeared to be collected in famibes, principally area,
venus, cardium, and murex. When ostrea appeared, they were by themselves.
The cliffs throughout the Gulf abound in organic remains, and I cannot but
believe that the same cause has produced the above unaccountable phenomena,
which I witnessed throughout a range of at least 80 miles.MAGDALENA BAY.
127
Having explored the westernmost estuary, about 17 miles northward of
our observatory, until no end appeared to its intricacies, I resolved on attempt-
bag -a second, which afforded a wider entrance, and offered deeper water.
This was examined about 4 miles beyond the last, and it still offered ample
scope for employment, the advance boat being at that moment in 4 fathoms,
and distant heads in view ; but considering that sufficient had been done to
show that no hope offered of reaching fresh water, and that the still unexplored state of the gulf would engross all our spare time, I determined on
adhering to its main outlines, which eventually offered so many intricacies as
almost to baffle our patience.
One circumstance connected with the examination of the second estuary
afforded very strong proof that no fresh-water streams were in the vicinity.
It was the fact of finding near our advanced position many large specimens
\ of the asteria medusa, or euryale, an asteria seldom found but in pure, and
generally deep salt water.    At least twenty were taken by the dredge.
By tbe 9th of November we had reached the eastern end of the first gulf,
when the ship was moved into the second, the channel or strait connecting
them being not more than a J of a mile wide. I had been very sanguine in
my expectations that we should have discovered a safe channel out by the
eastern end of the island of Margarita; but until satisfied upon that point I
took the Starling and boats to explore. I found that our boats, and, upon
emergency, the Starling, might have passed out, but it was far too doubtful
and intricate for the ship.
During the time the boats were thus engaged, I overlooked them from the
summit of one of the highest peaks of Margarita, and plainly saw the outlines
of tbe shoals, and the difficulty of the navigation, even for boats. I had also
a fine view of the southern unnamed island, which terminated in a crescent
about 10 miles to the S.E., with a passage very similar to that immediately
beneath.
We had frequently seen indistinctly the outlines of very high mountains
to the eastward, distant about 50 or 60 miles. But on this day I could
detect abrupt breaks, which indicated water-courses between them, and could
plainly follow out the yellow breaks of cliffs, as far as the eye could trace
inland.
I have not the sbghtest doubt that these estuaries flow past them, and
probably to the very base of tbe most distant mountains, even into the Gulf of
California. As I am informed that there are no fresh streams in the district
of La Paz, and that several esteros ran westerly from that neighbourhood,
it is not improbable that they meet. Although the solution of this question
may not be commercially important, it is one highly interesting in a geographical
point of view.
After all the time expended, independent of severe labour, on this immense
sheet of water, it will naturally be enquired, what advantages does the port
offer ? The reply is: at the present moment, shelter; and from several
water-courses nearly dry at the time of our visit, it is evident that very powerful streams scour the valleys in the winter season, which in this region is
reckoned between May and October.
Fuel (mangrove) can be easily obtained in the esteros.
As a port for refit after any disaster, it is also very convenient; and for
-this purpose, either our northern or southern observatory bays may be selected.
The latter would afford better shelter, but the former is certainly more con-I
m
128
MAGDALENA BAY.
geological constitution
venient, and less bable to difficulty of navigation, the access to it being entirely
free from shoals.
In war it would be a most eligible rendezvous, particularly if watching the
coasts of Mexico or California, as no one could prevent the formation of an
estabbshment, without .adequate naval force; and the nature of the country
itself would not maintain an opposing party.
The island of Margarita would afford an excellent site for a deposit for
naval stores. Martello towers on the heads of entrance would completely
cammand it, and, excepting on the inside, no force could be landed.
Water would doubtless flow into webs, of which we had proof in spots where
the wild beasts had scraped holes;   but from some (no doubt removeable)
causes, it was intensly bitter.    There is nothing in the
of the hills to render it so.
The ranges of hills composing the three suites of mountains, vary from
1500 to 2000 feet, and are composed principally of fragments of hornblende
slate, serpentine, sandstone, and primitive limestone."
The Coast.—From the entrance of Magdalena bay to cape Corso, the
north end of the narrow but elevated neck of land separating the bay from the
ocean, the distance is about 9 miles; the coast then fells low, and bends
inwards 4 or 5 miles from the general direction of the land, and forms with
cape San Lazaro the bay of Santa Mana,.which is entirely open to westward.
Cape San Lazaro is considered to be in lat. 24° 48' 20", long. 112° 16' 28".
Its height (1300 feet) renders it visible at a considerable distance, and it is a
prominent object when viewed directly from westward. The country behind
it, and immediately southward and northward of it, is very low. Viewed from
an offing of some miles the cape appears as an island.
From cape San Lazaro the coast trends north-westward about 140 miles to
point Abreojos, a low projecting headland the position of which is considered
to be lat. 26° 43', long. 113° 36'. From this point a reef of rocks extends
out a considerable distance (6 miles, it is said), hence the name Abreojos
(open your eyes) is suitable enough. Between the point and the reef is a
channel, which is reported to be deep enough for ordinary vessels, but as it
has not been examined it should be used only in an emergency.
Ballenas Bay.—Abreojos point is the western extremity of a large open
bay, named Ballenas, on account of its being a favourite resort of the humpback species of whale. A small estero bes immediately north of the point,
and there is another 15 miles eastward of it. The soundings in the bay are
reported to be regular and to extend a considerable distance from shore; at
less than a mile from the beach the depth is asserted to be 3 fathoms, whence
they increase gradually seaward. The bay affords no shelter, as it quite
exposed to southward and south-westward, from which quarters a heavy sea
is sent in when the wind blows with any force.
In the eastern part of Ballenas bay, in about lat. 26° 45', is the entrance
to a very extensive lagoon, which is probably deep enough to admit vessels
drawing not more than 12 feet. The principal branch of this lagoon is about
2 miles wide at its mouth; after running northward for 8 miles, it turns a
bttle to westward and doubles its width at 6 miles from the bar, then gradually
contracting it ends at 8 miles further up, making the whole length 14 miles.
A small branch, making from the south part of the entrance and taking a
more easterly course, runs through a low flat country 12 to 15 miles when it
reaches a high table land.    Another small estero, 15 miles further south,SAN BARTOLOME.
129
emptying into the sea, joins the southern branch of the main lagoon.
Near the head of this sheet of water are two islands, not more than 4 miles
in length and 1 in width; both are very low. The upper island, on its
highest part, has a growth of trees and low bushes, which gives it a pleasant
contrast with the surrounding country. The southern island is quite barren.
The face of the country, immediately in the vicinity of this inland water, on
either hand, is low, .quite level, and extremely barren; a few stunted shrubs
and mesquit trees are now and then met with, and a species of rush grass is
found in many places, but so scattered, that no appearance of anything but a
sandy desert plain is seen a short distance from the shore. To the southeastward rises a long table-land, to the height of 1000 feet or more, and then
comes a wild mountainous country as far as the eye can see. To the north-east
there is a belt of level land, that appears to .extend through the peninsula to
Nthe gulf of California. To the north-west is another low tract of barren waste,
which runs between high broken land.
It is stated there is trail leading from this lagoon to another, called Ojo de
Lievre, the distance being 70 miles. The native name of this lagoon is
Susa Maria. In a northerly direction from its head, distant 85 miles, rises
a mountain, showing three swells of land at its summit; it is called San
Ignacio, and at its foot is a mission bearing the same name. As this mountain is viewed from the coast, a still higher elevation is seen, standing alone,
with rounded peak.    At its base are hot sulphur springs.
The entrance to this fine body of water is shoal, narrow, and extremely
dangerous, on account of the strong currents running in different directions at
different stages of the tide. A depth of 7 feet of water only is found at low
tide ; tbe rise and fall is about 6 feet. A heavy swell usually rolls on the bar
at full and change of the moon, and it i§ only practicable for small vessels of
light draught.*
Asuncion Island.—From Abreojos point the distance to Asuncion island
situated in about lat. 27° 8', long. 114° 24', is nearly 50 miles in a northwesterly direction. The coast between is low near the shore; the beach
fronting it, being composed of white sand, is seen at a considerable distance
in the offing when it contrasts strongly with the brown clay cliffs and banks.
San Roque Island.—From Asuncion to San Roque island the distance is
about 8 miles in a northerly direction. This island is of but small extent,
and not so lofty as Asuncion. It is reported to be covered with an inferior
kind of guano.
SAN BARTOLOME.—From San Roque island a high bold coast continues nearly 30 miles to the harbour of San Bartolome, the north-west point of
which (Kelp point) is in lat. 27° 39' 53", long. 114° 54' 10", according to the
observations of Captain Kellett, R.N. This bay is only 3 miles in extent,
with soundings over the surface of 8 fathoms, gradually decreasing to 4 and
3 fathoms at its head. The north-western point has some rocks off it;
immediately round it to the northward is the landing-place. The eastern
point of the bay, cape Tortolo, has a"reef of rocks, mostly above the water,
extending from it nearly half-way across the bay, the outermost rock of which,
* See the Mercantile Marine Magazine, Vol. for 1860, from which the description of this
lagoon is ohiefly taken. All the coast between Magdalena bay and San Diego, in lat.
32° 41', is very little known, and is believed to be very imperfectly delineated in the charts.130
SAN BARTOLOME.
the Sulphur, is 80 feet high; this reef affords good shelter to vessels lying
within it.
The land round port San Bartolome is high, and the soundings immediately
outside it are deep, there being from 20 to 30 fathoms at 2 miles off.
Capt. Sir E. Belcher, R.N., says, "the surrounding land is high and mountainous, composed, as far as we had opportunity of examining, of every rock
occurring in trap formations, but reduced to fragments not exceeding four or
five pounds weight. Marine shells, similar to those found on the shores of
the bay, were plentifully mixed up with this general debris, and hi the layers
between some clay beds, crystallized gypsum abounded.
The bay is formed by a high range of loose cliffs on the north, and fine
gravelly bay on the east, and a coarse sandy tongue connects a high peninsula
or island at high water in its centre, (forming a third southern bay). From
this peninsula roeks extend northerly, partly under water, jutting into the
heart of the bay, and forming a safe land-locked position, having 5 fathoms
within.
The place of observation on the northern head of the bay is situated in.
lat. 27° 40', long. 114° 51' 20".    The anchorage we took up was hi 7 fathoms,
sheltered from all but S.W. winds, but bad holding-ground."
Another writer says—"in the southern part of the bay of San Bartolome
there is a fine anchorage sheltered from all winds. The harbour is much
frequented by the whalers, who resort thither to cooper their oil,—or to pass
a few days in fishing or catching turtle. It is usually called ' Turtle bay,' by
them. Wood may be procured here, in case of extreme necessity, by searching for low green bushes in •the level land about the shores; the roots are
found running near the top of the ground and are 8 or 10 feet long and often
6 inches through; they burn readily, and produce the required heat.
At the time sailing vessels were plying between Panama and San Francisco,
occasionally some of the number, in actual distress for many of the necessary
articles of provisions, put into port San Bartolome, hoping to have their
wants, to some extent, rebeved. One vessel is said to have anchored here
with nearly all her crew down with the scurvy, and several of them died.
Numbers of hapless adventurers have found a final resting-place along the
shore of the inner bay, and on an islet that breaks the ocean swell in front of
the harbour. Here are found grave-boards, some rudely carved, giving the
date of interment; other graves are only marked by rough stones, and countless numbers of sea-birds nightly cover the ground above them." Mercantile
Marine Magazine, Vol. for 1860.
The Coast.—From the bay of San Bartolome the coast trends 17 miles
in a north-west direction to point San Eugenio, the extreme western point of
which, Morro Hermoso, is in lat. 27° 52', long. 115° 7'. Off this point, to
the north-westward, is the large island of Cerros, and nearly midway between
is another of smaller size named Natividad. At this headland the coast
suddenly turns eastward, and after continuing in that direction many miles,
gradually turns northward and north-westward and forms with Cerros island
the great bay of San Sebastian Viscaino. All this part of the shore of
California is almost entirely unknown, but it is stated to contain several bays
in which no doubt anchorage may be obtained. The only description we have
of it is the following extract from the Nautical Magazine, 1860; the island
spoken of, San Geronimo, is in about lat. 29° 40', long. 115° 44'.
" The coast of Lower California, from San Geronimo island to the greatSAN BARTOLOME.
181
lagoon, trends S.E., presenting a nearly unbroken range of rugged mountains,
scantily clothed with cedar trees, but in many places barren of all verdure ;
and, to judge by the appearance from seaward, unfit for human habitation.
For about 80 miles the sierra closes on the sea, throwing out bold rocky
promontories, offering no shelter for vessels, although promising deep water
close in shore. Here and there long stretches of white sandy beach appear,
on which the surf rolls heavily. Following the coast down to where Cerros
island bears about S.W;, a headland will be observed in the main land, known
by the name of Lagoon head, from rising abruptly out of a low country which
is passed after leaving the mountain ridges already mentioned. This headland
is bigh and black bke a hummock, but appears to have no other elevations
inland from it.
Immediately southward of this is a lagoon about 10 miles long by 7 broad,
to which no name has yet been given. It was entered by whale-boats, and
partially explored ; but there is not depth enough for a ship to pass over the
bar, on which a heavy surf breaks in westerly winds. The land subsides
again into a low marshy country from Lagoon head for about 12 miles, when,
in following the coast to the S.E., the mouth of a second and larger lagoon
is opened. This is about 15 miles long by 8 wide, and has depth of water sufficient to float a ship; but the bar is very dangerous. It is known as the San
Domingo lagoon. Navigators will be very apt to mistake this or the first one for
the big or whahhg lagoon (that named Ojo de Lievre); but care should be taken to
pass by two entrances before standing in for the land. The whaler Black
Warrior was lost at the mouth of this second lagoon, while attempting to
enter, having mistaken it for the large one, which is still farther southward.
On leaving Lagoon head, a ship may stand along at a distance of 6 miles from
the beach, keeping in about 7 fathoms of water.
After passing the second lagoon, about 10 miles from the head, the outer
breakers at the entrance of the big lagoon may be plainly seen, as web as those
on the bar, stretching 4 or 5 miles seaward ; keeping inside of these the inner
breakers will appear in shore, and the channel lies midway between the two
lines. This channel may be plainly seen, it opens gradually, shoaling until
on the bar, which has 2 fathoms at low water and 8 at high water spring
tides, and is from £ a mile to 1 mile wide. The bar is about a \ of a mile
across, and when passed, the water rapidly deepens to 4, 5, and 6 fathoms.
The entrance is then plainly visible, formed by two sandheads, about 30 feet
in height. The deepest water is -midway between the heads, after passing
which the right hand shore should be kept aboard, and with the lead going
there will be no difficulty in running into the lagoon.*
This lagoon (Ojo de Lievre) was first entered by Captain Scammon in the
spring of 1856. While whaling in Magdalena bay, a Mexioan informed him
of it, but never having been there, he was unable to describe its situation,
although he judged from the low character of the country and the receding of
the mountains in that direction, that the lagoon must be there. He
accordingly set out on an exploring expedition, and first struck the small or
northern one, which with the next, he partially explored, and was three days
* See the remarks upon the lagoons in page 128.    The lagoons appear to be indentical
but the geographical descriptions differ.    In the imperfect state of the oharts of this coast
at present existing, it is impossible to reconcile these differences.
K 2■H
11
m «■-
132
NATIVIDAD ISLAND.
getting down to the big one, the approach to which looked very dangerous to
a stranger. Having sounded the channel with his boats, he took his
ship in. The explorations which have thus far been made lead to the
supposition that these three lagoons were, at one time, a single body of water,
and it is thought that, owing to the marshy character of the country, there
may still be, during the rainy season, communication by sloughs or branches ;
but this is not known. The mountains, with their serrated peaks, traversing
tbe Lower California peninsula, generally close with the coast, either within
a few miles of the beach, or from jutting headlands washed by the waves of
the ocean. The chain opposite to where the lagoon is, turns inland about
20 miles, opening a sort of amphitheatre, forming the bed of the lake, which
is filled from the ocean, and the only inlet or outlet to which, thus far discovered, is the entrance already described. A small space of rising land
intervenes between the western border and the foothills of the mountains,
which are wooded in a few places, but appear generally to be sterile and
valueless.
Around tbe borders of the lagoon are ranges of sand hills, extending in every
dfrection, being apparently the collection of ages, drifted in from the ocean.
This feature gives to the vicinity an aspect somewhat similar to that of the
ocean beach opposite San Francisco, but without the rocks and headlands.
These sands are ever moving and changing, in consequence of being thus
driven by the fierce ocean winds. A boat which was left for a few days near
the southern border of the lagoon was completely filled with sand, and would,
in another week, have been entirely hidden from sight by it. Of course no
trees nor herbage of any kind exists there, nor can any kind of cultivation be
carried on. Changes in the face of the country are going on constantly.
Logs of redwood, 3 or 4 feet in diameter, are even found half covered over by
sand, and sometimes several miles from the water. These are evidently of
Oregon growth, and have either been thrown into their present position by the
surf, in some tremendous storm, or being once lodged on the beach, the sands
have encroached on the water, leaving the logs far inland in the course of time.
Their presence is accounted for by currents setting down from tbe northward.
Fresh water and wood are very scarce, and should an unhappy wayfarer
chance to get lost in these trackless wilds, starvation would be inevitable.
Several instances of this are very web known.
The lagoon from its entrance expands at once into a vast sheet of water.
In every direction nothing is to be seen on the shore but scrub bushes and
stunted grass. To the southward, a small lagoon, about 8 miles in extent,
is connected with the larger one, and is navigable. It is known as fort
Lagoon, but whales seldom go into it. The lagoon contains several islands,
covered with stunted grass and weeds, with the exception of two, which are
supposed to contain guano, although this conclusion is not yet well estabbshed.
The distance from the bar to the western border is between 80 and 40 miles,
but counting the northern lagoons already described, and which are bebeved
to have been at one time a portion of the main one, this body of water would
be upwards of 70 miles in extent. The breadth is between 20 and 30 miles.
In every part, except close to the shore, may be found, from 2 to 5 fathoms,
and good anchorage everywhere."
NATIVIDAD ISLAND.—At about 3£ miles westward from Morro
Hermoso, the west extremity of point San Eugenio, is the east end of Nativi-
dad island, the position of which is considered to be lat. 27° 52' 30", long.
115° 11' 45".    The island thence extends 8 miles in a W. by N. * N.CERROS ISLAND.
183
■ direction, with an average breadth of | a mile. Its height is supposed to be
700 feet. It is extremely barren, as neither tree nor scrub is to be found
upon it, and it is only frequented by sea-fowl for a breeding place. From an
islet off its north-west end several cargoes of guano have been taken. The
depth at 2 miles westward from it is 35 to 40 fathoms.
In the middle of the channel separating Natividad island from the coast the
depth is 17 to 20 fathoms; more than ordinary care is however necessary
when running through it on account of a reef, upon which the sea breaks
heavily in bad weather, reported to exist at about a mile eastward of the Sail
rook*,—in fine weather the sea breaks upon it only at intervals. The tides
run through this channel with some strength at the period of full and change.
CERROS ISLAND.—This large island extends between latitudes
28° 2' and 28° 19';—its north point is considered to be in lat. 28° 19', long.
115° 14'. It is very lofty and can be seen from a considerable distance,
appearing when first in sight with a very irregular and broken outline. The
southern part, the highest, has probably an elevation of not less than 2000
feet. The depth at less than a mile from its shores is about 40 fathoms,
with the exception that a bank of 5£ to 10 fathoms extends 3 miles South
from its south-east point, in the direction of the west end of Natividad island
and to nearly the middle of the channel between them. In the Mercantile
Marine Magazine, Vol. for 1860, is the following account of this island.
" Cerros is an island of mountains throughout its whole extent, being a mass
of high, abrupt peaks, the highest of which is 2500 feet above the level of the
sea, and may be distinctly seen, in clear weather, 60 miles. On a near approach, tbe sombre, barren appearance of all brought to view is anything but
inviting. Many of the southern slopes present a dark red hue, interspersed
with high variegated cliffs, that give a bttle change to the otherwise dull
scene. On landing, one is at once fully sensible of the extreme dry atmosphere prevailing; still there must be, occasionally, heavy rains, producing
mountain torrents, which have cut their way through tbe sand and gravel
bottoms that skirt the southern bases. These, however, are of rare occurrence,
for whalers best acquainted with the island, who have been hving temporarily
there, or along the neighbouring coast for the last five or six years, have
never known it to be visited by anything more than bght rains, and those at
long intervals.
On the N.E. side, at about 3 miles from the extreme north end, a low sandy
point makes out; southward of this is good anchorage during the prevailing
coast winds. In a ravine near it, is a small stream of fresh water; and hke-
wise in several of the vaUeys leading from the shore line, to the southward,
water may be found within a mile of the beach. At one of these places it is
of excellent quabty. The only practicable place, however, for a ship to obtain
a large supply, is on the S.E. side, where there is a spring running among
rushes at the foot of a high peak close to the shore. The casks are filled by
placing them within a few feet of the running stream, and conducting the
water into them by means of a rough wooden spout, on the side of which are
the words:—' Whoever uses this will please to put it in its proper place, for
the benefit of those who may come for water.'
Not named in the chart by Captain Kellett, R.N., No. 2795.134
SAN BENITO ISLANDS AND SAN QUENTIN.
11
I I'
Anchorage may be had off this spring, within two cables' length of the
shore, in 20 fathoms of water; but a much better place for a ship to be is
2 miles further south, off a low shingle beach—where it is not so deep, and
the gusts that come down the mountains, when the wind is from the west, are
not nearly so heavy as at the other anchorage.
A vessel can always find shelter from the N.W. winds on the south side of
the island, in depths varying from 6 to 25 fathoms; these winds blow with
the regularity of a ' trade,' from May to October, and the only precaution to
be kept in mind in choosing an anchorage is to avoid fixed kelp. From
October to May the winds are generally bght and the weather dehghtful.
Occasionally a strong f norther,' or a light S.E. gale, blows the first part of
the winter, and strong gales from the N.W. again set in about the 1st of May.
It is said by those well versed in such things, that there is every indication
of extensive mineral deposits, in the shape of quartz rock and copper, scattered
over many parts of Cerros island. Whether they really exist there remains
to be proved."
SAN BENITO ISLANDS.—These three barren islands are situated
about 14 miles westward from the north end of Cerros. They occupy an
extent of 3 miles in an E. by N. and W. by S direction, and two of them are
of moderate height; the middle one has only little elevation. Reefs surround
them, which are intersected by narrow channels reported to be only sufficiently
deep to permit the passage of boats or of smaU vessels of very light draught.
It is said that there is anchorage on the south-east side of the middle island,
in from 10 to 20 fathoms, but that the place is by no means inviting as the
holding ground is far from good and the bottom is rough and rocky. The
centre of the westernmost (the largest) island is considered to be in lat.
28° 15' 30", long. 115° 33' 15".
The Coast.—The coast within Cerros island, as already noticed, is very
bttle known; it contains several bays, but the only one of which we have any
description is that named Playa Maria, an open roadstead of 6 to 9 fathoms.
On the eastern side of this bay is a mountain named the Nipple, 1132 feet
high, from which Cerros island bears between the angles of S. 49° 40' W.
and S. 38° W., (true). Vessels may anchor here in about 6 fathoms, but as
the roadstead is quite open to westward and south-westward and winds from
those quarters send in very heavy seas, it is not considered a desirable place.
The west point of the bay is in about lat. 28° 55' 37", long. 114° 31' 20".
SAN QUENTIN.—From Playa Maria bay the coast trends 114 miles
in a north-westerly direction to port San Quentin, and is almost unknown.
This port is of no commercial importance, and is very rarely visited. It was
surveyed in 1839 by Captain Sir E. Belcher, R.N., and it appears by his
published plan that an extensive flat of 2^ and l£ fathoms stretches across
the entrance of the port, but leaves a narrow channel of 4 to 7 and 8 fathoms
close to its western side. This sandy flat has several dry patches on it. The
point on the western side of the entrance is considered to be in about lat.
80° 21' 53", long. 115° 56' 33".
Sir E. Belcher observes of this bay. " The whole coast is dreary, being
either sand-hills or volcanic mountains, five of which, very remarkably placed,
caused one of the $arly navigators to term it the bay of Five hills. It is the
bay of tbe Virgins of former, and port San Quentin of the later Spanish
surveyors. The island and paps of Las Virgines are situated to seaward,
about 2 miles from what has been termed Observatory peak, in our plan."ICORONADOS ISLETS AND SAN DIEGO.
185
The Coast.—From port San Quentin to San Diego, a distance of about
160 miles in a north-westerly direction, the coast is unknown, with the exception that in about lat. 80° 59' 45", long. 116° 16' 22", there is a small
open bay, named Colnett, in which vessels may anchor in from 10 to 8
fathoms during the prevalence of easterly and northerly winds; At about 18
miles southward of San Diego are the Coronados islets, which are an excellent
mark for the port when approaching it from southward.
CORONADOS ISLETS.—These rocky islets lie 7 miles from the
coast, and the highest and largest of them is in lat. 82° 28' 46", long.
117° 18' 21". They form a group of high, bold, and abrupt rocks and islets,
of which the largest (16 miles S. 11° E. from point Loma, San Diego,)
is about 1ft miles in length by J of a mile in breadth, lying in a N.W. and
S.E direction. It is a wedge-shaped mass, 575 feet high, entirely destitute
of trees.
At about a \ < if a mile eastward of the islet there is anchorage ; and, there
is but one landing place upon it, which is difficult.
On the west and north-west sides of the islet, and at about £ a mile distant,
are two smaller islets, or rather masses of rock about 50 feet high, and
destitute of vegetation. Excellent anchorage is said to exist in the vicinity.
The smaller of the two prominent islets is about -J a mile in length, bes
N. 58° W. from the larger, and is distant 2f miles; it is a hugh barren rock,
with a very sharp summit.
The Coast.—Upon the table bluff rising from the lowland south of San
Diego bay, is a monument marking the western point of the boundary between
Mexico and the United States. It consists of an obelisk of white marble,
about 20 feet in height, resting upon a pedestal. It stands near the edge of
the bluff, about 200 yards from the shore, and its position is lat. 82° 81' 58"• 16,
long. 117° 6' 11' '12. Hence the coast is low and flat, running N. by W. for
about 7 miles, and then curving gradually westward until it is nearly East
and West at the entrance of San Diego bay. In the interior are high
mountains.
SAN DIEGO.—The port of San Diego is formed on the west side by a
bold projecting point of land, of which the southern extremity is named point
Loma; and, on the east side by low flat land covered with thick bushes and
grass, named the ' island', although it is really a peninsula—being connected to
the eastern 6hore by a very low and narrow strip of beach. Upon point Loma
there is a lighthouse, which, shows a fixed bight at 457 feet above the sea,
visible 25 miles; its position is lat. 82° 40' 15", long. 117° 13' 80".*
Point Loma is the termination of a remarkable narrow spur of ooarse,
crumbling sand-stone, which rises south of Puerto Falso, or False bay, and
west of the town of San Diego, to the height of 300 feet, and after stretching
south for about 5-i miles, gradually increasing in height to 422 feet, terminates
very abruptly. It is covered with coarse grass, cacti, wild sage, and low
bushes.
* See the plan of the harbour of San Diego on the chart of the coast of California,
issued by the publishers of this work (Messrs. Imkay and Sox). In this chart are inserted
plans of most of the harbours on the coast between cape Corrientes and San Francisco.
The port of San Diego is fronted by a bar which is tolerably permanent in its general
features; the instructions here given for it are from the United States Coast Surrey Beport
for 1862.186
SAN DIEGO.
EHJ
Next to that of San Francisco, no harbour on the Pacific coast of the
United States approximates in excellence that of the bay of San Diego. It is
readily distinguished, easily approached, and a depth of 22 feet can be carried
over the bar, which is f of a mile east of-the southern extremity of point
Loma, and between it and the tail of the Zuninga shoal. The bar is about
050 yards across from the outer to the inner 5-fethom lines.
Vessels coming from north-westward make the ridge of point Loma as a
long, flat-topped island, when about 25 miles distant. This appearance is
occasioned by the bay to the south-west, by the low land to the north-east,
and by the Puerto Falso at the north.
A thick field of kelp lies along the western shore of point Loma, the inner
edge being but 1 mile off-shore, and having a breadth of J a mile The outer
edge marks the bine where the depth of water suddenly changes from 20 to 10
fathoms. The field commences off the bar at the entrance to Falso bay and
stretches southward 2f miles south of point Loma. Approaching the south
end of Loma, along the outer edge of the kelp, pass through a partial break
in it, and when the point bears N.E. by E., distant H miles, keep along the
northern edge of the kelp in 4£ fathoms, and about i a mile from the point.
As soon as the point is passed, a. long, low beach of shingle is opened,
making out from the east side of the point and forming a natural breakwater
formerly called Punta de Guiranas* by the Spaniards, but now designated as
Ballast point.
Round up gradually until Ballast point is brought in range with the easternmost house of La Playa, (distant 1 mile from Ballast point and on the same
side of the bay,) and be careful not to open more of the village, as the shoal
called Barros de Zuningat stretches south from the east side of the entrance
parallel to tho ridge of point Loma, and distant only f of a mile from it!
Between point Loma and this shoal runs the channel, which is less than * a
mile wide within the 8-fathom lines. With the least swell the breakers Bhow
the position and extent of the shoal, and at low tides part of it is bare. It
has been said that a rock, having but 5 or 6 feet of water upon it, lies in tho
channel; its position being marked by a patch of kelp, which is, however
torn away in heavy weather. The pilot boat Fanny reported being upon it in
1851, but the examinations of tho Ooast Survey have developed no such
danger, and the report has been generally discredited.
During the summer keep as closo to point Loma as the draught of the
vessel will permit, and lay on the wind up to Ballast point, off which 4 fethoms
can be earned within a ship's longth, with 10 fathoms in mid-channel, and a
very strong current on the ebb and flood tides; the former setting over the
Zuninga shoal. After passing Ballast point steer for La Playa, and anchor
anywhere in from 4 to 10 fathoms, with good holding ground. Inside the
point, and about 260 yards N. by W. from it, is a shoal having only 12 feet
water upon it, in a line from Ballast point to the westernmost houso at La
Playa. It is a i of a mile long. The shoals on the starboard hand, after
entering, aro plainly in sight, except at very high water. Tho channel,
howover, is buoyed, and cannot be missed.    From La Playa to New San
* Or Punta de los Gmijarros.
♦ Named by Viscaino in 1002.   Don Caspar de Zuninga, Count dc Monterey, despatched
the expedition.r-
SAN DIEGO.
137
Diego, 4 miles distant, the channel curves to the right and contracts, but
about 6 fathoms water may be carried that far. A mile or two beyond the
town the bay becomes shoal and filled with flats, yet a very narrow 3-fathom
channel runs close along the eastern shore, nearly to the head of the bay.
Coming from the south, run for the extreme end of point Loma until
Ballast point and La Playa are in range, as before, and follow the foregoing
directions.
When inside the harbour vessels are perfectly safe, but during very heavy
southerly weather the kelp is said to drive in such masses as to make vessels
drag their anchors. We have never known such a case, and doubt if a vessel
with good ground tackle and proper attention would suffer from this cause.
Certainly there is not reach enough for the wind to raise a swell, and the
holding ground is excellent. In heavy south-east weather the sea breaks
over BaUast point, and in 1851 the pilot boat Fanny was piled upon it.
From BaUast point the bay runs about north for l£ miles; thence curves
gradually to the eastward for 3 miles to New San Diego; thence to the head
of the bay, south-east, 7 miles. The average width of the bay after passing
La Playa is l£ miles, but at New San Diego, after contracting to a trifle over
i a mile, it again expands to about l£ miles, with low shores and extensive
marshes and flats.
'^Tides.—At La Playa the corrected establishment is 9h. 38m. The
mean rise and fall of tide is 3*7 feet; of spring tides 5 feet; and of neap
tides 2-3 feet. The mean direction of the flood is 6h. 25m.; of the ebb 6h.;
and of the stand Oh. 30m.
Captain Sir E. Belcher, R.N., has observed "Port San Diego, for shelter,
deserves all the commendation that previous navigators have bestowed on it,
and, with good ground tackle, a vessel may be perfectly land-locked. The
holding ground is stubborn, but in heavy southerly gales I am informed
anchors 'come home,' owing to the immense volumn of kelp driven into the
harbour. It was stated to me by an old sailor in this region, that he has seen
the whole bank of fucus giganteus (which comprises a tongue of 3 miles in
length by a J broad) forced by a southerly gale into the port. This, coming
across the bows, either causes the cable to part, or brings the anchor home.
No vessel, however, has suffered from this cause. The chief drawback is the
want of fresh water, which, even at the presidio, 3 miles from the port, is very
indifferent."
Commander Wilkes U.S. Navy observes as fobows—"Port San Diego is of
considerable extent, being, in fact, an arm of the sea. It is 10 miles long,
and 4 miles wide, and, from being land-locked, is perfectly secure from all
winds. The entrance is narrow and easily defended, and has a sufficient
depth of water, 20 feet at lowest tide, for large vessels. The tide rises 5 feet,
The tongue of kelp off the entrance of the bay, must be avoided by large
vessels, but small vessels may pass through it with a strong breeze. During
gales, this kelp is torn up and driven into the bay, where it becomes troublesome to vessels by the pressure it brings upon them, either causing them to
drag their anchors or part their cables.
There are many drawbacks to this harbour; the want of water is one of
them, the river which furnishes the mission with water disappearing in the
dry season before reaching the bay; and, the surrounding country may be
called a barren waste of sand-hills. The town is situated on the north side of
the bay, on a sand flat 2 miles wide.    The mission estabbshment is 7 miles
>'S188
SAN DIEGO.
from the town, np a valley to the north-east; and here, there is a good supply
of water the year round. This river, in the rainy season, discharges a considerable quantity of water into the bay, bringing with it much sand, which
has already formed a bar across a part of False bay, rendering it useless, and
well grounded fears may be entertained that it will eventually destroy this
harbour also; this occurrence, however, may be prevented at slight cost.
The whole country around San Diego is composed of volcanic sand and
mud, mixed with scoria. The land is unfit for cultivation, and covered with
cacti, one of the many evidences of the poorness of the soil; this leaves the
port of San Diego Utile to recommend it but the uniform climate, good anchorage, and security from all winds."
Tlie Coast.—At the north end of the ridge of point Loma is an extensive
shoal bay caUed Puerto Falso, or False bay. The bar at its entrance Ues
N. by W. i W., distant 5£ mUes from the southern extremity of point Loma;
and having but 8 feet of water, it can be crossed only in the smoothest
weather. The entrance just inside the line of heavy breakers is about a J of
a mile in width, but rapidly contracts to less than /,. The northern point of
this bay is about 2 miles in length, very narrow, and covered with low sand
dunes. To the north and west of this the shore becomes compact and
unbroken, except by the vaUeys of San Luis Rey and San Juan Capistrano.
The waters off this stretch of the coast is named the bay of Santa Catalina.
From the southern extremity of point Loma the coast runs N. by W. foe
22 miles; thence to the east point of San Pedro bay, N.W. by W. i W.
nearly 60 miles.
San Luis Rey.—In this extent of coast oecurs the mission of San Luis Rey,
the largest in California, situated in about 1st. 33° 17', long. 117° 29'. It is
in a part of the country unequeHed for salubriety and productiveness, but the
scarcety of rain is an insuperable drawback to its prosperity. The anchorage
is very restricted and scarcely ever visited, as it is quite open to westerly
and southerly winds.
San Juan Capistrano, a mission similar to that of San Luis Rey, is situated
in about bit. 88° 28', long. 117° 48'. The anchorage is rocky in soundings
of less than 5 fathoms, and is unprotected; the landing is also bad. The bay
is formed by a high cliffy head to the north-west, and terminates in a southerly
direction in low sandy beaches. It is stated that when entering it from northwestward some care is required to give the bluff point a wide berth, because
some dangerous rocks be off it to a considerable distance.
Commander Wilkes, U.S.N., says " This bay has at its head a fertile
vaUey, in which is situated the town and mission of San Juan. The bay is
entirely unprotected, and is a bad roadstead, the bottom being very foul
inside of 5 fathoms, and the binding at times impossible, on account of the
surf. It can be safely visited only during the fine season. Provisions and
water are easily obtained ; the latter from the mountain streams, which empty
into the bay, and also enable the inhabitants to irrigate their lands, by which
mode of cultivation they are made extremely productive. The shore here
becomes quite bold, making the communication to the northward by the. land
very inconvenient."
From San Juan Capistrano to point Fermin on the west side of the bay of
San Pedro, the distance is about 80 miles in a W. by N. i N. direction; the
space included between is known as the bay of Los Tremblores. The cliffs
along this part of the coast are steep, and composed of clay and chert,SAN PEDRO.
139
throughout which are interspersed chalky lumps, which contain organic
remains. Only very little water is to be obtained here, and the little that is
required for the supply of the inhabitants has to be brought from a distance
in the interior.    San Pedro hill, over point Fermin, is 1600 feet high.
SAN PEDRO.—This bay is formed on the west side by the high bold land
of which point Fermin is the extremity, and on the east side by the low coast
of the main land. It is open to all points from S.W. by the southward to S.E.,
and is consequently exposed to the full force of the winter gales ; but during
spring, summer, and autumn, it is an exceUent roadstead. A little islet,
named El Moro, Ues \ a mile from the beach, and has close to its east side a
depth of 18 to 12 feet; between it and the shore there is no passage.
At about 20 miles in the interior, almost North from San Pedro, is the
town of Los Angeles, which is the centre of an extensive grazing, agricultural,
and grape growing country. The quantity of grapes, and fruits generaUy,
shipped from San Pedro to San Francisco during the proper season, is already
enormous, having amounted in 1862 to not less than 2,000,000 lbs.
The coasting trade of this place is now greater than the aggregate trade of all
the other ports south of San Francisco.
From point Fermin a line of bold bluff runs exactly north and south for
about 2 mUes, and averages 60 feet in height. Point Vincente, the western
point of the high land of San Pedro, is also bold and has deep water in its
immediate vicinity.
Vessels approaching San Pedro bay from westward through the Santa
Barbara channel make San Pedro hill, as an island projected against the
mountains to the southward and eastward. Approaching point Vincente,
which is the south-west point of the hiU, vessels can keep it close aboard,
there being from 50 to 80 fathoms within a mile of the shore; round point
Fermin within J a mile, in from 6 to 10 fathoms, and open the smaU island
El Moro, run for that island, and when abreast of the landing (readily
recognized by the houses on the bluff,) about 1 mile north of point Fermin,
anchor in 8 fathoms, hard bottom, at i a mile off shore. Vessels must anchor
a mile off to get 5 fathoms.
Coining from the southward with north-west winds, beat in boldly until
abreast of the landing; keep the lead going and anchor anywhere in its vicinity.
Do not approach the low shore, to the north and east of El Moro, closer than
1 mile, at which limit 4 fathoms water wiU be found.
In winter, anchor further out, and more to the southward, in order to be
able to slip the cable and go to sea should a heavy south-easter spring up.
The waters of the lagoon, inside of the low sandy beach, and a mile or
more northward of El Moro, find their principal outlet between that island
and the bluff point % a mile west of it. The entrance is very narrow and
crooked, and has or had two buoys, about 200 yards apart, to mark it. In
1859 it was stated that the 1 bar at the entrance to the creek remains about
the same, as it did in 1852. At mean low water, throwing out the half
tides, only 2 feet of water can be carried over it." A small tow-boat is now,
we believe, used for taking vessels to New San Pedro, situated about 3 miles
inside the bar.
Wood and water are not readily obtained, and charges are high. The beef
raised here is remarkably tough.
The position of the landing place, W.S.W. f S. from El Moro, is considered
to be lat. 33° 43' 20", long. 118° 16' 3".    The corrected establishment of the140
SANTA ANNA LAGOON &c.
W.i
W. 17
41';
thence
by!
!.±E.,
port is 9h. 89m.    The mean rise and fall of the tides is 8*7 feet; of spring
tides 4'7 feet; and of neap tides 2*2 feet.
Santa Anna Lagoon.^-Ai, about 15 miles, from San Pedro in an E. £ S.
direction, is the Santa Anna lagoon which receives the waters of the Santa
Anna river. When examined in 1861 it was found to be some 5 mUes long,
and separated from the ocean by a narrow strip of low sand beach, over which
washes the heavy sweU from tbe north-west and south-east. The lagoon has
a breadth of only a few hundred yards, and a mouth about 50 yards in width,
with a narrow bar, upon which it is supposed 10 or 12 feet of water might be
found at high tide. On this bar there is a very heavy break at aU stages of
the tide, rendering it dangerous to cross in boats of any kind. There is said
to be no safe anchorage off the entrance, and the low straight beach, with a
trend nearly east and west, affords no protection whatever. The San Pedro
wind gap Ues between San Pedro hiU and the Sierra San Juan, to the southeast of the Santa Anna, and the summer winds draw directly on the land,
causing the north-west swell to roU upon the beach with great force. In
winter the south-east and south-west sweU breaks square upon this whole bine
of coast, and would prevent any vessel passing into or out of the lagoon, or
riding at anehor near it. In summer the Santa Anna is said to frequently
dry up before reaching the lagoon.
) The Coast.—From point Vincente the coast trends N. by
mUes; thence W. by S. to point Duma, in lat. 34° 00', long. 118°
to point Mugu, W. £ N. 17 mUes,—the last point Ues N.E.
distant 14 miles from the eastern end of Anacapa. This long curve in the
coast is known as the Bahia Ona. Point Duma rises into a dome-bike form
202 feet high. The land immediately behind it faUs away, so that in making
it from westward it rises into view as an island close under the high mountains. Eastward of point Duma the mountains spring direotly from the
water.
From point Mugu to San Buenaventura, distant 17 miles, the coast has a
general trend N.W. by W.; but, about midway, it curves south-westward of
this course 2£ mUes towards Anacapa, thus contracting the eastern entrance
to the Santa Barbara channel. Two miles westward of point Mugu is Laguna
point, close under which is very deep water, the 10-fathom bine running
within 250 yards of the shore. Between point Mugu and Buenaventura the
coast is low, flat, and sandy, being the opening of the valley of Santa Clara,
through which flows the Santa Clara river; this stream is nearly dry during
the summer, and terminates in lagoons and marshes, but in the rainy season
a volumn of water is brought down having sufficient force to break through
the narrow sand beach and flow into the ocean.
The eastern entrance to the Santa Barbara channel bes between the eastern
end of Anacapa island and point Hueneme, which is about half-way between
point Mugu and Buenaventura. From Anacapa, point Hueneme bears
N.E. by N. \ N., distant 9£ miles. Directly off this point is found a remarkable example of a sub-marine vaUey, commencing with a depth of 10 fathoms,
400 yards from the beach, increasing to 50 fathoms in $ of a mile, and to 118
in less than two miles. Its general direction is South, with a width of a mile,
and bounded on either side by depths of 12 and 15 fathoms. The best
landing is directly on the point; fending in the bight eastward and leeward
of it is impracticable.SANTA BARBARA.
141
There is excellent holding ground off Buenaventura in 10 fathoms, but the
landing is not good.    The 3-fathom line Ues about a J of a mUe off-shore.
The mission of Buenaventura, situated at the foot of the dividing ridge of
the vaUeys of San Buenaventura and Santa Clara, about i a mile from the
shore, was founded March 31st 1782. Its position is about lat. 84° 15',
long. 119° 15'.
At about 15 fniles westward of Buenaventura, on the coast, there is a rich
deposit of sulphur, surface specimens of which have yielded 60 per cent.
Around the locabty are found ashes- and scoria. The ground is hot, and the
gas emitted is almost suffocating.
SANTA BARBARA.—From San Buenaventura the coast trends nearly
W. by N. 23 mUes to Santa Barbara. This roadstead is open to all winds
except those directly from northward; it is however somewhat sheltered by
tbe islands Santa Cruz, Santa Rosa, and San Miguel from the heavy swell
sent on the coast by south-west winds. The depth at £ a mile from the beach
is 6 fathoms, and it is believed that no sunken dangers exist in the kelp which
prevails in some profusion along the shore. When there is any sweU the surf
is very bad, not falling square on to the beach but cutting it at a sharp angle;
at this time landing is difficult. There is anchorage within the line of kelp in
about 4 fathoms,. which is resorted to in summer, but not in winter, because
at the latter season the gales detach and. drive it shoreward in such vast
quantities that, coming across .a-vessels' hawse, it helps to bring home her
anchors. We believe that vessels generally put to sea when there are indications of a gale coming on from south-eastward.*
The shore at Santa Barbara consists of a low sandy beach, which is
terminated to the westward by a bold bluff, named point CastiUo. Tbe Mil
over this bluff is known as La Vigia. The usual landing place is at about
£ a mUe eastward of point CastiUo. The shore is low and flat as far as the
town, f of a nnile distant, but gradually rises to the mission, a prominent
object about 2 miles inland.^ The town is of considerable importance; it is
situated in the midst of a rich agricultural district, running east and west at
the southern base of the Sierra Concepcion, but of Umited breadth. The trade
with San Francisco is not extensive; but this being one of the greatest stock-
raising districts on the coast, vast droves of cattle pass through and are sent
to San Francisco and the mining districts. Regular communication by
steamers and sailing vessels is maintained with San Francisco and other ports.
Wood and provisions in abundance can be obtained here. Water is plentiful,
but not so readily procured.
As a guide to vessels approaching Santa Barbara from westward and southeastward, a lighthouse has been erected on the point at about 2 mUes south-
westward from the landing place.    It stands 183 yards from the edge of the
* See the plan of Santa Barbara on the chart of the coast of California, published by
Messrs. Imray and Son.
t This mission is about 200 feet above the sea. It was founded December 4th, 1786,
and soon became one of the largest and best establishments of the kind in California, and
'in the gardens attached to it the grape and olive were cultivated with success. In the town
of Santa Barbara there is a grape-vine which yielded during the year 1858 over 2000 lbs.
of grapes. A single stem rises from the ground a height of 5 feet, and its branches
supported by poles, cover a very
circumference.
large area.   At the base the trunk measures 2 feet inIf 1
IT
HI
j!
1
j
i
1
1
142
SANTA BARBARA.
bluff, and shows a fixed Ught at 180 feet above the sea, visible 12 miles.
Its position is considered to be lat. 84° 23' 85", long. 119° 42' 5".
If approaching Santa Barbara from westward and south-westward, the hill
La Vigia will be a prominent object. Steer for the bib, and upon approaching
the anchorage keep outside the bine of kelp (here nearly \ a nnle wide);
graduaUy round the point upon which is situated the Ughthouse, and keep
along the kelp until abreast of the town, off which anchor in 7 fathoms. Or,
pass through the kelp and anchor inside of it in 8£ fathoms, hard bottom.
Outside the kelp in 9 or 10 fathoms, the bottom is sticky; vessels occasionaUy
anchor here.
The approach to Santa Barbara from eastward or south-eastward requires
no special remarks. Vessels may pass either eastward or westward of
Anacapa island.
Captain John HaU's experience of Santa Barbara agrees with the foregoing
—" this bay is only sheltered from the N.W. winds, being exposed to the South
and S.W. The anchorage is not very good, being hard sand, and overgrown
with sea-weed. We had such a quantity of this on our anchor when we hove
it up, that it entirely impeded the ship's progress until we got it clear. We
found no tide or currents, but there appeared to be a rise and fell, in-shore,
of about 2 feet. AU kinds of provisions are cheap here, as also fruits, viz.—
grapes, pears, apples, and plums, in the season."
Vancouver has remarked of Santa Barbara, " To sail into the bay requires
but few directions, as it is open, and without any kind of interruption whatever ; the soundings on approaching it are regular, from 15 to 8 fathoms ; the
former, from lj to 2 miles, the latter within l£ cables' length of the shore.
Weeds were seen growing about the roadstead hi many places ; but, so far as
we examined, which was only in the vicinity of our anchorage, they did not
appear to indicate shallower water, or a bottom of a different nature. The
• shores of the roadstead are for the most part low, and terminate in sandy
beaches, to which, however, its western point is rather an exception, being a
steep cbff, moderately elevated."
The Coast.—From the lighthouse at Santa Barbara the coast trends
W. by S., 37 mUes to point Concepcion. At a very short distance behind
the coast is a range of rugged hiUs, over 2000 feet high, forming part of the
Sierra Concepcion (sometimes called the Sierra San Inez), whose sides are
sparsely covered with timber, and through some of whose guUies and gorges
pass smaU streams abounding in the finest trout; from others issue warm
springs having a temperature of about 117° Fahrenheit, and highly impregnated with sulphuretted hydrogen;—these springs are behind the viUage of
Monteeito, eastward of Santa Barbara, and by barometric measurement are
about 1200 feet above the sea.
At about 8 miles westward of Santa Barbara is a large bitumen pit, which
empties directly into the sea, and the bitumen, floating on the water, works
against the summer or north-west winds even beyond point Concepcion. Very
frequently, in calm weather, a great extent of the surface of the channel
becomes iridescent from the thin film of bitumen spread over it. The rocks
along the shore, even westward of point Concepcion, are covered with it.
Sulphur, in large beds and of superior quabty, also exists along the seaboard,
and manifests itself hi aU the warm Bprings.
El Coxo.—At about 2 miles eastward of point Concepcion is the anchorage
of El Coxo, off the entrance to the valley of that name.    This anchorage isPOINT CONCEPCION.
143
better than that off Santa Barbara, and the kelp is not so compact. When
approaching it from westward, pass point Concepcion at the distance of about
£ of a mile, steer E. by N. and gradually round the bluff which is a mile East
from the point, giving it a berth of ± a mile ; run on a N.N.E. course for
f of a mile, when the vaUey wiU open with a sand beach off it. Anchor outside or inside the kelp, according to the choice of depth; 5 fathoms being
obtained within a £ of a mUe of the shore, with hard, sandy bottom. At £ a
mUe from shore the depth is 10 fathoms. There is a large rancho at El Coxo,
and it is one of the very best tracts for grazing. The beef has a finer flavour
and more delicacy than any on the coast. At the head of tbe valleys and in
the mountains is a species of large live oak, very brash when newly cut, but
growing hard by seasoning. WiUow, for fuel, and water can be obtained here,
but neither in abundance.    The water is disagreeable to the taste.
POINT CONCEPCION is a remarkable headland rising to the height of
about 220 feet. It is so conspicuous and prominent an object, that it is said,
when once seen it will never be forgotten. When made from northward, or
from eastward, it rises as an island, but, a nearer approach, discovers it to be
a high promontory, stretching boldly into the ocean, and terminating abruptly.
The land behind it sinks comparatively low, and at first gradually, but soon
rapidly rises to tbe mountains, which attain an elevation of about 2500 feet.
Between 300 and 400 yards south of the face of the cape is a large rock
nearly awash, upon which some of the California steamers have struck in very
foggy weather.
Vancouver says of this pohrt—" It is remarkable by its differing very much
in form from the headlands to the northward. It appears to stretch out from
an extensive tract of low land, and to terminate like a wedge, with its large
end faUing perpendicularly into the sea, which breaks against it with great
violence. Off the point the current sets to the north in the early spring
months."
The lighthouse upon point Concepcion is 35 feet high, and shows a bght
revolving every thirty seconds at 250 feet above the sea, visible 23 miles. The
buUdmg is white, stands near the pitch of the point, and is considered to be
in lat. 34° 26' 47", long. 120° 20' 33".* A fog-beU, stationed seaward of the
lighthouse, is sounded in thick weather every 13£ seconds.
From the bghthouse, Richardson rock off the west end of San Miguel island
bears S. i E. distant 22 miles; the east end of San Miguel island S.E. by
S. i S. 26 miles; and the south-west end of Santa Cruz island S.E. by E. % E.
40 miles.
Mr. Davidson of the United States Coast Survey says—| Next to the islands
of the Santa Barbara channel, point Concepcion is the most prominent and
interesting feature between San Francisco and the peninsula of Lower California.
It has very justly and appropriately been termed the ' cape Horn' and the
\ Hatteras' of the Pacific, on account of the heavy north-westers that are here
met with on coming through the channel, with a great change of cbmate and
meteorological conditions; the transition being remarkably sudden and well
defined. An investigation of the temperature of the ocean, north-west and
east of the cape, would be highly instructive, as some characteristics would
* These particulars of point Conception light are from the official list of Lighthouses
of the United States, published at Washington, 1867. In the Coast Survey Report for
1862, the longitude is stated to be 120° 27'.III
I
H
w i
m
!fl}«
I
ill
§
144
THE ISLANDS OF CALIFORNIA.
naturally be expected from the abrupt change in the direction of the mountains
and coast Une. We have frequently Been vessels coming from the eastward
with all sail set, and light airs from the north, in a very bttle time reduced to
short canvas upon approaching tbe cape, and vessels from the north-west •
coming before a spanking breeze loose it within a few mUes after passing the
cape into the channel. These last would be fortunate in reaching Santa
Barbara.in a day. We have known a vessel to be 3 days working from
San Buenaventura to Santa Barbara, whUst a ten-knot breeze was blowing
west of point Concepcion.
During some summer seasons the fog is almost interminable, but more
particularly among the islands. For the space of six weeks, with clear days
and nights at the cape, the islands have been invisible; rising, however, to an
elevation of 1000 or 1500 feet, the observer plainly sees the summits of the
islands over the sea of fog which envelops them.
When the fogs prevail, they generaUy roll in from seaward at sunset, and
clear away about 10 o'clock next morning.
THE   ISLANDS   OF   CALIFOENIA.
Theso islands commencing with the southernmost are named San Clemente,
Santa Catalina, Santa Barbara, San Nicolas, Anacapa, Santa Cruz, Santa
Rosa, and San Miguel. They are separated from the northern shore by the
Santa Barbara channel, which is about 20 miles wide.
When making Santa Barbara channel from north-westward, shipmasters
readily estimate their approach in thick foggy weather by the peculiar odour of
the bitumen which, issuing from the large pit already mentioned (page 142)
as situated on the shore about 8 miles westward of Santa Barbara and floating
upon the water, works against the summer winds far beyond point Concepcion.
This set westward is found to exist for about 4 miles from shore, and it runs
at a maximum velocity of 1^ miles per hour; further out the current is variable,
but even there its greatest velocity is attained when running westward. From
point Concepcion its direction is southward and westward, being doubtless
influenced by a current from the upper ooast.
Vancouver directs attention to this bitumen, as follows—" The surface of the
sea, which was perfectly smooth and tranquil, was covered with a thick sbmy
substance, which, when separated or disturbed by any little agitation, became
very luminous, whilst the Ught breeze that came principally from the shore
brought with it a strong smell of tar, or of some such resinous substance.
The next morning the sea had the appearance ef dissolved tar floating upon its
surface, which covered the ocean in all directions within the limits of our
view, and indicated that in the neighborhood it was not subject to much
agitation."
Sir Edward Belcher, in October, 1889, also observes—" Off this part of the
coast, westward of Santa Barbara, we experienced a very extraordinary sensation, as if the ship was on fire, and after a very close investigation attributed it
to a scent from the shore, it being more sensible on deck than below; and the
land breeze confirming this, it occurred to me that it might arise from naphtha
on the surface."CORTEZ BANK.
145
Among the islands, as far as San Nicolas, the current runs southward. On
the Cortez shoal it frequently runs against the N.W. wind at the rate of
nearly 2 miles per hour. At other times it has been found to run in an
opposite direction with nearly as much strength.
The rainy season here commences in the early part of November, and continues until the middle of March. The quanti+y of rain that faUs does not
average over 15 inches, but some seasons are marked by excessive drought.
During the winter S.E. gales prevail, and sometimes during the summer
months southerly weather wiU bring up heavy rain.
Cortez Bank.—This bank, within the depth of 50 fathoms, has an extent
of about 15 miles in a W. by N. and E. by S. direction, its east end being in
lat. 32° 24', long. 118° 59' 30", and 'its west end in lat. 32° 32', long.
119° 17'30". It has an average and nearly uniform width of 3£ miles. The
bottom is hard, composed of white sand, broken shells, and fine coral at the
south-east portion; and sand, with broken shells, at the north-west. The
shoalest and most dangerous part is that known as the Bishop rock, which is
5 mUes from tbe south-east tail of the bank, and has but 2£ fathoms of water
upon it. Around this danger the depth increases gradually, and in an extent
of 2^ miles in the general direction of the bank reaches but 15 fathoms. The
rock is considered to be in lat. 32° 25f, long. 119° 5', and from it the
north-west end of the island of San Nicolas bears N.W- by N., distant 57
miles ; and the south-east end of the island of San Clemente N.E. £ N. 46
miles.
A shoal spot of 10 fathoms is also situated in about the middle of the bank;
it is of limited extent, being only ^ a mile square within the 15 fathom curve.
Its position is considered to be lat. 32° 26f, long. 119° 10J', and from it the
north-west end of San Nicolas bears N.N.W. f W., distant 54 miles ; and
the south-east end of San Clemente N.E. ^ E., distant 50 mUes. From the
Bishop rock it bears W. J N., distant 5 miles. North-westward of this shoal
spot the depth is nearly uniform at 49 fathoms for 7£ miles, and between it
and the Bishop rock the depth is uniform at about 43 fathoms.
Upon the Cortez bank the current is variable, frequently setting against
the strong N.W. winds with a velocity of nearly 2 miles per hour, and producing at all times a heavy swell, and even in moderate weather breaking
beavUy upon the rocks. When passing over the bank at night its locality
may be known by the increased swell. In the detailed examination of 1856
it was found that the general set of the current was southward and eastward,
and the greatest velocity 1£ miles per hour; but no statement was made
concerning the prevailing wind.
The Cortez bank Ues in the direct route now foUowed by the Panama and
San Francisco steamships, and was discovered by Captain Cropper, of the
steamship Cortez, in March 1853. His position was determined by bearings
of San Nicolas and San Clemente, and was very close, being within a mile of
the latest and best assigned place. He says that the water around it was in
violent commotion, and thrown up suddenly in columns at regular intervals of
4 or 5 minutes. At first he thought he saw breakers ; and occasionally the
water broke as on a reef, but he became confident that the disturbance was
owing to submarine volcanic agency. The specimens of the bottom negative
this idea. He found his depth of water reduced from 42 fathoms to 9, from
which it is evident that he was on the shoal spot in about the middle of the
bank, and saw the water breaking upon the Bishop rock,—the same appearance
L146
SAN CLEMENTE AND SANTA CATALINA.
that he witnessed having been seen many times since by others, and the
nature of the rocky bottom and depth of water supporting the assumption.
The position of the bank was afterwards more closely determined by tbe
commander of the steamship Pacific; but in tbe Coast Survey operations the
10-fathom spot was found, and tbe surveying schooner used in that duty was
anchored on it 5 days.
Attention was subsequently called to a more extended examination of the
vicinity by the clipper sbip S. S. Bishop, of PhUadelphia, striking (1855) upon
the rock since caUed by her name, and, under unfavourable circumstances,
two points of rock were supposed to exist, to which approximate positions
were assigned. In 1856 tbe bank was sounded over to the extent of
130 square miles ; and from a consideration of the highly favourable circumstances under which this last survey was made, confidence is expressed that
the point of rock above mentioned is the only one existing ; but as it is very
difficult to find detached single points of rock below the surface in a sea-way,
it will not be surprising if others be eventuaUy found. At aU events a prudent
navigator will give this bank a good berth. Its existence forcibly suggests
the probabibty that other submarine ridges lie parallel to the coast.
SAN CLEMENTE is a lofty, bold island, the south end of which is in
lat. 32° 49' 30", long. 118° 24' 15". From this point it extends 22 miles in a
N.W. by W. direction, with an average breadth but little exceeding 2 mUes,
and at the same time gradually decreases in height. From its south extremity
point Loma, San Diego, bears E. £ N. distant 60 miles. The island is very
barren and neither wood nor water can be procured from it; the soundings
around it show a depth of from 36 to 130 fathoms close in shore, except
off the north-west point, from which a reef makes out about a mile.
At the north-west end of the island a small indentation of the shore line in
lat. 33° 2', long. 118° 34', forms an anchorage having a width of f of a mile,
by i a mUe in depth, with soundings decreasing from 12 fathoms, (on the
Une of a large rocky islet at the west side to a point E. by S. from it) to 4 and
5 fathoms close in shore. Kelp wUl be found in 10 fatboms, but tbe bottom
is tolerably regular and hard. It is anything but a pleasant or safe anchorage
in bad N.W. weather, and even in heavy southerly weather the sweU must
roll in disagreeably.
There is also anchorage under the S.E. end of the island, in the deepest
part of the indentation of the shore, but the bottom is rocky and irregular.
The S.E, point is a vast sandstone pyramid; and when it is brought to bear
North, and the shore f of a mile distant, the anchorage will lie W. by N. £ N.
If miles, inside the kelp, in 10 to 15 fathoms, and £ of a mile from the
narrow sand beach at the foot of the cliffs. Outside of the kelp the depth
ranges from 10 to 30 fathoms. This anchorage affords protection in heavy
north-west weather.
SANTA CATALINA.—The south-west end of this island is in lat.
33° 20', long. 118° 17', and bears N. f W, from the south-west point of San
Clemente; thence the island extends W. by N. f N., 17£ miles, with an
average breadth of 4 miles in its southern, and of 2 mUes in its northern part.
It is very lofty as it rises to the height of about 3000 feet, and is remarkable
for a great depression, at 5 miles from its north end, which runs partly
through it and forms a cove on each side, in either of which (according to the
direction of the prevaiUng wind) vessels may anchor and obtain shelter.
This depression in the island bears S.S.W. from point Fermin, San PedroSANTA BARBARA.
147
bay, distant 18^- miles. The land between the two coves is not more than
80 feet high; but the hills on each side rise to the height of 2000 or 3000
feet, so that when Santa Catalina is viewed from a good offing, North or South
of it, it appears to be two islands.
The cove on the south side of the island, just aUuded to, is only about £ of
a mile in width, but its approaches are bold, and, so far as known, free from
hidden dangers. To find it, run along the south-west side of the island and
make for the depression ; then stand in for the opening, keeping a little left
of mid-channel until £ of a mile inside of the heads; thence keep in mid-
channel until abreast of the long, low point on the right, and anchor in
5 fathoms, soft bottom. There is a depth of 3 fathoms immediately inside
of the low point, with hard bottom, but not room enough for a vessel to swing.
If the wind is blowing from the N.W., vessels wUl loose it at the heads, and
perhaps require to be towed in.
The cove at the depression on the north side of the island is also small,
with a reef hi the centre and two large outlying rocks. A steamer could run
in on the west side of the rocks, and anchor off the low beach in 10 fathoms,
when the reef would be N. by E. from her, distant | of a mUe. SmaU craft
wiU here find protection from the prevailing winds, but experience difficulty
in getting out, as there is always a swell setting in, and the wind blows in
flaws and eddies on account of tbe high hills. Between the two points forming the anchorage the distance is i a mile, and the depth ^ of a mile. From
observations made on the low shore of this cove its position has been
ascertained to be lat. 33° 26' 33", long. 118° 28' 50".
The soundings around the island show deep water, from 19 to 75 fathoms,
close in shore, with no outlying rocks except off the north cove. The shores
are rocky, and on the southern side fearfully abrupt, but on the northern
shore there are several indentations, where boats may land at almost any
season. Deep and precipitous gulches are formed by the ridges of rock
running diagonally across the island from N.E. to S.W., and occasionally a
smaU valley varies the scene. A few settlers cultivate these spots, but their
inconsiderable extent precludes tbe realizing of anything beyond a bare
sustenance. At about mid-way between the north-west extremity of the island
and the great break there is a spring of good water, and at the south-east
point good water has been obtained by sinking weUs to a depth of 50 feet or
more, but in the intermediate places water found at the same depth is
brackish. There is a large pond on the low land between the anchorages,
but the water is very brackish. Scrub-oak is obtained for fire-wood, and a
growth of thorny bushes covers the whole island, rendering travelling very
difficult. The island is partiaUy stocked with cattle and sheep, and at one
time vast numbers of wfld goats abounded, but they have helped to supply the
California market with fresh meat.
SANTA BARBARA.—This Utile island is distant about 23 miles in a
W. by S. direction, from the north end of Santa Catalina, and its centre is in
lat. 88° 80', long. 119° 2'. It is situated almost exactly mid-way between
the north end of San Clemente and the east end of Santa Cruz, and at an
equal distance from the shores of Santa Catalina and San Nicolas. Its extent
does not exceed 2 miles of shore-bine; its elevation at the highest part is
about 500 feet, and the top has an area of about 30 acres covered with soil.
There is no water, and not a vestige of wood.
The shores of the island are rocky and abrupt, presenting on the north-east
l 2148
SAN NICOLAS AND ANACAPA.
and south sides perpendicular cliffs exposed to the fuU force of the sea.
Landing is at all times difficult and dangerous. The water around it is
deep, and there are no outlying rocks. It is said to be much more enveloped
in fogs than the neighbouring islands.
SAN NICOLAS, is distant 25 miles S.W. from Santa Barbara, and is further from tbe land than any of the islands; it is also the driest and most sterile.
It is 8 miles long W.N.W. and E.S.E., and has an average breadth of
3£ miles. Its height is about 600 feet, and, Uke San Clemente, it is comparatively flat-topped, but falling to the southern end. The sides are bold
and precipitious, and composed of coarse sandstone. The depth at a moderate
distance from it is 10 to 48 fathoms; at 2£ roiles northward from it are
soundings of 40 and 42 fathoms. From its north end point Fermin, San
Pedro, bears N.E. by E., distant 67 miles.
The south-east end of San Nicolas island is a low sandy point, whose
position is considered to be lat. 33° 14' 12", long. 119° 25'. Vessels may
anchor off this end of the island in 10 fathoms, hard bottom, but some
inconvenience is occasioned by the steady southerly current; this makes a
landing difficult, as the surf cuts the beach at an acute angle.
Breakers extend from the north end of the island about 2£ ndles, and it is
said also from the southern point to the distance of If miles; this is doubtless
in heavy weather.
Begg Rock.—At about 7 miles N.W. by W. £ W., from the north-west
end of San Nicolas is the Begg rock, which is about 40 feet high, bold,
and
Its
so well defined as to be distinctly visible from the distance of 10 miles
position is about lat. 33° 22' 30", long. 119° 39' 30".
The depth near the south-east side of the Begg rock is 62 fathoms, and
near its north-west side-52 fathoms. Between it and San Nicolas, the bottom
is irregular and rocky, and at nearly mid-way are soundings of 40 to 45
fathoms, coral.
ANACAPA, although always spoken of as one island is a curiously formed
group of three islands, extending in nearly an E.N.E. direction 5 miles, and
situated in lat. 34° 1', and between longitudes 119° 19' and 119° 24'; the
actual position of its west end is considered to be lat. 34° 0' 30", long.
119° 24' 36". From its west end the east point of the island of Santa Cruz
bears W. \ S. distant 4£ miles; and, from its east end Santa Barbara light
bears N.W. f W., 28 miles, and point Hueneme, the nearest point of the
main land N.E. by N. \ N., 9f miles.
The western island of Anacapa consists of a peak 930 feet in height, with a
base of over 2 miles by f of a mile ; this is separated from the middle island
by a gap 10 feet wide, through which boats can pass. The middle island is
nearly 2 miles long by 500 yards wide, whilst the eastern island is bttle over
a mile long by 500 yards wide. The gap separating the middle and eastern
islands is over 200 yards wide, but so completely filled with rocks as to be
impassable for boats, which can, however, land on the north side of the
island.
The whole group forming the island of Anacapa is composed of coarse,
dark grey sandstone, very rotten and crumbling. The sides are perpendicular,
and from 250 to 300 feet high. The main peak is marked on the north side
by several deep gulches with almost vertical sides, running from the summit
to the bluff. The whole formation is fiUed with innumerable cavities, giving
it the appearance of an enormous blackened honeycomb.    At the easternSANTA CRUZ AND SANTA ROSA.
149
extremity is found a very beautiful arch in one of the outlying rocks.    The
soil is loose and thin, and not a drop of water is to be found on the islands.
The depth immediately off the cbffs of Anacapa is generally from 5 to 6
fathoms, which increases to 17 and 25 fathoms at an offing of about a f of a
mUe. Close to the arched rocks are soundings of 9 to 11 fathoms. The
depth mid-way between the island and Santa Cruz, is 30f fathoms, grey sand,
coral and shells; this prevails with tolerable regularity across the channel,
but increases to 35 fathoms at f of a mile from Santa Cruz island.
SANTA CRUZ.—This island, the largest of the California islands, lies
about 20 mnes from tbe coast and opposite to, or almost due south from, the
town of Santa Barbara. It is 21 mUes long East and West, and has an average
width of 4 mUes; its western part is tbe broadest. From its east end Santa
Barbara bght bears N.W. f N., 24 miles; from Prisoner harbour, this light
bears N. by W. -t W., 22 miles ; and from its west end the same light bears
N. by E. i E., 21 miles.
The island, composed of coarse dark grey sandstone, crumbling and rotten
bike that of Anacapa, is bold and about 1700 feet in height. Its eastern
part is extremely irregular, barren, and destitute of water ; and the surface of
the north-eastern portion is thickly strewn with large angular pieces of stone,
broken as if with a hammer.
On the northern side of the island, and near the middle, the shore makes
a moderately deep curve, forming a roadstead named Prisoner harbour, at
the opening of a valley, where plenty of wood and water can be obtained.
Anchorage may be had at a f of a mile from the middle of the beach in
15 fathoms, sandy bottom ; but there is no protection from the heavy swell
setting in with a north-wester,—it, however, affords excellent refuge from
gales from south-eastward. The position of the beach on the eastern side of
the little stream of fresh water in this harbour is considered to be lat.
34° I 10", long. 119° 40'.
The soundings round the island show deep water close to tbe shore. There
are rocks showing quite plainly at 1 mUe from the south-west point of the
island.
SANTA ROSA.—This is the middle island of the group off the coast
between Santa Barbara and point Concepcion. Its general shape is that of a
parallelogram, with the direction of the longer axis almost exactly East and
West, and 15 miles in length; and the shorter North and South, giving it a
width of 10 miles.
On the north-west side of the island, and mid-way between the north and
west points, a reef extends out If miles.
There is a good passage between Santa Cruz and Santa Rosa,
width of 5 miles, and one also between it and San Miguel of 4 miles.    Both
passages are frequently used by the California and Panama steam ships.
The soundings round the island do not show such deep water as that existing
round the others. On tbe north-west and north-east sides a depth of from
15 to 20 fathoms is found at 2 miles from the shore; on tbe south-east and
south-west sides the water is much deeper.
The outline of the island is bold, but not so high as Santa Cruz. The bills
are rolling, and covered with coarse grass and bushes. No harbours exist
around its shores, which are steep and broken.
The approximate geographical position of the south point of the island is
lat. 33° 58', long. 120° 4'; and of the western point, lat. 33° 58V,
long. 120° 12V.
having a150
SAN MIGUEL.
SAN MIGUEL.—San Miguel, the westernmost of the Cabfornia' islands,
is 7£ miles long in an E. £ N. and W. i S, dfrection, and has an average
breadth of 2 J miles. From its west end point Concepcion bears N. by W. f W.
distant 25 miles, and point ArgueUo N.W. by N. £ N. 35 miles. This end
of the island is bold and narrow, gradually increasing in breadth until it attains
8£ miles; as seen from south-westward, it appeal's to be several hundred feet
in height, and composed of sand dunes, therein differing from all the other
islands. The eastern face of the island is nearly straight for 2 miles; the
southern face is nearly straight along its whole length, with high, abrupt
shores.
On the N.E. side of the island is a small bay named Cuyler harbour, off
which lies a rock or islet more than a f of a mile long, and several hundred
feet high. From this islet to the head of the bay the distance is If miles,
and the course S.W. Close under the western side of the bay is anchorage
in 6 fathoms, secure from every wind except the North, which rarely blows.
The eastern part of the bay is full of rocks and reefs, and ought to be avoided.
The reef in the middle of the bay bears S.W. from the west end of the islet,
distant £ a mile; it is the same distance from the west point of the bay, near
the anchorage, and bears from it E. by S. At about £ of a mile S.W. by S. £ S.
from the west end of the islet is a rock, and rocky bottom; and on the same
line of bearing, but £ a mile distant, another. The southern part of the islet
is about £ a mile from the east shore of the bay. The bay shores are high,
steep, and rolling, and covered with coarse grass and busbes. There is no
water here in summer, but during the winter water drains down the gully at
the beach in the middle and southern part of the harbour. The south-west
part of this harbour is considered to be in lat. 34° 3', long. 120° 20' 27".
The sea round San Miguel island is deep, a depth of 22 fathoms prevailing
at about a mile from its shores. In mid-channel between it and point Concepcion there is no bottom at 120 fathoms.
Tides.—The corrected estabbshment of the port
9h. 25m.    The mean rise and fall of tides
IS   d'Y
at Cuyler harbour is
feet;   of spring tides
5*1 feet; and of neap tides 2-8 feet.
Richardson. Rocks,—These two rocks showing weU above water, Ue
N.W. by W. from the western extremity of San Miguel; the larger is distant
5 miles, and bears S. £ E., distant 22 miles, from point Concepcion, and
S.S.E., 30 miles from point ArgueUo. Off the inner or smaller rock a reef
extends a short distance southward and westward. Deep water is found around
the rocks, and vessels may pass between them.
POINT CONCEPCION TO POINT KEYES.
From point Concepcion the coast trends N.W. by W. J- W. 12 miles to
point ArgueUo. The shore is bold and compact, curving sUghtly eastward
between the two points, and the mountains immediately behind are not less
than 8000 feet in height. At 200 or 800 yards off point Arguello are some
detached rocks, upon which the steamship Yankee Blade struckJand was lost
on the 1st of October 1854, and 415 persons perished.SAN LUIS OBISPO.
151
At 8 miles northward of point ArgueUo is a small stream named La
Purissima, from the mission La Purissima Concepcion situated a few miles
inland; it rises in long. 119° 20', at about 15 mues from the coast, and runs
paraUel therewith behind the Sierra Concepcion.
The first point northward of point ArgueUo is point Purissima, from which
a reef extends about a f of a mile to the S.S.W.* Between points Purissima
and Sal, a distance of 7-jr miles, is a small stream named Ouyamas.
From point ArgueUo to point Sal the distance is 19 miles in a N. by W. f W.
direction. Point Sal is marked by streaks of yellow sand, except at the extreme point; the extremity is formed by high, round, black rocks, off which
are several sunken rocks, extending i a mile southward and westward. This
stretch of the coast is very similar to that behind points Concepcion and
ArgueUo, but, after passing point Sal, the mountains fall back, and the shore
is formed of sand hiUs. The general bend hence is North, until the shore
commences sweeping westward to form the bay of San Luis Obispo, and the
shores become high and abrupt.
SAN LUIS OBISPO.—At about 17 miles northward of point Sal, and
at nearly 36 miles from point ArgueUo, is the bay of San Luis Obispo which
is an open roadstead, exposed to southward and by no means a desirable
anchorage, for even during heavy north-west weather a bad swell rolls in,
rendering it extremely uncomfortable. The landing is frequently very bad,
and often impracticable, but the best place is in the mouth of the creek,
keeping the rocks at its mouth on the starboard hand. Fresh" water may be
obtained from a small stream opening on the beach at i a mile westward of
the creek.
Off point San Luis, which forms the S.W. part of the bay, are some rocks.
When making the anchorage vessels should give this point a berth of i a mile,
passing in 6 or 8 fathoms ; run on a N. by E. course and anchor at f of a
mile from the shore in 6 fathoms, sticky bottom; soundings of 4 fathoms can
be got about a f of a mile from the beach. In winter, anchor far enough out
to clear point San Luis if a south-easter should come up. During southerly
weather a landing is frequently effected at the watering place, when impracticable at the creek.
The distance from the rock off point San Luis to the mouth of the creek is
l£ miles; from the same rock to a white rock the bearing and distance are
N. 70° E. 2f miles;—a black rock bes halfway between the white rock and
the mouth of the creek.
The estimated position of the bluff at the east side of the small fresh-water
stream westward of the creek in San Luis Obispo bay, is lat. 35° 10' 37",
long. 120° 48' 81".
Tides.—The corrected estabbshment of the port at San Luis Obispo bay
is lOh. 8m. The mean rise and faU of tides is 3*6 feet; of spring-tides
4*8 feet; and of neap-tides 2*4 feet.
At about 10 miles inland from the bay of San Luis Obispo, is the town of
the same name, situated in the middle of an extensive and excellent grazing
* This point is known on the coast as point Pedernales, signifying point of Flints, but
now generally-, and erroneously printed Pedro Kales. Formerly it was called San Pedro
Nolasco. NeSr this point the steamship Edith was lost in 1849. The state survey of
California places point Pedernales only 2 miles northward of point Arguello.152
SAN SIMEON BAY.
m
country. Communication is maintained between the bay and San Francisco
and other ports by steamers and Unes of packets.*
From point San Luis the coast trends in a straight line W.N.W., for a
distance of 8 miles to point Buchon; close along this shore are several large
rocks. Thence the coast trends abruptly northward, running to the high
conical rock called El Moro,' distant 8 miles—these two shores forming the
seaward base of mount Buchon, which rises to a great height and is readily
distinguished in coming from the northward or southward.
From El Moro the shore gradually trends westward, and forms a deep
indentation known as Estero bay. Behind El Moro are several lagoons or
streams, and the high land retreats for some distance, leaving the shore low
and sandy, while the north shore is rugged, and guarded by rocks. The
N.W. point of the bay named point Los Esteros, bears N.W. £ N., from the
west point of mount Buchon, distant 13 miles; within these points the shore
line of the bay recedes about 5 miles.
From point Los Esteros to the western point of the anchorage of San
Simeon the coast runs nearly straight N.W. by W., for a distance of 15 miles.
The shores are not so bold as those southward or northward of it, and the
mountains fall well back, leaving a fine robing country of no great elevation,
and weU suited to agriculture.
SAN SIMEON BAY.—This is a small exposed roadstead, situated in
lat. 35c
may be
winds.
Esteros
38' 24", Jlong. 121° 10' 22"f, in which tolerably
good
anchorage
obtained during north-west winds, but it is unsafe with southerly
The south-west point of the bay bears N.W. by W. from point
and is distant 15 miles. The shore of the bay trends between
N.N.W. to N., for £ a mile, and then sweeps away westward about l£ mUes,
gradually taking a south-east direction. The land behind the bay is comparatively low and gently rolling, the high hills retiring weU inland.
Vessels from northward may run boldly round the S.W. point of the bay,
within a few hundred yards of the shore, in 8 or 9 fathoms; they should then
bear up northward and anchor anywhere off the sand beach, in 5 fathoms,
hard bottom, at a bttle more than a | of a mUe from shore. The beach is
i a ndle long, stretching weU out, and rendering the landing disagreeable with
any swell; but in such cases it is usual to land on the western part of the
beach. Eastward of the sand beach ihe shore is bluff and guarded with rocks.
Vessels from southward must make short tacks close in shore, or they wiU
assuredly miss the bay. The only sure marks for it are the Piedras Blancas,
subsequently mentioned.
The Coast.—From San Simeon bay the coast trends W. f N., 4 miles
to the Piedras Blancas, two large white sharp-topped rocks situated a short
* It is stated that there is a sunken rock at about 8 miles S.S.W. from point San Luis
upon which kelp has been found at the depth of 4 fathoms. On the old Spanish charts of
this coast, an island appears laid down in that direction, but distant about 8 leagues. One
of the Pacific mail steam ships laid to in a south-east gale and thick fog off point Concepcion, and drifting northward came unexpectedly upon a sunken rock, upon which the sea
was breaking heavily. The commander supposed the vessel to be then off point Sal, and
had so plotted the rock upon his chart ; but upon being informed of the alleged existence
of a rock off San Luis Obispo, he was satisfied that he had been near it, but unfortunately
had no opportunity of determining his position.
This locality demands a thorough examination, as it is in the direct track of the whole
California trade from San Francisco.
+ The place of observation was on the rise just off the beach, and bearing N. 5° W.
from the south-west point of the bay.CARMEL BAY.
158
distance from the shore, the outer and larger of which is hi bit. 85° 89',
long. 121° 15'. They are very conspicuous rocks, and as there are none bike
them on this part of the coast, they are an exceUent mark for the bay of San
Simeon. From them, point San Luis bears S.E. f E., distant 88 miles;
point Los Esteros S.E. by E. i E., 18 miles; and point ArgueUo S.E. £ S.,
72 miles.
From the Piedras Blancas the coast trends N.W. £ W., a distance of
67 miles, in an almost perfectly straight bine. At about 18 mUes from these
rocks the above-mentioned bearing cuts a bold bluff and rounded point named
Punta Gorda, off which, and for 2 or 3 miles along the shore northward, there
are many rocks.* Continuing on the same bearing, and at a distance of
49 miles from Piedras Blancas, is point Sur, which extends out nearly -J- a
mile. As seen from northward or southward, at a distance of 10 mUes, point
Sur appears as a high, barge, round-topped island; but upon approaching it a
low neck of land is seen, connecting it with the main. Its approximate
position is, lat. 36° 19', long. 121° 52'.
The highest peak of the range bordering the coast Ues 6 miles in from
point Sur, and attains an elevation of 4414 feet.
StiU continuing on the same bearing, 57 miles from Piedras Blancas and
H miles from point Sur, another sbghtly projecting point is passed, at about
1 mile eastward of the course. Thence the coast trends more eastward,
running N.N.W. for 8 nules, to point Cypress, and passing point Carmel, the
south point of Carmel bay.
From point ArgueUo to point Sur the bearing is N. 44° W., and the
distance 120 miles. From point Sur to point Reyes the bearing is N. 43° W.,
and distance 118 miles.
The mountains, which had faUen back behind Los Esteros, graduaUy
approach the shore-line north of San Simeon, and about 10 nules north of
Piedras Blancas they come down abruptly to the coast, and run parallel with
it to point Carmel, forming the boldest and most compact shore that we have
yet passed, and attaining a uniform elevation of nearly 4000 feet. These
mountains are known as the Sierra de Santa Lucia. From their abrupt faces
may be seen cascades faUing from a height of 40 or 50 feet directly into
the sea.
CARMEL BAY.—Between points Carmel and Cypress, which are about
8 nuiles apart, Ues the small, rocky and unsafe bay of Carmel. At the southern extremity is a small cove, sufficiently land-locked and protected for small
vessels. In the vicinity there is an extensive quarry of granite, and several
smaU coasting vessels are employed for its transportation to San Francisco;
but there is so Utile space that they are compeUed to warp in and out by buoys
placed at the entrance. Point Cypress, the north point of the bay, is low,
and covered with cypress to the water, and is the first wooded point met with
in coming from southward. The upper branches of the trees are spread out
by the influence of the strong prevailing winds, and present a flat or umbrellalike appearance. The Mission del Carmelo is situated but a short distance
from the shores of the bay, and can be seen from the water in certain directions.
* This point is the cape San Martin of Cabrillo. As there is a point under cape
Mendocino, more generally known as Punta Gorda, it has been suggested that this point
retain the name given to it by Cabrillo.MONTEREY BAY.
The Coast.—From point Cypress to point Pinos the general direction of
the shore is N. f E., and the distance 4 miles. Point Pinos makes out as a
low rounding point, bringing the pines, with which it is covered, within a f of a
mile of the shore, off which the rocks make out a f of a mUe, and the line of
8 fathoms nearly % a mile, when the depth suddenly increases to 10 or 15
fathoms, and at a mile reaches 40 or 45 fethoms. The 3-fathom line follows
the shore within a £ or \ a mUe into Monterey, whilst outside of that line the
depth increases as suddenly as off the point. Vessels should always give
point Pinos a good berth, as a very heavy swell almost invariably sets upon it.
This point is the northern termination of the long and elevated range named
Sierra de Santa Lucia, extending southward and forming the bold rocky coastline to San Luis Obispo.
The lighthouse upon point Pinos is 35 feet high, and shows & fixed Ught at
91 feet above the sea, visible 18 miles. Its position is considered to be lat.
86° 37' 52", long. 121° 55'.
MONTEREY BAY.—Point Pinos forms the south-west point of this
bay, and point Santa Cruz (the western point of the anchorage of Santa Cruz)
the north-west point. A hue joining these two points runs N. 27° W.,
19& miles,  and the greatest width of the bay, near the mouth of Salinas
river, is 9f miles.
The only part of Monterey bay in which vessels can anchor in security is
near its southern part, off the town, at about 3 mUes south-eastward from point
Pinos, where is good riding, and tolerable shelter for a few vessels. In order
to be protected from the sea, it is necessary to lie at no great distance from
the south-west shore, whence, either at night or in the morning, the
prevailing wind from the land permits vessels to leave the bay, which otherwise would be a tedious task, by the opposition of the wind along the coast,
the general direction of which is between N.W. and N.N.W. To these points of
the compass the anchorage is whoUy exposed, but as point Pinos to some
extent protects it from the swell of the sea, and these winds seldom blow
stronger than a moderate gale, the anchorage is tolerably safe and convenient;
notwithstanding north-westerly winds are common throughout the greater part
of the year, there are few instances known of their being so violent as to affect
tbe safety of vessels tolerably well found in anchors and cables. Tbe soundings are regular, from 30 to 4 fethoms, on a bottom of sand and mud ; and,
the shores are sufficiently steep for all the purposes of navigation,—without
rocks or any known sunken dangers.
From point Pinos to the anchorage off the town of Monterey, the course is
E. by S. i S. The shore towards the town is rugged, composed of granite,
and covered with a heavy growth of fir; but eastward of the town is a long,
sandy beach, backed by sand dunes of sUght elevation. For a distance of 10
miles along this beach the line of 3 fathoms Ues at a distance of 150 yards
from the shore, the water deepening rapidly beyond that, and the bottom
almost everywhere hard.
Vessels approaching Monterey from northward, should follow the coast from
point Ano Nuevo to point Santa Cruz, then run weU into the bay, but not too
far, for fear of losing the wind, and to avoid the set of the heavy sweU roUing
towards the beach. Leaving point Santa Cruz and. keeping on a S.E. by E.
course about 15 miles, wiU bring them into 25 fethoms, and nearly 2 miles
from the beach; thence a South course for 8 miles wUl bring them to the
anchorage in 10 fathoms, and i a mile from the landing.    These precautionsMONTEREY BAY.
15*
^
a    3
«
U              *
<3      2$ *
«•      <o|"
*5
**          t\-i
■*..      Q  .■'.■•'>
N 1L
ft*      *< :S|
gfe
Jrf      t*&i
^1
*
¥fW^
. L/a ,    in
uguiwiHuuB iu aujF uuitMT pan man tnat
used as an anchorage, as there is generaUy a heavy swell from the westward,
and deep water close to the shore., l»1
154
;'I  '.\^.-V    ■
MONTEREY BAY
11
r^
f£| y$
Z-.   ] '•. c   Q
m<
from the beach; thence a South course for 8 miles will m-mg xnem to i,lt.
anchorage in 10 fethoms, and £ a mile from the landing.    These precautions*w_
MONTEREY BAY.
155
are necessary, because point Pinos, with the whole bay, is almost continually
enveloped in a dense fog. Very frequently the coasting steamers have to run
for the beach, and then be guided by the route to the anchorage.
A direct course from point Ano Nuevo to the anchorage is S.E. £ E., and
the distance 36£ miles. From point Pinos to point Ano Nuevo the bearing is
N. 47° W., and the distance 34 miles.
By anchoring well in at the western side of the anchorage vessels will avoid
much of the swell that comes in with the heavy north-west'winds, but never
sufficient to make any berth there dangerous. In heavy southerly weather
point Pinos breaks tbe swell, but the wind draws very strong over the anchorage. The water shoals from 15 to 3 fathoms in a distance of 300 yards, and
the lead should be used to avoid running in too far.
When the California mail steamships stopped at Monterey, they frequently
ran outside of point Pinos, or in very dangerous proximity to it. This led to
their firing a gun when approaching the harbour during foggy or dark weather,
and upon the report being heard at the fort a gun was fired in answer, and
the exchange kept up until the steamer was safe at her anchorage.
The. approximate geographical position of the end of tbe wharf, abreast of
the custom-bouse at Monterey, is lat. 36° 36' 17", long. 121° 52' 27".
Tides.—The corrected estabbsbment, of the port of Monterey is lOh. 12m.
The mean rise and faU of tides is 3*4 feet; of spring tides 4-3 feet; and of
neap tides 2'5 feet.
The town of Monterey presents a very pretty appearance as seen from the
water. Immediately behind it the country rises in plateaux, diversified by hiU
and vaUey, and beautifully dotted by oak groves. It was the capital of
California while under the rule of Mexico, and for some years after it became
a State.
Regular communication is kept up with all parts of tbe coast by steamers
and numerous sailing vessels. Stages coummunicate with Santa Cruz and all
the towns to San Francisco.
Captain Beechey R.N. (1827) says of Monterey—" The anchorage is in
the south angle of the great bay extending between point Ano Nuevo and point
Pinos. It is necessary to be clese to the shore, both on account of tbe depth
of water, and in order to receive the protection of point Pinos, without which
vessels could not remain in the bay. It presents to the eye a very exposed
anchorage, but no accidents have ever occurred to any vessel properly found
in cables and anchors, in which respect it very much resembles the bay of
Valparaiso, nearly in the same paraUel in the southern hemisphere.
The town and presidio of Monterey are situated upon a plain between the
anchorage and a range of hills covered with woods of pine and oak. At the
distance of a league to the southward of the presidio bes the mission of San
Carlos, situated in a valley near the river Carmel; a small stream emptying
itself into a deep rocky bay. The shores of the bay, and indeed of the whole
of the coast near point Pinos, are armed with rocks of granite, upon which the
sea breaks furiously; and, as there is no anchorage near them on account of
the great depth of water, it is. dangerous to approach the coast in light or
variable winds. Fortunately some immense beds of sea-weed lie off tbe coast,
and are so impenetrable, that they are said to have saved several vessels which
were driven into them by the sweU, during calm and foggy weather.
Shies should not enter the bay in bgbt winds in any other part than that
used as an anchorage, as there is generally a heavy swell from the westward,
and deep water close to the shore.156
MONTEREY BAY.
m
It is impossible to mistake point Pinos, if the weather be at all clear, as its
aspect is very different to that of any part of the bay northward of it. It is a
long, sloping, rocky projection, surmounted by pine-trees, from which it takes
its name; whereas the coast Une of the bay is all sandy beach. There is no
danger in approaching point Pinos, except that which may ensue from a heavy
swell almost always setting upon the point, and from light winds near the
shore, as the water is too deep for anchorage. With a breeze from southward,
point Pinos should be passed as closely as possible; a f of a mile wiU not be
too near; and that shore should be bugged in order to fetch the anchorage.
In case of having to make a tack, take care to avoid a shoal at the south-east
angle of the bay, which may be known by a great quantity of sea-weed upon it;
there is no other danger. This shoal has 8£ and 4 fethoms upon its outer
edge, and 7 fathoms near it. With a fair wind steer boldly towards the sandy
beacb at the head of the bay, and anchor at about £ of a mtte off shore in 9
fethoms, the fort upon the hiU near the beach bearing W.S.W., and moor with
the best bower to the E.N.E.
This anchorage, although apparently unsafe, is said to be very secnre, and
it is also stated that the only danger is from violent gusts of wind from the
S.E. The north-westerly winds, though they prevail upon the coast, and send
a heavy sweU into the bay, do not blow home upon the shore; and when they
are at aU fresh they occasion a strong off-set in the bay. This I beUeve is
also the case at CaUao and at Valparaiso to which, as before mentioned, this
anchorage bears a great resemblance.
There is no good water to be had at Monterey, and ships in want of that
necessary supply must either proceed to San Francisco, or procure a permit
from the governor, and obtain it at Santa Cruz, or some of the missions to the
southward.    There is very bttle current at the anchorage."
Monsieur Du Petit Thouars of the French Navy 1837, says of Monterey—
" When making the bay, it wiU be known by a depression in the coast, while
the land rises to an elevation of more than 8000 feet at the northern and
southern extremities. When in the latitude of point Pinos (86° 89',) and near
the shore, great white spots are seen westward of the point, which render it
sufficiently marked. To anchor, with a fair wind, run in to within 2 or 8
cables' length of the rocks seen from this low point, and foUow at the same
distance the western coast of the bay, until point Pinos is shut in by point
Almeja. You are then in 15 or 16 fathoms water, on a bottom of sand and a
Utile mud, with good holding ground; that is the anchorage for large vessels.
SmaU vessels run in nearer to the bottom of the bay, and anchor very
nearly in a range with the battery, in 9 or 10 fethoms water, on a bottom of
muddy sand, having point Ano Nuevo (the northern extremity of the bay) shut
in by point Almeja. On account of the calms, which frequently oblige vessels
to anchor, it is necessary to foUow the western shore of the bay, neither too
far off nor too near. During adverse winds, vessels may safely beat about in
the bay of Monterey, as the two coasts are safe, the only danger being in the
bottom of the bay, in the south-east anchorage. This is a bank of rock, on
which are from 4 to 10 fathoms of water; but it is shown by the kelp which
floats on the surface. Fogs are very frequent, and sometimes render it difficult
to make the land; and it often happens that it is foggy in the offing but clear
near the coast. During the rainy season (from November to March), the wind
blows from S.E. to S.W.:—S.E. is the wind of bad weather.
During the dry season (March to November), the winds blow generally fromMONTEREY BAY. 157
N.W. to North:—N.W. is the wind for good weather. The N. wind causes a
heavy sweU in the bay, but it is frequently less severe than in the offing.
There is no perceptible current in the bay. Outside it the currents are not
strong, and appear to run northward near the coast, and southward more in
the offing."
Monterey bay was visited by the French navigator La Perouse in 1786;
bis remarks are as follows—" In the bay the sea rolls to the foot of the sandy
downs which border the coast, and produces a noise which we heard when
more than a league distant. Tbe lands north and south of this bay are elevated, and covered with trees. Vessels intending to stop here must foUow the
southern shore, and when they have doubled point Pinos, which projects to the
north, the presidency appears in view, and they come to an anchor in 10 fathoms of water, within and rather near to the point, which shelters them from
the winds of the sea. The Spanish vessels which make a long stay at Monterey
usuaUy approach as near the shore as the distance only of 1 or 2 cables'
length, and moor in 6 fethoms of water, by making fast to an anchor, which
they bury in the sand on the beach. They have then nothing to fear from the
Booth winds, which are sometimes strong, but not at aU dangerous, as they
blow from the coast. We had soundings in every part of the bay, and anchored
at the distance of 4 leagues from the shore, in 60 fathoms, soft mud; but as
the sea is heavy, it is not possible to remain in this situation longer than a
few hours, while waiting for day, or the clearing up of the fog.
Almost incessant fogs envelope the coasts of Monterey bay, which renders
the approach somewhat difficult. But for this circumstance there would
scarcely be a safer shore. No concealed rock extends further than a cable's
length; and if the fog be too thick, it is easy to anchor and wait for its clearing up,
when the town is seen in the angle formed by the southern and eastern shores."
The shore of Monterey Bay.—From the town of Monterey northward the
shore presents a uniform sand beach running nearly North, backed by low
dreary sand dunes, producing sparsely the coarsest grasses and bushes, and
entirely destitute of fresh water. This waste extends to Salinas river, of
which we reach the great bend at about 9£ miles from Monterey, and only 100
yards from the beach; from point Pinos this bend bears N. 80° E., distant
&J miles. From this bend the river foUows the bine of the beach, just inside
of the low sand dunes, for a distance of 4-J- miles, and then disembogues at a
place whence point Pinos bears S. 18° W., and is distant 12f miles. This
river rises in the latitude of the Piedras Blancas; one branch about 20 and
the other 83 miles from the coast;—these branches meet at San Miguel, and
thence the stream runs parallel with the coast and behind the Sierra Santa
Lucia. From its mouth, which is only 60 yards wide at low water, to the
entrance of the river Pajaro, the distance is 2f miles; the shore trending to
the N.N.W.; the entrance of that river bears N. 11° E., 14 miles from point
Pinos.
From the river Pajaro the coast runs N.W. nearly straight to Aptos creek,
a distance of 7 or 8 miles; this creek is about 6 mUes E. by N. from Santa
Cruz, and the shore between is rocky and abrupt.
North of Sabnas river commence rich meadow and table lands, affording
spots unsurpassed for productiveness, even hi the prolific State of California.
A remarkable sub-marine valley, similar to that off point Hueneme (in lat.
34° 10*) has been discovered hi this bay, and to some extent traced out. The
head of the valley is £ of a mile south of the mouth of Salinas river, and158
SANTA CRUZ.
the 20-fethom line is at only a f of a mile from the beach, the depth increasing
to 50 fathoms in the next f of a mue. At this distance from shore the 20-
fethdm lines are $■ of a mile apart. The general' direction of the vaUey for
the next 2 miles is S.W. -J- W. where is a depth of 117 fathoms, and the 50-
fethom bines be about f of a mUe apart; thence the vaUey runs about West,
reaching a depth of 170 fathoms in a mile, and 240 fathoms in 3f nules, with
42 fathoms less than a mile to the north of this. The soundings as yet are
not numerous enough to trace its outlines in deep water; but the indications
are that, for 10 nules of its length, it runs S. 60° W., with no bottom at 815
fathoms. The only available boat landing upon the beach of the bay shores
is at the head of this sub-marine valley. There are no indications on the land
of this pecuUar formation, except that at its head the bay very gradually
reaches its greatest easting.
An extensive valley, caUed the Salinas plains, through which flows Salinas
river, extends inland from the eastern part of Monterey bay, nearly to the
mission of San Miguel, situated on a plateau of the San Bruno mountains.
This valley is said to be nearly 90 mUes in length, and in breadth varying
from 2 to 10 miles. It contains some 200,000 acres of good agricultural
lands, and the remainder affords excellent pasturage for horned stock, horses,
and sheep.
SANTA CRUZ.—This harbour or anchorage is at the north-west part
of the bay of Monterey, and is of very limited extent. It is protected from all
the winds from northward, but exposed to the fuU sweep of southerly gales,
and many coasters have been driven ashore during the winter season. It is
about f of a mile in depth northward, by 1-J- miles East and West.
Vessels coming from northward, after leaving point Ano Nuevo, foUow the
coast-bne on a general course E.S.E. for about 18 miles. The shore for this
distance is abrupt, jagged, and moderately elevated, with a range of high hills
or mountains, whose summits in summer are almost continuaUy enveloped in
fog. Skirting the shore at a distance of £ a mUe a depth of 6 to 10 fethoms
can be carried, and upon making point Santa Cruz, the top of which is
moderately level for some distance back, soundings of 4 fathoms are obtained
within a f of a nule of it;—round up and run along in 5 fathoms until abreast
of the beach, where good anchorage wiU be found at $ a mile from shore.
Vessels from southward in summer keep weU into Monterey bay, to escape
the full force of the north-westers and the heavy head sea.
During the winter months it is recommended to anchor well out, so as to
be able to clear the shore westward of point Santa Cruz in case a south-easter
springs up.
Landing on the beach is generaUy disagreeable, as it extends out some
distance, but boats usually land at the embarcadero, at the foot of the bluff in
the N.W. part of the harbour.
The beach is over £ a mile in length, and between its eastern extremity and
the bluff point empties the San Lorenzo river, a sniaU stream running past
the town and mission, which is situated a mile inland.
The country about Santa Cruz is exceedingly productive, and now thickly
settled. A steamer runs regularly in the trade between this place and San
Francisco, and numerous coasters find abundant freight from here and the
Pajaro country to San Francisco. Regular stage communication is also
maintained with San Francisco and Monterey.
The position of the top of the bluff at the embarcadero, is considered to bo
lat. 86° 57'
long. 122° 0' 10"HALF-MOON BAY.
159
The high mountain, N. 25° E. 12^ mUes from Santa Cruz, is named
mount Bache, and attains an elevation of 3791 feet.
The corrected estabbshment of tbe port is lOh. 18m. The mean rise and
fell of tides is 4*1 feet; of spring tides, 5*5 feet; and of neap tides, 2-9 feet.
The Coast.—From point Santa Cruz to point Ano Nuevo the distance is
18 mUes, and the general direction is W. by N. f N., at first curving to the
south-westward of that course, and then to the northward, until within 3 miles
of the rock of point Ano Nuevo, when the shore curves well to westward,
(for the last mile to the southwest,) and forms an anchorage protected somewhat against the heavy sweU from the north-west, in which is a depth of
5 fathoms within less than i a mile of the shore, and from 10 to 15 fathoms
at the distance of a mile.
At a f of a mUe from the.point lies a black jagged islet, consisting of a
sloping ledge of rocks covered with a stratum of yellow clay about 4 feet thick,
and this again covered with a mound of sand about 30 feet high. The point
itself is composed of rolling hills of shifting sand, varying from 20 to 100 feet
in height, while behind them rises'the Santa Cruz range of mountains.
Steamers coming upon tbe coast from southward in thick weather, always
endeavour to make the land near point Ano Nuevo, and then foUow the coast
to San Francisco bar.
From point Ano Nuevo the coast runs N.W. f N., for about 10 mUes, to the
rocky point named Bolsa. The high mountain eastward from point Bolsa,
bearing N. 53° E., and distant 13 mUes, named Black mountain, attains an
elevation of 2809 feet. Two miles north of Bolsa point is the mouth of the
Piscador, a small stream running through a valley of inconsiderable extent.
For the foregoing 12 nules the general formation of the immediate seaboard
is that of a table land of three.terraces, the lowest. graduaUy sloping from
the base of the second to the coast, which is exceedingly rocky and forbidding;
the underlying stratum is sandstone.
From point Ano Nuevo to Pfllar point, forming the south and western point
of Half-moon bay, the general direction is N.W. by N. f N., and the distance
25 miles. At 8^ miles above the Piscador is the San G-regorio, another
smaU stream, and 2£ miles still furthur is the Tunitas. The seabeard between
the valley of the Piseador and that of the San Gregorio undergoes a striking
change both in the character of its topography and its geology. Instead of
the table land we meet with a spur of the coast mountains running into the
sea, and having an elevation of 600 feet within a mile of it. The shore-line
and the coast generally presents a very broken and rugged appearance,
occasioned by the deep gulches cut through to the ocean.
HALF-MOON BAY.—This anchorage is 6 miles S.S.E. from point
San Pedro, and 18 miles S. by E. from tbe Golden gate. The south-western
point of the bay is formed by a bluff table land about 160 feet in height,
caUed the Corral de Tierra, 325 yards south of which stretches a number of
black rocks, which show as one when seen coming up the coast, but as three
or four when approached from north-westward ; the largest is nearly as high
as the bluff, and locabty known as Sail rock, or Pillar rock. The point is
known as Pillar point, and from its south-eastern extremity rocky and foul-
bottom, marked by kelp, extends S.E. £ E., f of a mile, dropping suddenly
from 14 feet to 5 fathoms; this is the inner reef, and makes tbe bay
avaUable as a summer anchorage.    At If miles south-east from the same
of a mile long, and marked
part of the point a narrow ledge of rocky bottom,I
II
j
M
jjj
160
HALF-MOON BAY.
by kelp, stretches in the same general direction. The passage between this
outer and the inner reef is f of a mile wide, with rocky and uneven bottom,
from 3f to lOf fathoms. These ledges be parallel with the coast mountains,
and with the shore-bne from which the outer one is distant If nules. From
the eastern extremity of the point the shore runs N.W. by N. for a f of a
mile; then N.E. for f of a mUe, curving to the eastward and south-eastward
in a long bend, for 2£ mUes to the mouth of the Arroyo de los PiUarcitos,
down which comes the only road crossing the peninsula of San Francisco,
between the Laguna de Mercedes and Santa Cruz. The highest part of this
road, which crosses a depression of the peninsula, is near the Coast Survey
station " Ridge," which is 1093 feet above the ocean, and but a few feet
higher than the road. The outer reef is nearly abreast of the PiUarcitos,
from which the coast runs South 4 miles to Miramontes point, which is
S. 48° E., 5 mues from Pillar point; thence to the mouth of the Tunitas the
distance is 4 nules S.E. The greatest extent of the bay may be said to be
between Pillar and Miramontes points, but the part near the former only is
available.
The soundings between the rocky ledges and the shore are quite regular,
decreasing from 9 fathoms to 3. fathoms at less than a f of a mUe from the
beach, with sandy bottom. Tbe passage to the anchorage is between the
inner and outer reef, with the high, bare-topped mountain bearing a Utile
north of East, and PiUar point open to the westward. This mountain is steep,
with straggling redwoods on its flanks, and the summit bare. It is locaUy
known as Bald Pate; but, on the Spanish grants, as Cumbra de las Auras.
When inside the reefs beat up until Pillar point bears about S.W., distant
£ a mile, and anchor in 4£ fethoms, hard sand. With southerly Ught winds
a heavy sweU sets in; but upon the approach of heavy south-east weather it
is necessary to go to sea.
The mass of redwoods cresting the mountains of the peninsula cease
abruptly abreast of Miramontes, and only stragglers are seen to the northward.
They are a good mark for recognizing this part of the coast when coming in
from sea.
Around Half-moon bay is a limited extent of agricultural country at the
seaward base of the mountains, and small coasters carry the produce to San
Francisco.
About 1 mUe along the coast to, the north-westward is a small boat harbour,
100 yards wide, formed and protected by outlying rocks, and having
3£ fathoms in it.    In the autumn months it is used as a whaling station.
Point San Pedro Ues N,W. by N. f N., 30 mUes from point Ano Nuevo,
and S. 12° E. from point Lobos, at the entrance to the Golden gate. It is a
black, bold, rocky promontory, over 500 feet high, having a high, large,
jagged rock at the northern part, and is a prominent and exceUent mark for
making the entrance to San Francisco. The principal rock is nearly 100 feet
high; its south fece is white, and shows the line of stratification plainly;—
it is connected with the main by some low rocks. Half a mile to the northeast of the point is the valley of San Pedro, from which the point takes its
name.
The range of mountains forming the north-eastern shore of Monterey bay,
and extending to Santa Cruz and point Ano Nuevo, is called Santa Cruz.
Thence northward to the Golden Gate, and forming the peninsula of San
Francisco, by bounding the bay on the west, the mountains are known as the
San Francisco or San Bruno range.BAY OF SAN FRANCISCO. 161
The extent of shore line from point Concepcion to point Bonita is about
286 miles.
BAY OF SAN FRANCISCO.—This bay affords the finest and most
commodious harbour on the Pacific coast of the United States. From its
discovery it has commanded the admiration of navigators, and, since the
wonderful rise of CaUfornia, has weU sustained its reputation. Its geographical position, its size and depth of water, its noble entrance and bold shores,
the Sacramento and tributaries, draining the rich agricultural valleys and
auriferous slopes of the Sierra Nevada, the magic city upon its shores, and the
salubrity of its climate, have conspired to make it emphatically the port of
the Pacific*
Golden Gate.—This is the entrance to the bay, and presents the character
of a great cleft or fissure in tbe sea-coast range of mountains, thereby connecting tbe bay of San Francisco with the Pacific ocean. On approaching, it is
difficult to imagine that a deep channel lies ahead, so clear is the atmosphere,
and so weU defined the Contra Costa mountains, behind the bay. Both shores
are bold, broken into points, and rocky; but the northern is much the bolder,
rising almost perpendicularly from the water, attaining an elevation of about
1000 feet but a short distance back, and in 7 miles rising to 2600 feet. On
the south side, between the points, are stretches of low beach ; the hills are
undulating and of moderate elevation, increasing very gradually in altitude to
the southward, and reaching a height of 1250 feet in about 6 or 8 miles.
Point Bonita.—The north head of the entrance is formed by this point; a
narrow, precipitous, rocky cape, nearly 300 feet high, and stretching from the
lighthouse about \ a mile to the S.E. Behind it the mountains rise rapidly
to an elevation of 1500 feet. During the dry season the deposit of sea birds
accumulates in such quantities on the ridge outside point Bonita lighthouse,
as to make the bluff show white, but the first heavy rain carries it off, and
then, throughout the rainy season, the point exhibits its natural colour "and
appearance. There are no dangers off the point, the line of 3 fathoms rarely
extending 800 yards from any portion of it. When the clipper ship San
Francisco was lost on this head, we are told that she first struck the bluff
inside the heads; was carried by the currents around the point, and then cast
ashore on the outside. A depth of from 5 to 6 fathoms can be found on every
side of the point within -jt of a mUe.
The lighthouse on point Bonita is situated nearly £ a mile from the extremity of the point, and consists of a brick tower painted white, and surmounted
by a lantern painted black. From seaward it is seen projected against the
dark, high bills behind it, and in clear weather is a very plain object. It
shows a fixed bght at 806 feet above the sea, visible 24 miles. Its position
is lat. 87° 49' 4", long 122° 80' 50". From this light to that on Fort point
the distance is 2f nules, and the bearing E. f N.
Upon point Bonita is a fog-bell; it is in a frame building, open in front,
and placed on the bluff just in advance of the bghthouse tower, at an elevation
of 270 feet above the level of the sea. The bell weighs 1500 lbs., and during
foggy and thick weather is struck six blows, at intervals of 16 seconds each,
followed by a pause of 44 seconds.
* See the large plan of the bay of San Franoisco on the chart of the coast of California
published by Messrs. Imray and Son.
M162
BAY OF SAN FRANCISCO.
Point Lobos.—The south head of the entrance to San Francisco bay is
formed by this point, which is 375 feet high. Upon the round-topped hUl
behind tbe point is erected a large frame buUding for a telegraph station,
whence the electric wires run to tbe city of San Francisco. Tbe first telegraphic message transmitted on the Pacific coast was over these wires.
Southward of the head the sand dunes are conspicuous and easUy recognised
features in approaching the entrance. The strong north-west summer winds,
drawing in over the land, raise the white sand from the 3 miles of broad beach,
and, carrying it inland over the hUl-tops, bury grass, bushes, and scrub oak.
The quantity of sand driven in from this beach is enormous, and its accumulation has greatly modified the topography of the peninsula.*
Off the western face of point Lobos be a number of black jagged rocks
about 50 feet high, but all within the 5-fathom Une, and close in shore. They
are caUed the Seal rocks, and one of them shows a large arch from particular
directions. The outer one bears from point Bonita S.E. by S. f S., and is
distant 2£ miles. From it the general trend of the shore runs in a bne to
Fort point for nearly a mUe, to a short jutting high point, off which lie the
MUe rocks. From this point the shore runs weU to the eastward for a mUe,
gradually trending to the north for 1£ miles to Fort point. In the deepest
part of this bend the shore is low, with small hiUocks rising from the general
surface and slope of the hills, and fronted by a long sand beach.
Two rocks named Mile rocks lie off point Lobos, at a short distance within
the limit of the entrance of the Golden gate. They are smaU, near each other,
and have a height of 15 feet above water, with a good depth of water aU around
and close to them; but the current swirls and eddies about them in such a
manner as to render a near approach anything but agreeable or safe with a
Ught wind. The inner and smaller rock is \ of a mile northward of the small
jutting point inside of point Lobos, and very nearly 2 mUes S.W. i S. from
Fort point. Vessels running in on the line of Fort point and Alcatraz island
pass less than £ a mile from the outer and larger rock. The rocks bear almost
S.E. from Bonita bght, distant If miles.
Fort Point.—This was formerly a bold, narrow, jutting promontory of bard
serpentine rock, 107 feet above high water, and surmounted by a small Mexican
fortification caUed fort Blanco. The view from the point was one of the finest
in the harbour; but the whole headland has been cut down to within a few
feet of high water, and increased in area to form a large fortification, which
wiU be mounted with guns of the largest range and calibre. Upon the hiUside
rising behind it are houses for the accommodation of the commandant, officers,
soldiers, and workmen. Eastward of the point is a long substantial wharf,
constructed for receiving stores, ordnance, &c. Several
been lost on Fort point by venturing
irregular currents.
Upon Fort point is a lighthouse which shows & fixed bight at 52 feet above
the sea, visible 12 nules; tbe angle of visibibty seaward is bounded by the
extremity of point Bonita bearing W. f S., and point Lobos bearing
S.W. by S. f S. The lighthouse is considered to be in lat. 87° 48' 81",
long. 122° 27' 38".
A fog bell is stationed on the eastern side of the Ughthouse. During foggy
or thick weather it is struck by machinery, five blows at intervals of 10 seconds,
followed by a pause of 34 seconds.    There is also a fog-horn.
large vessels have
too close during Ught airs and strong
We believe it is intended to erect a lighthouse on point Lobosit     tf ,;A*iUtMs /6V/
The information contained in this notice is to be carefully considered, to be noted in the
SaiUng Directions, and compared with the chart when the ship is
navigating the parts to which it refers.
Hydrographic Notice.
[    No. 8.    ]
NORTH   PACIFIC   OCEAN.
SAN FRANCISCO HARBOUR, CALIFORNIA-
The folio-wing information relating to the harbour- of San Francisco^
California, is from the remark book of Navigating Lieutenant John J. A.
Gravener, of H.M.S. Zealous, April 1870.*
The blossom rock has lately been removed by blowing up, and
there is now 24 feet at low water over tbe site.
Tbe presidio shoal and anuta rock are both marked by buoys.
The bell boat formerly placed on tbe bar has been permanently
removed.
The four fathom bank bttot, off the entrance of the harbour,
has been washed away, and it is reported will not be replaced; but it is
intended to place a buoy on tbe inner or eastern end of the Four-fathom
bank, as a guide to vessels using the Eight fathom channel.
tides.—Between Fort point and the northern shore of the Golden Gale
the ebb tide frequently runs with a velocity of 6 knots. A wide berth
should be given to the Fort point, as the eddy tides often carry vessels
dangerously close to it.
Hydrographie Office, Admiralty, London,
8th May 1871.
m
* See Admiralty Chart:—San Francisco harbour, No. 591.
[13936.]        E. & S.—500—5/71.1
162
BAY OF SAN FRANCISCO.
Hi
rt',:
Poh
formed
behind
whence
graphi<
Southv
feature
drawin
and, c
The qv
tion ha
Off
about!
are cal
directii
distant
Fort r.
Mile r
gradua
part of
surface
Two
the Urn
and ha
and clc
manne:
bght w
jutting
Fort i
pass le
S.E. fi
Fon
serpen
fortific
in the
feet of
will be
rising
soldier
censtri
been I
irregul
Upc
the si
extren ^
S.W. by
S. JB.
The lighthouse is considered to be
in lat. 37° 48' 81",'
long. 122° 27' 38".
A fog bell is stationed on the eastern side of the Ughthouse. During foggy
or thick weather it is struck by machinery, five blows at intervals of 10 seconds,
followed by a pause of 34 seconds.    There is also a fog-horn.
'
We believe it is intended to erect a lighthouse on point LobosBAY OP SAN FRANCISCO.
163
San Fbancisco Bab.—The bar off the entrance to the bay of San Francisco
has a depth of 5 fathoms at the lowest tides.* Its general form is that of a
horse-shoe, commencing 4 mUes southward, stretching out graduaUy to
6 mUes abreast of point Lobos; and when nearly up to the parallel of point
Bonita, running in shore towards that point and forming the " 4-fethom
bank," from a distance of 4 nules down to one. The average breadth of the
bar within the limits of the 6 - fathom curve is about 1 mile. It falls off outside to 10 fathoms in $ a mile, and deepens graduaUy inside. The depth
over the bar when point Bonita Ught bears between N.E. by E. $ E. and
N. by W. i W. is not less than 5 fathoms.
No vessel should anchor upon the bar if she can possibly avoid it;
frequently a heavy swell sets in without wind, and if the current is running
strong ebb, it allows Utile chance of escaping from an uncomfortable berth.
The flood tide makes on the bar about 61 minutes earlier than at San
Francisco.
It has been given as a rule for steamers approaching in thick weather that
they should run for the bar as nearly as they can estimate, keeping the lead
going until they strike 5 fathoms, and run on until the depth is increased,
when the armed lead should bring up gray sand with red specks, and they
may conclude themselves within the bar. Recently, however, it has been
intimated that these peculiarities of bottom exist also outside of the barf
The fog sometimes stands like a waU outside of a Une from Fort Point
across the entrance, while the bay inside is beautifully clear. After the
greatest heat of the day is passed this fog creeps in and envelopes land and
water.
Four-fathom bank.—A first class can buoy, with red and black horizontal
stripes, is placed in 4 fathoms at mean low water near the western and seaward end of the " 4-fathom bank," lying off point Bonita. It is on the
prolongation of the line from Fort Point Ught to the extreme point of Bonita,
and from it point Bonita light bears E. 13° N., distant 8£ mUes; outer
telegraph station on point Lobos E. 13° S., distant i>\ miles; and the highest
part of the western ridge of Table mountain N. 13° W. There is a spot
having but 8$ fathoms upon it outside this buoy, bearing S. 84° W., and
distant £ of a mile.
The shores of the Golden Gate.—On the north side of the Golden Grate the
shores are very precipitous, with an occasional short stretch of sand beach at
the base of the bluffs, affording a boat landing. Point Diablo is the first
point inside Bonita, and bears N.E. by E. $ E., distant l£ nules from it;
between these the shore is indented about $ of a mile, affording a boat
* A bell-boat was stationed in 1858 outside the bar in about lat. 37° 45 £', long.
122° 881'. I' was not at its station in November 1860, but may perhaps have been
reinstated since. From it South Farallon island lighthouse, bore S.W. by W. | W.,
16i miles; Point Reyes, (lighthouse site,) N.W. by W. f W., 221 miles; Dnxbnry
point, N.W. by N. | X.. 8 J miles; point Bonita lighthouse, N.E. } N.f 7 J miles; Fort
Point lighthouse, N.E. f E., 9$ miles ; point Lobos telegraph station, N.E. by E. | E.,
7) rniUm ■ point San Pedro, S.E. J £., 11} miles;—The course to enter the bay from the
intersection of these bearings is N.E. f E.
+ A line of large bnoys, properly marked, outside the bar in 10 fathoms is the next best
expedient after a large fog-gun. From them the position of the bell-boat (supposing it to
be at its station, already noticed) could be known ; and numbered bnoys from it across the
bar would enable steamers in thick weather to feel their way in, and be independent of
guessing about the velocity and direction of the current.
M 2164
BAY OF SAN FRANCISCO.
landing during smooth weather for the lighthouse people. In the vicinity of
Diablo tbe faces of the cbffs show of a reddish purple colour. The rock is
very hard and flinty, "traversed by seams of quartz, and has a banded or
belted structure, so that it resembles varieties of jasper. ***** It
exhibits its stratified character most distinctly. It is also found at the
cinnabar mine of New Almaden."
The red specks found on the bar are doubtless derived from the disintegration of these reddish cliffs.
From point Diablo the shore is jagged and irregular to Lime Point bluff,
495 feet high, distant 1 mile, and bearing N.E. J E. Off this point are
several high rocks, but they are so close to the bluff as to be distinguishable
only from certain directions. From Lime Point bluff to Fort point the
distance is barely a mUe, and the bearing S. by E. £ E. This is the
narrowest part of the Golden Gate. Thence the bay begins to open weU to
the north-east.
On the south side, eastward from Fort point, the shore is low, flat, and
marshy to point San Jose, distant 2^ mUes, and bearing E. by N. This point
is moderately high, with a few houses clustering upon it, and is locaUy known
as Black point. Off this reach was the ' outer anchorage' of former navigators, and the Presidio of San Francisco is seen a short distance behind it.*
From point San Jose to North point, at tbe base of Telegraph biU, the
distance is 1 mile, and the bearing E. £ N. AU this space forms part of the
city of San Francisco, and is covered with houses. The shore-line is denominated the North beach, and from about the middle of the lowest part projects
a long wharf over the flats to 3 fathoms water. This has naturally caused a
great deposit around it, and now only 4£ feet of water can be obtained at the
north-west part of the wharf at mean low water.
Telegraph hill rises to a height of 801 feet above tbe mean level of tbe bay,
and is covered with houses to its summit wherever buUding room can be
obtained. The present plan of the city grades contemplates the entire
removal of this hill. The position of the bib is considered to be lat. 87° 48',
long. 122° 23' 19".
Upon this hiU was formerly erected a telegraph or semaphore, by which
intelligence of the arrival of vessels off the Golden Gate was made known to
the city—hence the name of the hiU.
AUatraz Island.—This, the first island that is opened in entering the
Golden Gate, is nearly 600 yards long, in a W.N.W. direction, by about
260 in width, and rises to an elevation of 186 feet above high water.   The
* " It is a curious and interesting fact that the sand beach between Fort point and point
San Jose has been thrown up by the surf upon an extensive alluvial deposit, which has
the character of a peat bog or swamp. When the tide is very low the edge of this peat
formation may be seen. Large masses of the peat are also broken out during storms, and
thrown up on the sand of the beach. This sand and all the loose round boulders, from
3 to 8 inches, or more, in diameter, rest upon a foundation of the peat; and the continuation of the peat is found in the swamp or flat meadow land whioh lies inside the
belt of sand, and between it and the base of the sandstone hills. It is very difficult to
account for the formation of this swamp under conditions like those at present existing.
A strong current is constantly setting backward and forward through the channel, and
the action of the surf constantly undermines and encroaches upon the beach, so that the
present action is destructive, and the swamp could not possibly have been formed while
the Golden Gate was open as we now find it." Geological Report of the coast of California,
by W. P. Blake, Esq.BAY OF SAN FRANCISCO.
165
summit is flat, falling away gently on all sides for some distance, and then at
the sides dropping perpendicularly. Upon the top exists a thin layer of earth,
but the island is composed of a fine-grained and very " compact sandstone of a
dark bluish green colour. It is regularly stratified in beds of varying
thickness, and often separated by thin layers of argiUaceous shale. It appears
to contain a large amount of protoxide of iron, which changes to the hydrous
sesquioxide on exposure." Deep water marks exist all round the island, and,
with the exception of one or two places, the sides are so steep that a landing
is effected with difficulty. Extensive fortifications are now in course of construction upon it. At the S.E. side a small pier has been built to receive
stores, ordnance, and materials. Off the N.W. part, foul bottom makes out
about 300 or 400 yards.
The Ughthouse on the summit of the island, bears N.W. from Telegraph
hiU, distant If miles; and from Fort point N.E. f E., distant 2| miles. It
exhibits & fixed bght at 166 feet above the sea, visible 14 miles; its position
is considered to be lat. 37° 49' 27", long. 122° 24' 19".
On the south-eastern extremity of the island, close to the water's edge, is a
fog-beU, which is about 80 feet above the water. The bellweighs 1092 lbs.,
and, during foggy or thick weather, is struck by machinery four blows at
intervals of 8 seconds, followed by a pause of 15 seconds.
Shoals in the Entrance.—No hidden dangers have been discovered in
the entrance outside of the Une from Fort Point to Lime Point bluff, but there
are several inside.
Presidio shoal, having 8£ fathoms upon it, lies 1^ miles inside of Fort
point, and bears N.E. by E. J E. from it, or f of a point eastward of the
hue between the bghts on Fort point and Alcatraz island. The shoal is about
700 yards long within the 4-fathom curve, and over i a mile long within the
S-fathom curve. It is very narrow, shows sandy bottom, and has deep water
aU round it. Its general direction is on the above mentioned bearing. From
the shoalest part the Presidio flag-staff bears S. jE.
Anita rock shows above water at low tides, and is situated l£ miles inside
of Fort point, and bears E. by N. from it. It is only 300 yards from the
low beach, and has deep water close around it.
A spar buoy, painted red, with even numbers, has been placed in 3-fathoms
at about i a cable's length due West from the shoalest part of Anita rock.
Vessels sbould not approach this buoy within a cable's length, as a strong
current sets across the rock.
Bird or Arch rock is a smaU pyramidal rock, about 45 feet in diameter,
80 feet high, and bearing W. f S., distant £ of a mile from the lighthouse on
Alcatraz island. When seen in the direction from or towards the Presidio
shoal, it presents a perforation at low tides.
Shag rock is a low white-topped rock, about £ a mile nearly N.N.E. from
Bird rock. From Alcatraz Ught it bears W. by N., distant 1 mile. For
about 800 yards towards Alcatraz island the bottom is foul and irregular, but
outside that limit 10 fathoms are found. The rock shows about 4 feet above
the highest tides, being then not more than 8 or 10 feet in extent.
Blossom rock, a ledge having 5 feet water upon it at the lowest tides,
and, within the 3-fathoin curve, is about 300 by 200 yards in extent, with
deep water outside these Umits. A spar buoy, painted with red and black
horizontal stripes, has been placed in 4 fathoms water, at about £ a cable's
length due South from the shoalest part of the ledge. Vessels should not
approach this buoy from any direction nearer than a cable's length.166.
BAY OF SAN FRANCISCO.
mi
This ledge bears E. by S. from Alcatraz light, and 1$ miles distant, being
almost on the line joining the south points of Alcatraz and Verba Buena
islands. From the summit of Telegraph hill it bears N. 6° W., distant
1 mile.
Yerba Buena is the large high island opened to the east and south of
Alcatraz after entering the Golden Gate. The western point of this island is
If miles from Telegraph hill, and the bearing N.E. by E. Its peak is
848 feet high; the sides steep and irregular, and rising to a ridge running
nearly east and west. On the western or San Francisco side the water is very
deep close in shore, but from the N.W. point a 8-fathdm bank extends
1± nules N.W. by N., spreading to the eastward for f a mile, and thence
running to the N.E. point.
Angel Island.—When passing through the narrowest part of the Golden
Gate this large island bears about N.N.E., and is seen as an island for a very
short time when in the narrowest part of the Golden Gate. It has an irregular
and bold shore-line of about 5 miles, and an area of 1 square mile. It rises
to a height of 771 feet, is covered with grass and bushes, and cut in every
direction by deep gulleys. As seen from the south-eastward it appears part
of the northern peninsula, but is divided from that on its N.W. face by Raccoon straits, f of a mile in width, having a depth of water ranging from 10 to
80 fathoms, and a very strong current. A narrow high jutting point makes
out from the S.E. portion of the island, bearing N f W. from Alcatraz island
Ught, and distant If nules. From this head the general trend of the southern
face for over a nule is W. by S. toward Saucebto point.
Point Cavallos is J a mile N.N.W. from Lime Point bluff. The
shore-line between them falls slightly back, and a very smaU vaUey makes
down from the high hills behind.
Point Saucelito.—From point CavaUos the general trend of the shore is
N.W. by N. for If miles to point Saucelito, with nearly a straight shore-line.
One mile from point Cavallos is the anchorage of Saucelito, where men-of-war
and whalers formerly anchored. It Ues abreast of a few houses forming the
town of Saucelito, whence much of the water used in San Francisco was
formerly taken in steam water-boats. North of this anchorage is a largo bay,
with but a few feet of water. From Saucebto point to the western point of
Angel island the distance is If nules, and the bearing N.E. by E. f E. To
Peninsula point, forming the south-western part of Raccoon strait, the distance
is 1 mile, and the bearing N.E. § E.
DIRECTIONS.—When approaching the coast every opportunity should be
seized for deterniining the vessel's position, as fogs and thick weather prevail
near the land. Vessels coming from southward make the coast about point
Ano Nuevo, (lat. 37° 7'), and follow it at a distance of 4 or 5 miles up to
tbe" bar. Steamers keep close under the land for fear of losing it in foggy
weather. Coming from westward they first sight the South Farallon island
(lat. 87° 42'), and keep upon either side of it; but it is preferable, to go
southward of it, especiaUy in thick weather and at night, as the vicinity of tho
island has not yet been surveyed in detail (1862). From the South Farallon
lighthouse the point Bonita light bears N.E. by E. 23j miles. Coming from
north-westward, they make point Reyes, 597 feet high, in lat. 38° 0', Ion".
123° 0', and pass within 2 or 3 nules of it, 15 fathoms being found within a
> of a mile from it, but vessels are apt to lose tbe wind by getting too close
under it.   From the western extremity of this point the point Bonita UghtBAY OF SAN FRANCISCO.
167
bears E. $ S., distant 25$ nules, the line passing over the taU of Duxbury
reef, at a distance of 17f nules from point Reyes.
The bell-boat, (1858) If nules outside of the bar, is placed on the prolongation of the range from Alcatraz island to Fort point, giving a course N.E. f E.
for vessels entering the Golden Gate, and designated by Belcher the " fair-way
line," and he calls the island and fort the " fair-way marks." But with a
heavy swell on the bar this range should be used merely as a Une of reference,
because on the bar it passes over a small 5-fathom spot, while f a fathom
more can be obtained for a distance of 2 nules both north and south of it. In
clear weather and with a favourable wind a vessel can cross the bar in not
less than 5 fathoms from the line, having tbe north end of Alcatraz island just
open by point Bonita (N.E. by E. $ E.), round to the shore south of point-
Lobos (N. by W. f W). Northward of the former Une the 4-fathom bank
(having 8} fathoms on it) commences 1 mile west of Bonita, and stretches out
over 8 nules, with a breadth of 1 mUe.
Between the eastern extremity of the " 4-fathom bank" and the shore, the
distance is f of a mile, and within this space can be found the deepest water
for entering the harbour, but it would be dangerous for a sailing vessel to
attempt it with a flood tide and Ught winds. While it is breaking on the bank
only a heavy sweU is found through this 8f-fathom channel, and small sailboats have passed in safety when they dared not try the bar. Close in under
the cliffs, at 2 or 8 nules above Bonita, is anchorage in 8 fathoms, with muddy
bottom.
During clear, moderate weather any vessel can cross the bar, within the
limits we have mentioned, without running until she has got on the ' fair-way
line,' whereby she might lose her slant of wind. Should the wind fail, or be
Ught, and the current adverse, anchor outside the bar in 15 fathoms, mud and
fine sand ; or, after crossing the bar, in 6 to 10 fathoms, fine gray sand, with
red specks in some places. Run in mid-channel between the heads; avoid
too close proximity to the northern shore, not only in entering, but in leaving;
the high, bold bluffs causing calms and baffling airs, even with a south-easter
blowing out. Between Fort point and the opposite shore, take special care not
to approach Fort point .too close, because the currents set around it irregularly
and with great rapidity, and the bottom is uneven and rocky. A depth of 69
fathoms is in the centre of the channel. In the Golden Gate an ebb current
has been measured running about 6 miles per hour. As a general rule, the
winds increase within the heads, drawing in very strongly abreast of Fort
point. When off this point steer for Alcatraz lighthouse until the north point
of Telegraph hiU bears E. by S., then steer to give it a berth of a f of a mUe,
running through among the shipping.
In making the port at night it is customary to run for the bell-boat, ant?
cross the bar with Fort point bght on with Alcatraz island Ught, or better, tin
latter a little open to the northward. But this practice frequently involves
much delay and annoyance when the wind will not permit a vessel to attain
this position without a tack. With Bonita light bearing from N. by W. to
N.E. by E. a vessel may boldly run on within those limits, and, unless there
be a heavy swell, safely cross the 4-fathom bank. Give Bonita a berth of a mile,
and when within the heads, and Bonita abeam, graduaUy open Alcatraz Ught
north of Fort point, until abeam of the bitter; then run for Alcatraz until the
lights of the shipping show the vessel's position. Hauling up for them, anchor
off the north beach in 10 fathoms, or off the north-east front of the city in 10
fathoms, soft mud.:
I
168
BAY OF SAN FRANCISCO.
In coming upon the coast in thick foggy weather, sailing vessels should not
run into less than 50 fathoms because the water around the South Farallon,
and off points San Pedro and Reyes, is very bold. It is bebeved, however,
that a 30-fatbom bank exists at a considerable distance westward of the latter.
South-west of the line passing through the Farallones and Noonday rock, the
100-fathom curve is only 4 nules distant, and the 50-fathom curve only 2
miles, with a very irregular bottom. If the FaraUones be made, a course can
be easUy laid for the bar, but it would be unadvisable to run into less than 10
fathoms, soft mud, if the beU-boat be not heard, as the set and strength of the
currents off the bay are yet undetermined. Belcher says that, being caught
in a fog, he anchored in 15 fathoms, to the southward of the bar, and determined "that southerly of the fair-way Une the ebb tide set N.N.E., flood
S.S.W." We suppose he means from the N.N.E., and from the S.S.W.
During the season of freshets in the Sacremento and tributaries the discoloured
water outside the bar wiU frequently point out the position of the entrance.
Steamers in thick weather were accustomed to run close along the coast,
and endeavoured to make the land north of point San Pedro, running in until
they got about 15 fathoms, and then laying a course for the bar, shoabng upon
it to about 5 fathoms, and then graduaUy deepening, while the fog-gun gave
the direction of Bonita bght.
The U.S. sloop-of-war Vincennes, during the cruise of the Exploring
Expedition, anchored on the bar in a cairn, and, when the flood tide made it
brought up a swell that broke over her.
In beating out, vessels start on the last quarter of the flood, make the first
tack to the northward of the Blossom rock, and weather it on the second;
thence they keep between Alcatraz and the south shore, avoiding Bird rock,
1 mile west of the south end of the island, and giving a good berth to Fort
point, past which the ebb current wiU carry them rapidly, (with a strong tendency towards the south shore,) and a couple more tacks carry them clear of
the heads. J£ the vessel be bound northward, and the weather shut in thick,
with the wind to the north-west, she makes a tack off shore southward of the
Farallones; if the weather be clear short tacks are made off shore until she
works up to point Reyes, because the sea to the leeward of that headland is
much smoother and the current less ; then stands off until a course can bo
made for her port.
The Winds.—It has been advised to work close along shore to northern
ports during the summer north-west winds, and take the chances of land breezes
to make latitude, but the attempt wiU double the length of any voyage.
Baffling bght airs and calms frequently exist along the coast while vessels
several hundred nules off have strong N.W. winds. Moreover, along the coast
we know that the current frequently sets 2 miles per hour from the northward,
except very close under the shores. In our experience we never yet have met
a wind off the land north of San Francisco, and very rarely, indeed, south of
it, except in the region of Santa Barbara channel. As a general rule, it may
be safely stated that the summer winds foUow the Une of the coast, nearly, and
graduaUy draw towards and over the land. In winter, with winds from the
southward, this is not so marked.
From April to October, inclusive, the prevaihhg wind is from the north-west,
changing to west in valleys opening upon the coast, but in no case so strongly
as through the Golden Gate. During tbe summer the wind sets in strong
about 10 a.m., increasing until nearly sunset, when it begins to die away.BAY OF SAN FRANCISCO. 169
During its height it almost regularly brings in a dense fog, which, working its
way over the peninsula, meets that already advanced through the Golden Gate,
and envelopes San Francisco and the bay by sunset. As a rule, the breeze
does not dispel the fog. If a fog exist outside, the wind is sure to bring it in,
but the heated earth dissipates it for a time.
From November to March the wind is frequently from the south-east,
blowing heavily, working round to the south-west, with a large and broken
sweU from the S.W., weather thick, rainy, and squaUy; the wind not unfre-
quently ending at N.W., with an ugly cross sea. During heavy south-easters
tbe sea breaks upon the San Francisco bar, clean across the entrance,
presenting a fearful sight. The sound can be heard at the anchorage in front
of the city.
During some winters a hard " norther" will spring up and blow steadily and
strongly from one to five days, with a clear blue sky, and cold bracing weather.
Winds rarely blow from points between North, round by the east, to South-east.
The further north we advance, tbe heavier blow the gales in the winter.
The north-west winds are not predicted by the barometer, but, those from the
south-east, almost invariably; the mercury faUing one inch from its usual height
of 80 inches. When it begins to rise, the wind may be looked upon as soon to
shift round by the west, and to decrease. Only in one instance during our
experience has this failed, and that was off the strait of Juan de Fuca.
On the tops of the mountains bordering the coast, light variable and easterly
airs are frequently experienced whilst the north-west winds are blowing freshly
along the seaboard. Upon Sulpher peak, in latitude 38° 46', and 26 nules
from the coast, we have had fresh breezes from the E.N.E., whilst the usual
north-west winds were prevailing off shore. On Ross mountain, only 3 miles
from the sea, and rising 2197 feet from the right bank of tbe Slavianska river,
we found variable airs when strong summer winds were blowing below.
Tides.—The corrected establishment of the port at San Francisco, is
12h. 6m. The mean rise and fall of tides is 8-6 feet; of spring tides 4-8 feet;
and of neap tides 2-8 feet.
The Coast.—From point Bonita to Duxbury point, forming tbe west side
of Ballenas bay, the course is W. by N. J N., and the distance 9f miles.
The point, sometimes called Ballenas, is a table land about 100 feet high,
which stretches along the coast for a mile or more, and gradually rises to a
narrow, nearly treeless ridge, 1389 feet high at its greatest elevation, and
running in a straight line 25f miles N.W. f W. to Tomales point. The old
Californians expressively call it the Cuchilla Grande. Parallel to this ridge
on the east, and starting from the west end of the great cross ridge of Table
mountain, runs another to the north-westward, and the depression between
them, abreast of Duxbury point, forms Ballenas bay, as it does also Tomales
bay further up the coast. This depression forms a long narrow velley, well
watered and timbered, and in many places cultivated. Two streams running
into each bay, have their sources nearer the bay from which each runs.
Duxbury reef makes out If miles S.E. f S. from the southern extremity of
the point, and stretching towards point Bonita, forms a safe anchorage in
northerly weather. From the tail of the reef to the rocky point E.N.E. from
it, the distance is 8 miles, and from this Une to the greatest bend of the bay
the distance is If nules. In this bay the 3-fathom line makes off f of a mile
from the south-east face of Duxbury point, but approaching the low sand
beach east of the narrow entrance to the lagoon. From 4 to 8 fathoms of
water, with a regular bottom of sand and mud, are found in the bay, and 6170
POINT REYES.
an
fathoms quite close to the reef. From Duxbury point to the bluff, at the
entrance to the lagoon, the distance is If miles N.E. by N.
The lagoon north of the bay is at the foot of the mountains, and, except
smaU crooked channels, is bare at low tides, and filled with small islets. The
south side of this lagoon is bounded by a long, narrow sand spit, stretching so
nearly across it as to leave an entrance of but 100 yards wide at the southwest part of it. Only a few smaU vessels run between this place and San
Francisco.
The shore north of Bonita point is bold and high, presenting a marked and
peculiar undulating surface at right angles to the sea front.
North of Duxbury point the hard rocky shore continues bold and high, but
graduaUy merges into cliffs, consisting chiefly of yeUowish clay and sand
resting upon granite, and, as the surface is regularly undulating, with the
direction of the alternate ridges and valleys at right angles to the shore, the
wearing action of the surf forms a continuous series of round-topped, bright,
vertical bluffs, averaging nearly 100 feet high, and presenting a very noticeable
feature from the sea.
The mountains in the back ground rise over 2000 feet, and the ' Table
mountain' of Beechey attains an elevation of 2604 feet, stretches nearly 2
miles inland at right angles to the coast, and forms a prominent mark from
seaward and from the bay of San Francisco. A few large trees are seen along
the top of the main ridge running paraUel with the coast and behind the valley,
connecting Ballenas and Tomales bays.
Table mountain is a very sharp ridge, showing flat-topped only in two
directions. From South FaraUon lighthouse it bears N.E. f N., distant 24
nules. The geographical position of the eastern peak is bit. 87° 55' 86",
long. 122° 38' 38".
Drake Bay.—From the taU of Duxbury reef to the west end of point
Reyes the course is W. f N., and distance 17f nules. To the east end the
course is W. by N., distance 14f nules. From Duxbury the shore is bold
and compact, running nearly N.W. by W. for about 10 nules, then curving
regularly to the westward, changing to a low shore, until it reaches its greatest
latitude at the Estero de Limantour, which bears N. by E. f E., from the
east end of point Reyes, .distant 8 nules; thence the line curves to the southward and south-west, 1 nule west of the point, leaving a long, high, narrow
point stretching to tbe east, and off which the breakers extend f a nule.
This curving shore-line forms Sir Francis Drake's bay, which affords a large
and admirable anchorage in heavy north-west weather; and by anchoring close
in under the north side of the point, in 4 or 5 fathoms, hard bottom, good but
contracted anchorage is obtained in south-east gales, as the sweU rolling in
from the S.W. is broken by the reef.
Several estores or lagoons open into the north side of the bay, but their
entrances are very narrow and shoal. The largest is the Estero de Limantour,
which stretches to the northward over 8 nules, and one of its numerous arms
approaches within a nule of the ocean beach, 5 nules north of point Reyes
head. The entrance to this lagoon has 8 feet of water, and is generally
marked by breakers on either hand. Coasters can enter with the prevailing
north-west wind.
POINT REYES—This is the most prominent and remarkable headland
north of point Concepcion. It is distinctly visible from the entrance to San
Francisco bay, and the summit of the ridge presents an irregular jagged
outline, with the highest part about one-forth of its length from the westernSOUTH FARALLON.
171
extremity. Its southern face is a precipitous waU of hard sienitic granite,
rising boldly from the ocean, attaining an elevation of 597 feet in 800 yards,
and stretching nearly in a straight line E. by N. and W. by S. for 8 miles.
This direction is pecubar on the coast, and would not be expected from a
consideration of the trend of the coast mountains and of the FaraUones, which
are in Une N.W. and S.E. On the north side the cape faUs away regularly
to a low undulating neck of land, cut up by estores making in from Drake
bay. When made from southward it is raised as a long, high island ; but on
approaching it from westward it is projected upon the mountains running
north from Table mountain, and its characteristics are not so readily recognized. Its base is very broken and rocky, and bordered by crags and
hundreds of rocks, but may be boldly approached, and 8 fathoms, hard bottom,
obtained within less than a f of a mile. Off the eastern extremity a reef
makes out f a mile in continuation of the point. Upon this reef it breaks
heavUy in bad southerly weather, but 9 fathoms can be had close to the
breakers. Off the western head a depth of 12 fathoms is found quite near to
the rocks.
Vessels bound to San Francisco from northward always make point Reyes,
and, when up to it, sight two mountains on the southern peninsula of San
Francisco as islands. One of these is Blue mountain, 1100 feet high, and
the other, Abbey hiU, 1250 feet.*
THE   FARALLONES.
SOUTH FARALLON.—Tbe southern and principal one of the. six
rocky islets known as the Farallones de los Frayles, Ues off the Golden Gate
at a distance of 23f miles; the whole group is disposed in a nearly straight
Une running N.W. from the southern one. This is the largest and highest,
extending nearly a nule east and west, attaining an elevation of about
840 feet above the sea, and presenting to the eye a mass of broken, jagged
rocks, upon which no vegetation exists, except a few stunted weeds. The
rocks are sharp, angular masses, which, becoming detached by the operations
of natural causes, roU down upon the more level parts of the islet and cover
it with irregular boulders. A more desolate and barren place can hardly be
imagined. From the hUls about the Golden Gate the South Farallon is
plainly visible, rising in regular pyramidal form.
Vessels from westward, running for the Golden Gate, should keep southward of the South FaraUon, especially in thick weather and at night.
Westward of it a depth of 60 fathoms is obtained at a distance of 3 miles,
* Mr. Davidson of the U.S. Coast Survey observes—" In 1859, while occupying the
Coast Survey station on point Reyes hill, 1389 feet in altitude, and 8| miles N.E. i N.,
from point Reyes head, we observed a barque, during a perfect calm, having no steerage
way, and turning round several times, drift to the northward past point Reyes head, at the
rate of 1 mile per hour. She was 2 miles to the westward of the head. On this and subsequent occasions we noticed the discolored water of the Sacramento from San Francisco
bay close in shore, and extending to the northward of the head several miles. Different
degrees of discoloration, as of successive ebb tides, were plainly marked."
A lighthouse is to be erected on point Reyes, at about a J of a mile from its western
point.
-G^—xxJ*^11
'ill
11 ]
11
172
SOUTH AND MIDDLE FARALLON.
shoaling to 20 fathoms in 2 miles; whereas, inside of it, the bottom is very
regular at 80 fathoms for 10 nules, and then decreases regularly to the bar.
On the S.E. side of the island there is said to be good holding-ground in
15 fathoms.
The San Francisco pilot-boats cruise off the island.
Ught.—The lighthouse on South Farallon is in lat. 87° 41' 49", long.
122° 59' 5". The light revolves every minute, is 860 feet above the sea, and
can be seen from a distance of 26 nules. From it tbe North Farallon bears
N. 64° W., 6f miles; western head of point Reyes, N. by W. f W.,
17:} nules; point Bonita Ughtbouse, N.E. by E., 28f miles; and point San
Pedro, East, 23f nules.
MIDDLE FARALLON.—This*is a single rock, between 50 and 60
yards in diameter, and rising 20 or 80 feet above tbe water. It Ues
N. 56° W., distant 2f nules from the Ughthouse on the South Farallon. Its
geographical position is, lat. 87° 48' 82", long. 128° C 55".
NORTH FARALLONES.—These be nearly in Une with each other
and the Middle and South Farallones, and consist of a group of four islets,
having a pyramidal appearance as their name denotes, and comprised within
a space of little more than f a mile Bquare. The northern three are quite
high and bold, the highest peak of the middle one attaining an elevation of
166 feet, whUst the southern one of the group is a mere rock of about 85 yards
in diameter, and hardly 20 feet above water. Viewed from south- it or
north-east, breakers extend across from the largest islet to the next one southeast, and during a heavy ground sweU, an observer on Reyes hiU has watched
it breaking on an isolated sunken rock lying apparently between the northern
and largest islet. From certain directions a small pyramidal detached peak
shows close to the north side of the northern islet.
The northern islet is in lat. 87° 46' 11", long. 128° 5' 25", and has an
extent of 160 yards.
It is said that a rock of 4 fathoms upon which the sea breaks in bad weather
Ues 2 nules southward and eastward from the North Farallones, and that it
has kelp around it, except when torn away by storms. In good weather the
fishermen are reported to fish around it.
Noonday Rock.—This danger Ues nearly on the prolongation of the Une
from the South FaraUon, through the North FaraUones. It is of very limited
extent, and is, doubtless, a sharp isolated point of a smaU ledge, having
from 20 to 80 fathoms immediately around it. It is plainly visible when
directly over it, and has 8f fathoms of water upon it at mean low water;
but at the extreme low water of spring tides there wiU be hardly so much.
In very heavy weather and low water the sea breaks upon it, but
this indication seldom exists, and must not be depended upon for ascertaining
its position. From it point Reyes, (western head) bears N. 18° 25' E.,
distant 18ft miles; North Farallon, S. 79° 80' E., distant 8^ miles; South
Farallon lighthouse, S. 69° 45' E., distant 9T7ff miles; and point Bonita
lighthouse, N. 71° 82' E., distant 80T30 miles.
In the description of the South FaraUon, and in the directions for approaching San Francisco, we have heretofore advised vessels approaching tbe Golden
Gate at night and in thick weather to keep southward of the South Farallon
light. This advice has now more significance, and should be foUowed. With
point Reyes and the Farallones in sight, vessels bound in and running between
them should keep the western head of point Reyes open on a N.N.E. course,BODEGA HEAD.
178
nothing to the eastward,
coming notning to ine easiwiuu, until the North and South Farallones are in
range, then bear away for the Golden Gate. In that position the rock will
bear S.E., distant 2f nules. Coming from north-westward at night, vessels
should not bring the South Farallon Ught to bear anything east of S.E. by E.,
which wiU clear the rock by 2 miles, and the North Farallones by 1 mile.
South-west of the line passing through the FaraUones and Noonday rock,
the 100-fathom curve is only 4 miles distant, and the 50-fathom curve only
2 nules, with very irregular bottom.
POINT REYES TO CAPE CLASSET.
The Coast.—Northward of point Reyes is a long reach of broad
White sand beach, backed by sand dunes, and extending in a N. f E. direction
about 12 miles, curving to the north-west, and changing to a high precipitous
coast running to point Tomales, which bears N. by W. 15 mUes from point
Reves Three-quarters of a mUe before reaching the point, a rocky islet
80 feet in height is seen close in shore. Eight mUes above point Reyes is
the opening to an estero, the north point of which is low and sandy; the
wider arm runs 1 mile towards the head of tbe western branch of the Estero
de Limantour, a little more than that distance from it; the other arm runs nearly
U miles to the north-westward. The ridge forming Tomales point and the
western shore of Tomales bay is tbe northern extremity of that starting from
Duxbury point. About 4f miles from the point the ridge is 678 feet high,
with slightly lower ground a few miles south. It is where the sand dunes
strike this ridge that the coast changes its character; thence to the point it is
bold and rocky, with breakers about f of a nule off the point, and on the
prolongation of the ridge, which averages less than f of a mile m breadth for
the last 4 miles. * Jr,£A4<  l,.™; »'< fH     -i
Tbe bay of Tomales extends from Tomales point S.E. f E. for 12f miles,
with an average width of £ of a mile. The entrance is narrow, and obstructed
bv a bar having a depth of 10 feet, between sandy lumps of 7 feet. The bar
Ues nearly f a mile east of tbe extreme point, and 400 yards from the bluffs.
It is exposed to the full force of the north-west swell, and with the least swell
from seaward it breaks across the whole entrance. For 2 or 8 nules this bay
is contracted but has a narrow, deep channel close under the western shore.
Four nules within the point lies a small island near the middle of the bay;
bevond it the depth of water becomes more regular. Its shores are becoming
thickly settled and trade in agricultural products has increased so much that
a small steamer has been put upon tie route to San Francisco.
Bodega Head.—This point lies N.N.W. 18 nules from point Reyes, and
forms the northern point of Bodega bay, Tomales point being the southern.
The head is 200 or 800 feet high; with a slightly rounding summit, and continues of nearly the same ieight for a mile or two northward, where it changes
to a broad sand beach with low country near, but high hills in the back ground.
The face of the land about here begins to change from its uniform want of
trees to Mils partiaUy covered. Bodega head is said to bear some resemblance
to noint Reves but the surveyors state that such does not exist, or if it does
they were unable to detect it.    The highest part of the head is about 265 feet174
BODEGA BAY.
I
above the sea.   The position of the head (one nule from its south extremity)
k, lat. 88° 18' 20", long. 128° 2' 47".
BODEGA BAY.—From Tomales point to Bodega head the course is
N.W. f W., and tie distance 4f nules. The average width of tie bay eastward of the above Une is If nules, with the shore running nearly a parallel
course. It is bordered by numerous rocks, is abrupt, and reaches a height of
594 feet less than a nule inland. The anchorage Ues between tie head and
the mouth of the Estero Americano, (caUed Avatcha by the Russians,) which
Ues E. 16° N., 2f nules from the head. One mile west of the estero a low,
narrow sand spit If nules long, and covered with bushes, stretches towards
the head, within 100 yards of it, where a passage exists for the waters of the
extensive lagoon north of the sand spit, having small and intricate channels,
but almost destitute of water at low tides. The anchorage is f a mile outside
of this passage, and about N. f E. of the rocky islet, in 5 or 6 fathoms, hard
bottom of coarse sand and small patches of clay. It is protected by the head
and the low rocky islet and reef, about f of a mue off tie south-east face,
from the full force of tie north-west sweU, which generally rolls in disagreeably
in the open part of the bay if the weather is heavy. The reef is densely
covered with kelp, and the breakers usually indicate its position. Between
the islet and the head there is a narrow 4f-fathom passage opening directly
upon the anchorage. In coming from the north-west in summer this channel
is available ; but in beating out it is too contracted to be safe. During the
winter season it is necessary to anchor well out, to be ready to slip and run,
as the sea-room is very contracted and the sweU heavy. Some vessels havo
ridden out heavy souti-easters, but several have been lost. In beating oat,
tie only danger is the reef off the head.
On account of tie general depression of tie coast hiUs behind Bodega bay,
to about 500 or 600 feet elevation, and tie vaUey in which tie Estero
Americano lies being perpendicular to the coast line, the summer winds draw
in towards the Petaluma valley with great force. The trunks of tie oak trees
rise straight for about 10 feet, then bend almost at right angles, without a
branch for 10 or 15 feet, and terminate in a clump of branches all dragged out
by the force of the wind. Fogs are found drawing in sooner and more
frequently than upon any other part of tie coast.
Tie country in the vicinity of the bay is very productive, both in the valleys
and upon the hills. The produce is placed in lighters at the " port" or
embarcadero, about 1 mile within the lagoon, and carried by tie current to
tie anchorage.
Tides.—The corrected establishment at the port is lib. 17m. The mean
rise and fall of tides is 8*6 feet; of spring tides, 4*7 feet; and of neap tides,
2-7 feet.
Fort Ross.—At about 15 miles from Bodega head, and 82 miles N.W. f N.
from point Reyes is fort Ross, off which vessels occasionaUy anchor, bat it is
by no means a desirable place to ride in as the anchorage is rocky, contracted,
and consequently unsafe. The large white buildings of the Russians on the
rising ground, and about 100 feet above the sea, are the only marks for
making it, and the shore is so steep and guarded by rocks and reefs as to
render approach dangerous. No trade is now carried on here. Its
geographical position is lat. 88° 80', long. 122° 13'.
The shore between Bodega head and fort Ross curves slightly to tbe eastward of tbe line joining the two places.    Sand dunes commence 11  milesToot 174it
t
174
above tie sea.    The
k, lat. 88° 18' 20",
BODEGA   BA
N.W. f W., and th
ward of the above 1
course.    It is horde
594 feet less than a
tie mouth of the Es
Ues E. 16° N., 2f 1
narrow sand spit 12
the head, within 10
extensive lagoon n<
but almost destitute
of this passage, and
bottom of coarse sa
and the low rocky
from tie full force c
in the open part <
covered with kelp,
the islet and the 1
upon tie anchorage
is available;   but i
winter season it is
as the sea-room is
ridden out heavy i
the only danger is i
On account of tl
to about 500 or
Americano lies ben
in towards tbe Peti
rise straight for al
branch for 10 or 1
by the force of ti
frequently than upi
The country in 1
and upon the hiUT
embarcadero, aboi
the anchorage.
Tides.—The co:
rise and fall of tid
2-7 feet.
Fort Ross.—At
from point Reyes i
by no means a desi
and consequently
rising ground, an
making it, and ti
render approach
geographical posit:
The shore betwi
ward of the Une —
•SB-SBHAVEN ANCHORAGE.
175
from the southern'point of the head, and extend 2f miles to the mouth of a
small stream called Salmon creek; these dunes are bordered by a broad sand
beach. At 9f nules from Bodega head the Slavianska (known as Russian
river) empties into the sea, breaking through the coast hills that here reach
an elevation of 2200 feet. During the summer months a dry bar forms completely across the mouth of the river, so that the trail along the coast passes
over it. It requires heavy rains to break through it, and forms again after
a few weeks of dry weather. During the summer tie bed is dry above
Healdsburg, 30 miles from the mouth, and can be forded in several places
in that distance. Before breaking through the coast hills it comes from the
northward through a broad, fertile vaUey. The arroyos and streams opening
into the Russian river near the coast are filled with a very dense growth of
heavy redwood; and in 1860 a tram road was being constructed along the coast
to the lagoon inside of Bodega head to carry the lumber from the mill on
the river.
From Ross mountain, 2198 feet in height, the discoloured water of the river
has been frequently observed to work along close in-shore to the northward,
but never to the southward.    The fishermen experience the same eddy current.
Northward of the Slavianska again commence the high coast hills, covered
with timber which graduaUy approaches the coast, and reaches it about half
way to fort Ross. The Russian vessels used this as a distinctive mark for
making tbe anchorage. Where the timber commences to skirt the coast a
bold spur of the mountains comes directly upon the sea. At fort Ross there
is a small .'extent of open, cultivated ground, moderately low, but backed by
tbe'higi wooded country. Tbe coast and coast hills to the northward are
mostly covered with dense forests of immense redwood, pine, and a thick
undergrowth. At one of the Coast Survey mountain stations over 40 trees
were cut down that measured from 5f feet in diameter (spruce) to 8f feet
(redwood).
Two nules above fort Ross is a small contracted anchorage, called Timber
cove, where a great deal of lumber is sawed, and carried by coasters to San
Francisco.
Eight mUes above fort Ross is another contracted anchorage, under Salt
point, where coasters load lumber.
From fort Ross to point Arena the coast is almost straight, running
N.W. by W. f W., for 37 miles. It is compact and abrupt the whole
distance, covered with trees to the water's edge, and backed by an unbroken
ridge of hiUs about 2000 feet high, and wooded to their summits.
Haven Anchorage.—About 24 miles north-westward along the coast
from fort Ross and in lat. 38° 47' 58", long 123° 34' 1", is a contracted anchorage under high precipitous rocky islets, with a short stretch of beach on
the main, affording a boat landing. There is a protection, when anchored
close in, against heavy north-west weather; but it would be very difficult to
recognize tie locaUty unless the position of a vessel approaching it were
accurately determined.
Northward of this anchorage high bold rocks line the coast for 4 or 5 nules.
They are generaUy known as " Fishing rocks."
A few miles south of this anchorage is the mouth of the Walalla river, open
in the rainy season, but having a dry bar in summer. It rises south of fort
Ross, behind the first range of coast hiUs. One of the Coast Survey stations
on the north side of the river, and 3 or 4 miles from the coast, has ansi
176
POINT ARENA.
elevation of 2192 feet, and this may be taken as the general height of this
coast range.
# Point Arena.—This is tbe first prominent headland north of point Reyes,
from which it bears N.W. f W., distant 67 miles. Approached either from
northward or southward it presents a long level plateau, stretching out about
2 miles west of the highlands, and terminating in a perpendicular bluff that
averages about 200 feet in height, except the extreme north-west part, which
is comparatively low, partially covered with sand, and destitute of trees for
some distance inland. When seen from southward, with the sun shining
upon the face of the bluff, it shows remarkably white for the length of 2 nules.
In fact no point upon the coast presents such a bright appearance, or such
uniform vertical bluffs, composed of hard rocks, twisted and distorted into
many pbcations. Bold water is found close off the point, outside the kelp,
which, stretching along [to the southward, shows the set and comparative
strength of the current. When observed in October 1857, it was estimated
to be running at the rate of not less than 2 miles an hour. In July, 1858,
the computed distances between the astronomical stations, compared with the
indications of Massey's patent log, showed a current of from 1 to 2 miles,
running southward along the coast.*
At about 2 mUes southward of point Arena a small contracted vaUey opens
upon the shore, and off it is an anchorage for small vessels, moderately weU
protected from the north-west swell, but open to the south-west. Several
schooners have gone ashore here.    A large bed of kelp lies off the anchorage.
At about If miles N. by W. from point Arena are several rocks showing
just above water, and upon which the least swell breaks. These were noticed by
Vancouver in October 1793. When 1 mile broad off point Arena a high, sharp
pinnacle rock shows weU out from the shore on the horizon to the southward,
with some rocky islets inside, and breakers well out beyond the pinnicle rock,
yet northward of it; but their distances from shore are probably not so mucb'
as a mile. The approximate geographical position of Point Arena is
lat. 88° 57', long. 123° 45'.
At about 10 miles northward of point Arena is a small stream named
Nevarro, upon which is a lumber null. Articles floating from this river are
occasionally found on the coast northward of it.
Albion River.—From point Arena the first point to the north-westward is
24 miles distant, on the bearing of N.W. by N. f N. After passing point Arena
the coast trends eastward of North, and for 6 miles presents a low shore-line
with sand beach, changing suddenly to a straight, high bluff shore with a few
trees, and backed within f a mile by bibs of 2000 feet, covered to their sum-
* Point Arena and the coast southward of it are thus described by Vancouver, " Point
Arena is a conspicuous mark on the coast, the shores to the north of it taking a N. 10° W.
direction. Its northern side is composed of black rugged rocks, on which the sea breaks
with great violence; to the south of it the coast trends S. 35° E. Its southern side is
cemposed of low, sandy, or clayey cliffs, remarkably white, though interspersed with
streaks of a dull green colour. The country above it rises with a gentle ascent, and is
chequered with copses of forest trees and clear ground, which, gives it the appearance of
being in a high state of cultivation. The land, further south, is high, steep to the sea,
and presents a rude and barren aspect. As we approached the shore advancing to the
southward, the country became nearly destitute of wood and vendure, at least that part of
it in the vicinity of the sea shore, which was nearly straight and compact. The more
interior hills, rising behind those forming the coast, were tolerably well wooded."
a^y^i '-«—*~—*-*   /> ^&%r* l*-r?4~^ *JL~sC *£c~*~~, +s«
&MENDOCINO BAY.
177
mita with wood. At 16f nules from point Arena is the mouth of the Albion
river, a very small stream, with the barest apology for a harbour at its mouth.
A saw-miU.upon this stream induces coasters to obtain freights here, but a
great many of those trading have been lost. In 1853 tie Coast Surveying
steamer Active passed in, but broke her anchor on the rocky bottom.
Mendocino Bay.—At 20f nules from point Arena, and 4 miles northward of Albion river, is a contracted indentation named Mendocino bay, which
is available for a few vessels in summer, but dangerous in winter. The
northern and southern points are about f of a mile apart, and the eastern
shore retreats-nearly f a nule. At the southern head are several small rocks,
and one large islet surrounded by rooks, off which are heavy breakers. Midway between the heads is a small reef upon which the sea breaks heavily,
with very Utile sweU. Deep water is found close around this reef. Off the
northern head is very bold water close to it. Into the north-east part of the
bay enters the river Noyon, or Rio Grande, between 200 and 300 yards wide,
with a good channel on the southern side, a broad sand flat on the northern,
and a bar at the mouth with but a few feet of water, and upon which the sea
always breaks. The eastern shore is bold and rocky. La the south-eastern
part is a sand beach, with a reef extending from its centre.
The bay forms so sight an indentation in the coast-line that it is difficult to
find without acquaintance with its minutest peculiarities, as there are no
prominent marks by which to determine it. The north head is a table bluff
about 60 feet high, and destitute of trees to the northward and some distance
inshore. The south bluff is likewise destitute of trees, but more irregular in
outiine than the other. Vessels bound for it in summer work a little to
windward; then run boldly in towards the north point, upon which the houses
become recognized; keep as close as possible along the shore, gradually
decreasing the distance to 100 yards just off the south end of the point in
6 fathoms; run on about 150 yards past the point; head up handsomely, and
anchor in 5 or 6 fathoms hard bottom. It is a bad berth in summer, and in
winter a vessel must anchor far enough out to be able to slip her cable and go
to sea upon the first appearance of a south-easter. Several vessels have been
driven ashore here.
An extensive saw-miU is located on the north side of the river, some distance up; formerly (1853) it was on the north head, and a stationary engine
was placed near tie mouth of the river to draw loaded cars up the inclined
plane* whence they were drawn to the mUl. The lumber was slid down chutes
into large scows, and carried to the anchorage.
The place is now sometimes caUed MeiggsvUle; formerly it was Mendocino
City. The position of the north head of the bay is lat. 39° 18' 6", long.
128° 47'26".
From the point just north of Mendocino bay, (the first one made from point
Arena), the shore runs nearly straight for 28 mUes in a N. by W. f W.
direction, being low and bounded by rocks for 12 miles, when tbe back hills
reach the water and present an almost vertical front 2000 feet in height.
From the deepest part of the bight the general trend of the coast to cape
Mendocino is N.W. f W., and distance 45 mues; and for the whole of this
distance it is particularly bold and forbidding, the range of hills running
parallel to the shore and rising directly from it. It has been found impossible
to travel along this stretch of seaboard; and the traU turns well into the
interior valleys.
N178
SHELTER COVE  AND  POINT  GORDA.
fir
Shelter Cove.—From the «ompact shore just described a plateau, from
60 to 300 feet in height, and destitute of wood, makes square out from the
land, just about latitude 40°, for a distance of i a mUe, and affords on its
south side an anchorage from north-west winds. This cove may, perhaps,
be regarded as a harbour of refuge for small coasters which have experienced
heavy weather off cape Mendocino, and are short of wood and water, both of
which may be obtained here from one or two gulches opening upon the sea;
from point Arena it bears N.W. by N. f N., distant 65 miles.
The whole sea-face of the bluff, just mentioned, is bounded by thousands
of rocks above and below water, and vessels coming from northward for
shelter must give it a wide berth, rounding it within f of a mile. The
anchorage is in 5 fathoms, hard bottom, at about f of a nule from shore;
in this position fresh water comes down a ravine bearing about North, and an
Indian village existed in 1853 at the bottom of the wooded ravine, a little
further to the eastward. There is always a swell here, and boat landing may
not be very easy.
The south-east part of the bluff (place of observation at about 60 feet above
the sea) is in lat. 40° 1' 14", long. 124° 3' 3".
Point Gorda.—From Shelter Cove the coast trends 17 mUes in a
N.W. by W. f W. direction to point Gorda, which, as its name implies, is a
large, bold, rounding point. At £ a mile from it there is a large rocky islet,
and rocks also lie close inshore, north of the point. From point Arena it
bears N.W. f N., distant 81 miles.
Cape Mendocino.—From point Gorda to cape Mendocino the distance
is 12f miles in a N.N.W. f W. direction, hence the cape is 93 nules
N.W. f N. from point Arena. Here the range of coast hills from southward
appears to meet a range coming from eastward, the junction resulting in a
mountainous headland of about 8000 feet in height. The cape is the western
Umit of the north-west trend of this section of the coast, and its geographical
position is lat. 40° 25', long. 124° 22'.
At about 3 miles br6ad off the cape is a reef, just under water, known as
Blunt rocks, or reef, upon which the sea generally breaks. And, at nearly
half way between it and the cape, but a little to the southward, is a sunken
rock called Fauntleroy rock.*
Southward of, and immediately off the pitch of cape Mendocino, are
numerous rocks and rocky islets, the latter being large and high, with a
peculiar pyramidal or sugar-loaf appearance. None of them seem to be more
than f a mile from the shore, which is almost perpendicular and destitute of a
beach.
* As Fauntleroy rock has not been thoroughly examined, nor its position accurately
determined, more than ordinary care is required when sailing in its neighbourhood.
Steamers have passed dangerously near it, and in 1857 it was distinctly seen almost
under the wheel of the steamship Commodore. Vessels can, perhaps, pass over it in
smooth weather, but with a heavy sea the water must break.
In January, 1860, the steamship Northerner struck upon it. The weather was slightly
hazy; long, large ground-swell from the north-west, no wind, and low tide. She was
bound up the coast, and going over 10 knots per hour. As her bow sunk in the trough of
the sea a very slight jar was felt forward, exciting no alarm among the uninitiated. The
pumps were immediately sounded, and the ship found to be making water very fast. She
headed for Humboldt, but was beached north of cape Fortunas (False Mendocino) and went
to pieces in a heavy south-west blow that sprang up.HUMBOLDT BAY.
179
The face of the cape is very steep, rocky, and worn. About this the
general appearance is rolbng, and the surface covered with timber. The
I pyramidal islets off it are very readily distinguished in approaching from northward or southward.
From cape Mendocino, Trinidad head bears North, distant 39 miles;
i Redding rock, N. f W., 56 miles; Crescent City lighthouse, N. by W.,
179f miles; and cape Orford, N. by W. f W., 145 miles.
At about 7 miles south of cape Mendocino is a small stream named Mattole.
Upon the sides of the hills in lower Mattole, and not above a mile from tbe
Pacific, coal oil springs were discovered in 1861. Along the course of this
stream are numerous bottom lands under cultivation.
Cape Fortunas (False Mendocino) lies northward of cape Mendocino,
distant 5 or 6 miles, and is another bold spur of mountainous headland,
similar and almost as high as that cape. Between the two the shore recedes
slightly, is depressed, and forms a beach receiving a small stream called Bear
or McDonald creek, which descends through a narrow valley or gulch. Off
this cape are several rocky islets presenting the same peculiarities as those
off cape Mendocino. There is no beach at the base of the almost perpendicular
sea face.
The vicinity of these headlands certainly deserves a detailed hydrographic
and topographical survey. It is reported that soundings have been obtained
weU to westward of tbe cape; should such prove correct, the fact will be of
importance to vessels, especially steamers, bound north or south, when
near the coast and enveloped in fog, as it would enable them to judge of their
position and change their course.*
Northward of cape Fortunas, the shore changes to a straight, low, sandy
beach, with valleys running some distance inland. At 14 mues from cape
Mendocino is Eel river, a small barred stream; it is very contracted and
crooked, receiving the waters of a great many sloughs near its mouth, and
draining a most fertile valley, which is rapidly filling up with settlers.
An extensive business in salmon fisheries is carried on near the mouth of
Eel river. The first vessel known to have entered it was a schooner, in the
spring of 1850, when searching for Humboldt bay. She thumped over the
bar, which is said to have 9 feet of water upon it at high tide. The Indian
name for the river is Wee-ot. It rises by two heads in about latitude
89° 30', about 80 miles from the coast, and runs nearly parallel with it.
One head of a small branch called the South fork is only 5 miles from the
coast, a short distance south of Shelter cove.
HUMBOLDT BAY.—Tbe entrance to this bay lies 21 miles from
Sugar Loaf islet off cape Mendocino ; and the bar, N. by E., 22f miles from
Blunt rocks. Tbe bar is If miles from the entrance between the sand points,
or 2 miles from the south-west and highest point of Red bluff, which is the
second bluff above Eel river. As with all the rivers on this coast, the bar
undergoes irregular changes, depending much upon the prevalence, direction,
and strength of the wind. Early in 1851 it bore N.W., distant 2 miles from
Red bluff, and about f a mUe from the beach of the north spit. Soundings
of 3f fathoms were obtained upon it; there was then a width of 250 yards
* Lieut. Knox, U.S. Navy, is reported to have discovered a reef at about 8 miles
N.W. by W., from the rocks off cape Mendocino.   We suspect that this is Blunt reef, the
distance being probably over estimated.
N 2180
HUMBOLT BAY.
i
H
between the 8-fathom curves, which retained nearly the same width, and
continued on a south-east course towards the bluff, but approached closer
to the north than to the south spit. When between the two, the depth of
water was increased to 11 fathoms, suddenly shoaling to 4 fathoms* inside.
Vessels kept the north spit within 150 to 250 yards on the port hand for
2 or 8 miles after entering. In the fall of 1852 the bar was reported to have
moved to the northward about its entire width, and the ranges for going in,
as laid down by the survey of the previous year, were entirely useless. In
the whiter of 1858-4 the bar changed much, and often suddenly. In tie
spring of 1854 it was more than its previous width to the southward of its
position in 1851, and the depth of water had decreased, until in June of that
year, when the United States Survey vessel crossed, it was over f a nule
in extent, with only 16 feet of water at high tide. A bare spot then showed
at the lowest tides, W.N.W. of the end of the south spit. In that year a
brig was observed to thump over the north sands, while on the course prescribed by the sailing directions of 1851. In 1857 less than 13 feet at high
tide could be found upon it, and its extent was very much increased.
EventuaUy a deep and narrow channel wiU be cut through. About 1852 a
steam-tug was stationed in the bay, and has since rendered tie most efficient
service in determining the changes of the bar. When vessels are seen
approaching the bar a flag is hoisted on Red bluff, and the tug goes out to
take them in. If it is breaking so heavily on the bar that she cannot get
through it, and it is yet practicable for the vessel tq run in, she takes up a
position and hoists her flag as a signal for the vessel to steer for her. She
is also used in towing out the deeply laden lumber vessels, as the summer
winds blow directly in the channel.
From the foregoing remarks it wiU be seen that it is not prudent to attempt
to enter the bay without the assistance of a pUot, or tie help of a tug. In
1861 the steamship Columbia was detained in the bay 6 days by unusuahy
heavy weather; at the same time a lumber-laden barque was unable to cross
the bar for 25 days.
A lighthouse has been erected on the north spit of the bay at f of a nule
north of the entrance, and about midway between the bay and sea shores. It
shows & fixed light at 53 feet above the sea, visible at the distance of about
12 miles. Its position is lat. 40° 46' 4", long. 124° 12' 10".*
. Tides.—The corrected establishment at tie port is 12h. 11m.
rise and fall of tides is 4*4 feet; of spring tides, 5*5 feet; and
tides, 3* 5 feet.
Humboldt bay is situated immediately behind the low sand spits and
dunes, and extends 9 miles north and 4 miles south of the entrance; being
contracted to less than f a nule in width between the south spit and Red
bluff, it then expands to nearly 3 miles, and runs If miles to tie eastward
of Table bluff. The single channel running into this part of tie bay divides
into two crooked ones, which contain from 1 to 3 fathoms of water; all tie
rest shows a bare mud flat at low tides. Abreast of tbe entrance it is
nearly a nule in width, with extensive sands bare at low tides, lying midway
* A light on Red bluff, which is nearly 100 feet high, would always serve as a leading
range, as the flag-staff and ensign placed there are now thus used by the pilots. It would
be distinguishable readily at sea, when the present one might be obscured by the mist
hanging over the surf on the beach. During the day the white buildings would be a
capital mark against the green hills and trees in the background.
The mean
of neapHUMBOLDT BAY.
181
between tie opposite shores, and running nearly parallel with them. To the
northward its average widtb is f a mile for a distance of 8£ miles; it then
expands into a large shallow sheet of water, having two or three crooked
channels through it, but the greater part is bare at low tides, showing extensive mud flats, bordered by a grassy flat nearly a mile in widtb. In tbe
channel way close to the north spit, not less than 3 fathoms may be carried,
increasing for 3 mileB to 6f fathoms. One mUe north of the entrance, and
on the eastern side, enters a small stream called Elk river. Two miles
north of tie entrance, and on the east side, is situated tbe town of Bucksport,
off which a depth of 8f fathoms is found within 150 yards of the shore.
Vessels are got alongside the sawmill wharf here at high tide to load, at low
tides they rest upon the muddy bottom. The mibtary station of fort Humboldt is on a reservation on the bluff about 100 feet bigh, and immediately
behind the town. On the same side, and 4 miles north of the entrance, is
the town of Eureka, off which is a portion of the channel, having nearly 8
fathoms in it, but no channel reaching it having more than If fathoms. The
town was bud out before this latter fact was discovered. Vessels be at the
wharves, resting on the mud at low tide. Abreast of Eureka lie several low
marshy islands cut up by sloughs and ponds. The largest, caUed Indian
island, is about a nule long (N.E.) by f a nule in width. It is marked by
two hiUocks, surmounted by clumps of trees, near which were (1854) several
wretched Indian huts. Tbe smaller islands lie between this and the eastern
siore and parallel with it. Areata, formerly Uniontowiu, & situated on the
north-east shore of the bay, and can only be reached by boats at'high tide. It
is the starting point for the Trinity and Klamath mines. From it an extensive wharf stretches far out over the mud flat, which vessels can reach at
high-tides.
The southern spit from the entrance to Table bluff does not average
a f of a mile hi width; is formed of low sand dunes and grassy hiUocks, and
bordered on the bay side by marsh. At the southern extremity rises Table
bluff, which tie name weU describes, to a height of about 200 feet, its
western point nearly reaching the sea beach, and forming a good landmark
for making the bay. Five miles east of it the iiUs commence rising. Abreast
of the north end of the south spit rises Red bluff, presenting to the entrance
a perpendicular face, composed of sand and gravel coloured by tie decomposition of iron ore near its surface, which is 96 feet above high water, and
destitute of tree or bush. The bay front of the bluff is about f of a mile
long, gradually declining to tie low, flat bind to tie north, and also falling
away to the south and seast. On this bluff the pilots have a flag-staff to
range with known points of trees beyond, by which they cross the bar and
keep tie run of its changes. The low land on the eastern shore above Red
bluff averages f a nule in width, and runs as far as Eureka, gradually changing to marsh, and bounded by plateaus and hiUs covered with wood. The
north spit averages f a mile in width, and its southern extremity as composed
of sand dunes and grassy hiUocks disposed in a marked manner parallel
with the direction of the north-west windB. Two mUes from the entrance trees
cover the hillocks and run northward 1 mile, when a space of a mile occurs
without them.   After that they continue along tie shore.
We have already mentioned tie situations of three of tie towns on Humboldt bay. Humboldt, the fourth town, is located on the south side of Red
bluff.    It had eight or ten houses in 1854, and was going backward; in182
TRINIDAD BAY.
1860 it had two houses.
saw-mill, formed by hauUng the steamer
Bucksport has a goodly number of houses and one
Commodore Preble on the beach,
and using her engines for motive power. Eureka has eight saw-miUs_ and
a grist-null, and presents a thriving appearance; one of the saw-mills is
formed by the steamboat Santa Clara.    Areata has one saw-miU.    (1862).
The Indian name of Humboldt bay is Qual-a-waloo.
Mad river.—-This stream has its outlet at about -a nule north of Humboldt
bay. It averages about 100 yards in width, with a bar at its entrance that
prevents egress; but the vast amount of timber in tbe valley must eventually
find a passage through a canal to the north-west point of Humboldt bay.
A deep slough from the latter is said to approach quite close to Mad river,
thus favouring the execution of such a project.
Trinidad Head.—From the bar of Humboldt bay the coast trends 17f
miles in a N. f W. direction to Trinidad head, which bears North 39 nules
from cape Mendocino. The low sand beach off Humboldt continues past Mad
river to within 2 miles of Trinidad bay, when it changes to a bluff, guarded by
innumerable rocks. For the entire distance of the low beach a depth of
from 10 to 15 fathoms may be found at 1 mile from the shore.
The bay or roadstead of Trinidad on the south-east side of the headland is
of very limited extent, but as the water is deep, and all known dangers are
visible, it forms a moderately good summer anchorage. The head, forming
the western shore of the roadstead, and a prominent mark when seen from
close in, is about 375 feet high, and covered with a low, thick undergrowth
of scrub bushes; it has very steep sides, and close to its southern base is a
depth of 8 fathoms. Off its western face, for nearly f a nule out, be several
high, rocky islets; and there is also one f a nule south of it, having
soundings of 8 and 9 fathoms close to it. From the south face eastward to
the 3-fathom curve the distance is 1 mile, and the depth of the bight northward of this line is about f a mile, with half a dozen rocks lying outside the
3-fathom Une, but well above water. In the northern part of the bay there
is a sand beach extending about f a mile ; thence eastward the shore is very
rocky, the bluff being about 300 feet high, and covered with a heavy growth of
timber. The town, formerly a place of some promise, fronts on the northwest part of the roadstead, and the boat landing is on the north side of a
round knoll making out about 100 yards from the low neck running to the
head. A wharf is now built here, at which vessels be to load lumber. A
very considerable quantity of seaweed lies off the shore.
When working into the anchorage beat in boldly past the outermost rock
until the rock just off the eastern side of the head is in range with the knoll
(having a few trees upon it) between the town and the head, with the south
facie of the head bearing W. by N., and anchor in 7 fathoms, hard bottom,
within f of a mile of the rock and head, having tie neck visible
ward of the knoll, and a sugar-loaf rock beyond the neck
A swell wUl generally be found setting in.
Trinidad bay is a dangerous anchorage during winter, and if a vessel is
unluckily caught in it, her chances of riding out a south-easter are bad.
Several Spanish vessels were wrecked here when it was visited by them, and
a number of vessels have been lost within tie last 8 years. In February 1851,
the barque Arcadia was totaUy lost in a south-east gale, her ground tackle
being insufficient to hold her.
showing
le west-
over it.KLAMATH RIVER.
188
From observations made on tbe neck of land near the town, the geographical
position of Trinidad is :—lat. 41° 8' 20", long. 124° 8' 8".*
The shore running N.W. by N. from Trinidad bead is remarkably broken
and rocky, for about 5 miles which induced Vancouver to call its northern
extremity Rocky point. At about 1 mile off it are several rocks known as the
'Turtles'.'
From Rocky point the shore takes a gentle sweep eastward, making its
greatest indentation at the north end of the once famous Gold bluff, in lat.
41° 27', long. 124° 3', and then trending westward to Crescent city. Gold
bluff has an extent of 10 miles, and is very bold and high.
Between Rocky point and Gihon bluff, which is the first one to the northward, there is a stretch of low sand beach, immediately behind which is
an extensive lagoon several miles in length, and from a f to 1 mile in width.
It lies parallel with the beach, and at some seasons is not connected with the
ocean, but at others an opening exists at the northern extremity. The indian
name of the lagoon is iE-shce-sho-ran.
Redding rock.—At 5 mUes from Gold bluff, is the rock known as Redding
rock, which is situated in lat. 41° 21', long. 124° 10'. It is a single large
rocky islet about 200 feet high, and reported to have deep water all around
it, with no outlying dangers; but its vicinity has not been surveyed. Vancouver places it in latitude 41° 25' on his chart, and 4 mUes from shore ; but
in tie narrative states the distance at f a league, and that it is ^ a mile in
circuit. His track was inside of it. It has been asserted that a reef, commencing at the shore 2 miles above the rock, stretches out towards it.
Klamath. River.—Tbe mouth of this river is in lat. 41° 33', long.
124° 5'. It is, perhaps 200 yards wide, having a long sand spit on the
south side running north-west, and parallel with the high hills that form the
north shore. South of the entrance for If miles are outlying rocks, and at
the north side of the entrance are several others. It is reported that the
depth upon the bar is about 2f fathoms. Upon passing it in 1853, within
less than a mile, tbe sea was breaking across it, and no appearance of a safe
channel was presented. SmaU schooners are occasionally able to enter it;
but tbe mouth was completely closed in the winters of 1851 and 1860, and
the bar changes with every change of heavy weather.
At 3 or 4 miles northward of Klamath river is a small sharp indentation at
the mouth of a gulch, off which lie one large and several small rocks; but
from a distance of If mUes the surveyors were unable to determine whether
any stream opened here. It has, however, received the name of False
Klamath, because it has misled small coasters seeking for tbe Klamath,
although there is no sand point on either side, as exists at the latter.    In the
* The town of Trinidad is nearly deserted during winter, but a brisk trade is carried on
in summer. The land in this vicinity is very rich, and well adapted to agriculture. The
red-wood trees grow around it and attain an enormous size. The stump of one measured
by the surveyors was about 20 feet in diameter, and a dozen trees standing in the vicinity
averaged over 10 feet. One is affirmed to be standing on the bank of a small stream at
the south-east part of the bay, that measures over 90 feet in circumference. The bark of
these trees has a thickness of from 8 to 14 inches; they grow perfectly straight, retaining
their thickness to a great height, begin to branch at 50 or 100 feet, and frequently attain
250 feet in height. The forests of this timber, when free from undergrowth, present an
imposing sight.
The Indian name of Trinidad bay is Sh6-ran.It I
184
CRESCENT CITY BAY.
State map of California a creek caUed Ahmen is represented as opening here.
The coast hence continues bold for several nules, when the hills begin to
recede and the shores present many pleasant slopes, unincumbered with
forests and now under cultivation. The shore is low and regularly sweeps to
the westward for a couple of miles, forming the roadstead of Crescent city.'
CRESCENT CITY BAY.—This, the most dangerous of the roadsteads
usually resorted to on tbe coast, has acquired much' importance on account
of the town (Crescent city) being tie depot for tie suppbes of miners working
the gold diggings on the Klamath, Trinity, and Salmon rivers. It is fiUed
with sunken rocks and reefs, and has a goodly number showing above water.
No vessel should think of gaining an anchorage here without a pilot, or perfect
knowledge of the hidden dangers. No sunken rocks are known to exist outside of the Une of visible ones, except one awash, situated at a little more
than f a mile S.W. f W. from the lighthouse. A depth of 10 fathoms exists
all around it, and 7 or 8 fathoms outside of the visible rocks. The usual
anchorage is on a line between the lighthouse and the north side of the large
islet f of a mile east of it, in 3 J fathoms, hard bottom. To reach this position run for the small, round rock bearing S. 65° E. f of a nule from the
lighthouse; pass it on tie east side, giving it a berth of 100 yards; steer
N. by W. £ W. for f of a nule, passing 100 yards on tbe east of Fauntleroy
rock, which is covered at three-quarters flood. H this rock be covered, its
position is generaUy marked by a breaker. It is necessary to keep it close
aboard, because there is a sbarp bayonet rock having only 2 feet of water
upon it, and 200 yards to tie eastward. Head up for the town and anchor
in 8f fathoms. To enter or leave it at night, as is done by the mail and
coasting steamers, requires a perfect local knowledge of tie dangers and
pecubarities of the land-marks. Coasting steamers, in fine weather, nsuaUy
anchor close inshore to discharge freight, which is received in lighters.
A wharf has been buUt out from Battery point, and landing is now easily
effected in good weather.    In south-easters the breakers wash over it.
This bay was surveyed in 1853, and again in 1859, from whioh our
directions are in part drawn up, but principally from an examination of it in
4867. The following report (1859) shows clearly the dangerous character
of tie roadstead, and tie knowledge required to enter it—"During the
progress of the re-survey of Crescent City harbour, we found several new,
dangerous rocks; but as they are not in the channels followed by steamers,
and do not interfere with the anchorage in use, it does not seem necessary
to notice them further in advance of the publication of tie chart, as every one
trading here knows that vessels drawing over 9 feet should be very cautious
in venturing out of tie beaten track. The rocks at that place are of a
peculiar character, standing isolated like bayonets, with their points just below
the surface, and ready to pierce any unlucky craft that may encounter them."
After we finished tie survey, and a fair way had been selected for a sailing
Une, we discovered a very sbarp rock almost directly in the passage, with
its point only 8 feet from the surface, and deep water all around it. This
is mentioned to show that, although the greatest care was taken in the survey,
the character of tie points of rocks is such that it cannot be surprising if new
ones be found for several seasons to come."
In summer there is always some swell here, but in winter it roUs in fearfully, and vessels must choose a position to be ready to run to sea at the
approach of a south-easter.POINT SAINT GEORGE.
185
Communication is maintained with San Francisco and other ports by mail
and coasting steamers, which generaUy carry as many passengers and as much
freight for this place as they carry to the Columbia river.
The town Ues N.W. from the anchorage, immediately on tie low shore; old
drift-logs, hi some instances, forming the foundation for wooden houses. Tn
August 1853, there were about 135 houses of all descriptions. In 1860 the
population was 558, and the number of bouses 176. The lands adjacent
are being cultivated; a grist-miU has been built which turns out 75 barrels
of flour per day, and a good trail leads to the "digging" on the Klamath and
Illinois rivers. Tbe S.W. point of the bay is elevated about 25 feet and this
height continues to the westward.
The Ughthouse at Crescent City bay stands on tbe rocky islet about 800
yards from the point, which is connected to it at low tides by a broken mass
of rocks, over which a single foot-bridge is constructed. It shows a fixed
Ught varied by Biflash every If minutes at 80 feet above the sea, visible 14
nules; its geographical position is lat. 41° 44' 34", long. 124° 11' 22", and
from it cape Mendocino bears S. by E., 79f miles.
Tides.—The (approximate) corrected establishment of the port at Crescent
city is llh. 44m.    The mean rise of tides, 4*7 feet.*
Point Saint George.—From Crescent City bght the coast trends
W. by N. 2 miles to point St. George, which rises to the height of from
50 to 100 feet, with table-land some distance back. It is bounded by hundreds
of rocks, some of which rise perpendicularly 200 feet from the water. Three
or four of the largest present a remarkably white appearance, which serves
to distinguish this point. The extensive reef in its vicinity may have led
to confusion among the old discoverers, by their confounding it with cape
Orford.
Dragon Rocks.—The rocks and reef extending W.N.W. from point St.
George for a distance of 6 miles are known as the Dragon rocks. The locality
has not been surveyed in detail, but a wide passage exists inside tie reef,
and is invariably used by tie mail and coasting steamers, when entering or
leaving Crescent City bay. There are ten or twelve outlying rocks, and many
sunken ones, with the passage running between them and those close to shore.
This passage is about a roile in width, has 10 fathoms in it, and the general
course through is nearly N.W. and S.E., but not straight. ^Among the
multitude of rocks on tbe land side of the passage are three very large and
prominent ones about 200 feet high. It has been already stated that several
of the largest rocky islets have a well-marked white appearance, occasioned
in part by the deposits of sea birds.
* In the interior, along the coast just described, there is a range of very high mountains
running in a direction parallel with the shore, the summits of which can be seen in clear
weather above the hills which form this iron-bound coast. One of these mountains, named
mount Shaste, is always covered with snow, and appears as though composed of large
blocks of rock; its conical shape indicates its volcanic character, although so crater is
visible. The position of thiB mountain is about lat. 41° 20', long. 121° 45'. IThe party mader
Captain Wilkes, U.S JJ., had a fine opportunity of observing this mountain, when travelling
overland in 1841. " It presented a magnificent sight, rising as it does to a lofty height,
its steep sides emerging from the mists which envelope its base, and seem to throw at off
to an immense distance; its cleft summit gave proof of its former active state as a volcano.
The snow lies in patches on the sides and part of the peak of this mountain; 3>ut there is
a great difference in the position of its snow-line team that of mount Wood, or St. Helen's..
Its height is said to be 14,390 feet, but Lieut. Emmons, U.S.N., thinks it not so high/'I 111    ll„ t
Hi ' i ■:;!
186
PELICAN BAY AND ROGUES RIVER.
Pelican Bay.—From point St. George the coast runs straight for 12 nules
N. \ W.; thence W.N.W. for 9 miles, and forms a deep indentation, named
Pelican bay. For 8 nules from point St. George the shore is low for some
distance back, and fronted by a sand beach to the mouth of a smaU stream
caUed Smith's river. The entrance to this river was looked for in vain by the
surveyors from the deck of the steamer, although scarcely 2 miles off shore,'
but tbey were able to form a good estimate as to where-it should open by the
pecuiariti.es of the northern bank, which was a low perpendicular bluff. Its
approximate geographical position is lat. 41° 54', long. 124° 11'.*
Chet-ko river.—At 5 miles from the deepest part of PeUcan bay, and in lat.
42° 1', long. 124° 15', (both approximate), empties the Chet-ko river, a stream
which is from 50 to 60 yards wide at its mouth, with banks about 100 feet
high, and bounded half a mile in shore by very high hills. It appears deep
and sluggish, and in August 1853, was completely closed at the mouth by a
gravel beach. The anchorage off it is open and exposed from West to
South, with several reefs in and around it. A survey has not yet been made
of it.
On the Coast Survey charts of 1853 this stream was marked Dlinois river,
that being tbe name appUed to it by the miners prospecting from Crescent
city, whereas the IUinois is the south branch of Rogues river. Some give
the Indian name of this stream Chit-ko.
From point St. George to an arched rock about 40 feet high, in latitude
42° 11', the course and distance are N.W. by N. 27 nules. The coast between
the Chit-ko and the point within a mUe of tie arch is high, bold, compact, and
bordered by vast numbers of rocks, with very deep water close in shore.
From this the shore runs nearly N.W. by N. £ N. for 40 nules to cape Orford,
making a long gentle curve of 4 nules to tbe eastward, and being in general
high, abrupt, and rocky.
Rogues River.—Within the long stretch just referred to is found the
entrance of Rogues river, in lat. 42° 25', long. 124° 22', (both approximate),
having a long, low, sandy point on the south side, and a high, steep hiU, with
two large rocks off its base at the north side. It comes from tie interior
between high mountains, and it is next to impossible to travel along its course.
The stream is very rapid, and, at a short distance within the bar, is reported to
have a depth of 4 or 5 fathoms. Just within the entrance and on the north side
were large Indian viUages in 1853. When passing it in moderate north-west
weather tie sea was observed to be breaking heavily across the bar, and this
is reported to be generaUy tie case. It has not been examined nor surveyed,
and the depth of water on the bar is variously reported to be from 10 to 18
* The " Smith river " of recent maps and descriptions is a myth. Half way between
Crescent City and the mouth of Smith river there is a small sheet of water called lake
Talawa. North of this small stream the coast acquires an elevation of about 100 or 300
feet for a short distance inland, and is bounded by high mountains.
About 8 miles by the shore northward from the deepest part of Pelican bay, the boundary
line of California and Oregon, of 42° latitude, strikes the coast near a remarkable high
pyramidal mound, rising abruptly from the plateau, whioh is destitute of timber.
From point St. George, the coast northward is composed of high steep precipices and
deep chasms, falling abruptly into the sea. The inland mountains are very lofty, and
appear to be tolerably well covered with trees, apparently pines, although there are some
spreading trees of considerable magnitude. Some of the mountains are barren. Along
the coast are a number of rocky islets.PORT ORFORD.
187
feet; the former is, doubtless, nearer tbe truth. Lieutenant McArthur, of
the U.S. Coast Survey reports 10 feet on the bar, and that tbe channel is too
narrow for sailing vessels to turn in. In the spring of 1850 the New York
pUot-boat W. G. Has/staff entered the river, and we beUeve was attacked by
the Indians, deserted, plundered, and burnt. The next vessel that entered
was the schooner Sam Roberts, in July of the same year, which got out safely.
We know of no other vessels ever having made the attempt.
Near the entrance to Rogues river commences the detached deposits of
auriferous sand and gravel, which are found northward along the coast to tie
Coquille river.*
Rogues River Reef.—At a short distance northward from Rogues river,
is tie Rogues river reef, the rocky islets composing which are not so large as
tie Dragon rocks, and run more nearly parallel with the coast line. The
southern group of rocks bes W. i N., about 4 miles from the north head of
the entrance to Rogues river, and stretches northward 3 miles, where a gap
occurs between them and another cluster lying 1^ miles from the shore. Off
this inner group Ue several dangerous sunken rocks, which must be sharply
watched from aloft when the sea is not heavy enough to break upon them.
As seen from southward, the inside rock of the outer group shows a perpendicular face eastward, and sloping back to tbe west. The channel through this
reef is perhaps a nine wide, but more dangerous than any other on the coast.
No hydrographic survey has been made of it, and it is never used by the
coasting steamers.    In 1853 the Coast Surveying steamer passed through it.
Abreast of the northern part of this reef is a 5 mUe stretch of low sand
beach, backed by high, rugged, wooded hills, when the shore changes to an
abrupt and precipitous face to port Orford. Many rocks closely border the
shore, and 5 nules south of port Orford a high rocky islet lies nearly a mile
off the base of the bill, about 1000 feet high.
PORT ORFORD.—This is by far the best summer roadstead on the coast
between point Reyes and the strait of Juan de Fuca. From the extremity of tbe
S.W. point eastward to the main shore the distance is 2 miles, and from this
line the bend of the shore northward has a depth of 1 nule, forming port
Orford. The soundings within this space range from 16 fathoms close to
Tichenor rock, forming the S.W. point of the bay, to 3 fathoms within a J of
a nule of the beach on the north-east side; with 5 fathoms at the base of
tie rocky points on tie north-west side towards Tichenor rock. One nule
off the shores of the bay the average depth is about 14 fathoms, regularly
decreasing in-shore.
The point forming tie western part of the bay presents a very rugged,
precipitous outline, and attains an elevation of 350 feet. Its surface is covered
with exceUent soil and with a sparse growth of fir. From this point the shore
becomes depressed to about 60 feet at the northern or middle part of the shore
* The name of the river was suggested by the dishonest propensities of the natives in
its vicinity. On the maps it is named Toutounis, and the Too-too-tut-na or Klamet.
These names, we judge, have arisen from misapprehension, because the Indians hereabouts,
when asked a question which they did not understand, answered to6-ta, to6-ta; too-ta
signifying negation, and rendered more emphatic by repetition. Or the name may be
derived from what is called the Too-too-tan village, some distance up the river. That existing (1853) on the north head of the mouth of the river is Tar-shoots. Several campaigns
have been made aginst the Bogues river Indians, and they have been found a warlike and
troublesome race; but the manner in which they were treated by some of the early settlers
was well calcutated to rouse them to a war of retaliation.m
i isi1
ill!
jl
||
188
ELK RTVER.
of tie bay, where the town is located.    The hills behind are covered with a
thick growth of fir and cedar.
The anchorage is usually made with the eastern end bearing North, being
just open to the east of a high rock on the beach, in 6 fathoms water, hard
bottom, having a sharp, high point bearing N.W. by W. a $ of a nule distant,
the beach in front of the town distant a J of a mile, and three rocks just in the
8-fathom Une E. by N., distant £ a nule. Steamers anchor a little eastward
of this position, and closer to the town, in 4 fathoms. Coasters from the
south in summer beat up close in-shore, stretching inside of the outlying islets
to avoid the heavy sweU outside. Coming from northward they keep just outside of a high rock \ of a mile off tie western iead, and round Tioienor rock
within i a mile. In winter, anchor far enough out to be ready to put to sea
when a south-easter comes up. During a protracted gale in December 1851,
a terrible sea rolled in, that no vessel could have ridden out. The old steamer
Sea Gull was driven northward, and lost two weeks hi regaining her position,
and the mail steamer Columbia hardly held her own for many hours off tie
Orford reef.
Tie usual landing is norti of tie anciorage, between the rock named Battle
rock and the point of rock close on its west side. A road is cut from here up
to the town, which consists of but a few houses. Sometimes a landing is made
on the rocky beach a J of a mile westward of Battle rock, in the bight, where
a sloping grassy bluff comes to the water; but this landing is over a rocky
bottom. A road is cut up the slope to the site of the mibtary post of port
Orford, which is now abandoned.
From Battle rock the shore eastward is skirted by sand beach for If nules
to a rough, rocky point named Goal point. About iaaidway in this distance
empties a small creek, whose banks are composed of a deposit of auriferous
sand and gravel, the same as found in front of tile town abreast of Battle rock,
and which has yielded as high as $30 to §40 per diem to each miner.
Several attempts have been made to open a road from this place to the
mines, about 60 or 70 miles eastward, but hitherto without Buccess. Several
partieB iave gone through, but could find no direct available route for pack-
animals. Upon tie'" opening of such a road it would become a large depot of
supply for lie interior. In the neighbourhood of port Orford are found immense quantities of tie largest and finest white cedar on tie coast, and for
some years a saw-mill tas been in operation, affording a smaU supply for the
San Francisco market of this lumber, unapproachable in quabty by any on the
Atlantic coast.
The high mountain about 12 miles east of port Orford » called Pilot knob.
Observations made on the top of tie ridge just west of tie town, at a height
of 262 feet above tie sea, and within a few yards of tie western edge of the
bluff, determined its position to be lat. 42° 44' 22", long. 124° && 47". From
this station Tioienor rock bears S. by W., \ of a nule distant.
Tides.—The corrected estabbshment at tie port is lib. 26m.    The mean
rise and fall of tides is 6'1 feet; of spring tides, 6*8 feet; and of neap tides
S^feet.
Elk River.—From tie western extiemity of port Orford, cape Orford
bears N.W. £ N., distant 6 miles, tie shore Une between them curving eastward about a mile. This shore immediately north of port Orford is composed
of a very broad loose sand beach, backed by a long uniform sand ridge of 100
feet height, covered with grass, fern, saUal bushes, and a few firs; whileCAPE ORFORD.
189
behind this the ground falls and forms lagoons and marshes. This ridge extends nearly to the mouth of a stream named Elk river, 8£ miles from Tichenor
rock. It is a narrow stream, fordable at its mouth at low tides, which comes
for mUes through broad marshes covered with fir and white cedar, and an
almost imprenetrable undergrowth. The south side at tie mouth is low, sandy,
and flat; the north side, a slope rising from the marsh in-shore and terminating on tie beach in a perpendicular bluff, averaging 100 feet high, covered
with timber to its very edge for a couple of miles, when the timber retreats
some distance inland. The face of this bluff exhibits vast numbers of fossil
sheUs in the sandstone. At its base a sand beach exists which may be traversed
at low water.*
CAPE ORFORD.—When making this cape from northward or southward it presents a great shnilarity to point Concepcion, (in lat. 84° 27', long.
220° 20V), appearing first as an island, because the neck connecting it with
the main is comparatively low, flat, and destitute of trees, with which tie
cape is ieavily covered to the edge of the cliff. It is, perhaps, over 200 feet
high, but the trees upon it make it appear at least 100 feet more. The sides
are very steep, and worn away by the action of the sea, showing a dull whitish
appearance usuaUy, but bright when the sun is shining upon them. At the
base are many black rocks and ledges stretching out to form the inner part of
Orford reef. In the bend, south-east of the cape, rises a large, high, single
rock, about 100 yards from tie beach. The approximate geographical position
of the cape is lat. 42° 50', long. 124° 30'; it is consequently the most western part of the main land until we reach latitude 47° 50'.
From this headland cape Mendocino bears S. by E. § E., distant 145
mues; cape Hancock Ught, at the north side of the entrance to the Columbia,
N. by W. £ W., distant 207 miles ; and Tatoosh island light, off cape Classet
N.N.W., 882 miles. From the Une joining capes Orford and Hancock the
coast does not, in any place, leave it more than 12 miles,
Orford. Reef.—At about 4 miles from tie coast, between port and cape
Orford, Ues a group of rocky islets and sunken rocks, known as Orford reef.
There are seven large high rocks within an area of one square mile, with small
ones that are just awash, and others upon which the sea only breaks in very
heavy weather.
The south-eastern rock named Fin has a perpendicular face to the southwest, with a sloping surface to the north-east; near it are several low black
rocks. Fin rock Ues W. £ N., distant 4^ miles from tie western point
of port Orford, and the general direction of the six others is N.N.W. from this"
rock. West from port Orford, and distant 4£ miles, is a small black rock,
and near it a smaUar one, upon which the sea breaks only occasionally.
W. by N. i N., distant 4| miles from port Orford, lies the largest of the seven
islets, rising up with high and nearly perpendicular sides. On the same
course, and l£ nules further out, is a small rock, and half way between them
a rock awash.   This is tie northern limit of the group.
Stretching S.S.W. for l£ miles from cape Orford are numerous rocky islets
and sunken rocks, with large fields of kelp; but ceasing at that distance, a
* At the mouth of Elk river, a bottle nearly buried in the sand, was picked up on the
18th of May 1860, with a memorandum, stating that it had been thrown from the steamship Brother Jonathan in lat. 42° 0', long. 124° 50', on the 23rd of March 1860, the wind
at the time strong from the southward.   It had travelled nearly North about 50 miles.190
COQUILLE RIVER.
It III
passage is left l£ miles wide between them and the northern islets of the other
group. The course through the middle of the passage, clearing tie rock
called Klooqueh, off tbe western point of port Orford, is N.W. by W., with 10
fathoms rocky bottom on the shoalest part of that line. This passage is in
constant use by mail and coasting steamers, but the hydrography of the reef
has not yet been executed, and only a preliminary examination of the position
of the outer rocks. Although tbe general trend of the southern group is
N.N.W., it is very probable that they are a continuation of the reef making
out from the cape.
One mile north of cape Orford empties the Kowes, a smaU stream having a
great number of rocks off its mouth. In 1851 it was usually called Sikhs
river, the Chinook "jargon" name for friend. On some maps we find a stream
near this locality called Sequalchin river. The village upon tie Sikis is
named Te-cheh-quut.
Ten miles north of cape Orford La Perouse places a cape called Toledo, but
no headland exists between Orford and the south head of the Coquille, although
a small stream called Flora creek empties upon the coast about half way
between them.
General features.—From cape Mendocino the hills upon tbe seaboard range
from 2000 to 3000 feet high, running parallel with the coast at a distance of
from 3 to 5 miles, receding somewhat at the Eel river valley and point St.
George, and at other points coming abruptly to the ocean. The whole face
of the country is covered with dense forests, and offers almost insurmountable
obstacles to the opening of roads intended to strike the trail leading along tie
valleys of the Sacramento and Wallamut.
Northward of cape Orford the appearance and nature of the coast assumes
a marked change. Long reaches of low white sand beach occur, with sand
dunes, broken by bold rocky headlands, and backed by high irregular ridges
of mountains. On the sea-face and southern sides of many of these prominent
points no timber grows, and they present a bright, lively green of fern, grass,
and bushes. The general altitude of the mountains appears the same as to
the southward.
Coquille River.—From cape Orford to the mouth of the CoquUle, in
lat. 43° 7', the coast runs exactly North for 17 mUes, with a slight curve of
l£ miles eastward, and a short distance north of cape Orford consists of a low
sand beach, immediately behind which are long shallow lagoons receiving the
water from the mountains, but having no visible outlet to the sea. Along this
shore the soundings range from 7 to 15 fathoms at a distance of a mile.
The south point of the entrance to this river is a high bluff headland,
whilst the north point is a long, low, narrow spit of sand, overlapping, as it
were, the southern head, so that the channel runs parallel with and close
under it, (1851.) A short distance off it lie several rocks, but not of sufficient
size to lessen the western swell which breaks continually across the bar.
In the winter of 1851 the boats of the Sea Gull effected a landing near the
rocks, but it was attended with danger; subsequently boats were carried by
land from port Orford. The widest part of tie moutt is less than 200 yards,
after which the river spreads out into a large sheet of shaUow water, about
2 miles long by \ of a nule broad, and bounded by low ground. Into the
north-east part of this lagoon enters the river, which has been followed a
distance of about 30 miles in a north-easterly direction, and having a depth
throughout of not less than 15 feet, and an average width of 40 yards.    It
hjiljjiCAPE  ARAGO.
191
drains a very fertile region, densely covered with many varieties of wood.
Numerous Indian encampments were found along its banks from the mouth,
and quite extensive fish weirs were discovered and destroyed. About 15 miles
from its mouth there is a portage of l£ miles to Koos river.
The hydrographic reconnaissance of this river in 1859 by the Coast Survey
shows only 3 feet of water on the bar, and it is reported, inaccessible for
vessels of ordinary draught. The north point is a long stretch of dreary sand
dunes, and has a single bold rock at its southern extremity. The channel
makes out straight from the southern head, and north of the rocks (1859.)
The approximate geographical position of its entrance is lat. 43° 7', long.
124° 24'.
Tides.—The (approximate) corrected estabbshment is llh. 30m., and the
mean rise and fall of tides 5 feet.*
CAPE ARAGO.-^Between the Coquille river and this headland a low
sand beach continues for 10 mUes to the southern part of cape Arago, which
rises up very precipitously; the hill (attaining perhaps 2000 feet elevation
2 miles back) runs in a straight Une northward for 3 or 4 miles, and bounded
by many rocks, slopes northward to a sharp perpendicular point, about 60 feet
high, and peculiarly cut and worn by the action of the sea; thence it takes
a sharp turn to the E.N.E. for 2 miles, to the entrance to Koos bay. The
cape, as seen from southward, shows a couple of rocks a short distance from
its western point. Along the low shore soundings in 10 fathoms are found at a
mile off. It has been asserted that vessels anchoring close under the north
face of the cape may ride out heavy south-east gales. If so, it is very important, no other place between Drake and Nee-ah bays, except, perhaps,
under Destruction island, affording that protection. If a south-easter should
haul to the S.W, and then N.W. as they usually do, the chances of getting
out would be bad.
Upon a small island at the western extremity of cape Arago is a Ughthouse,
which shows a fixed Ught varied every 2 minutes by a flash, at 75 feet above
the sea, visible 15 miles.. The duration of flash is 3 seconds, and that of eclipse
also 3 seconds. The approximate geographical position of the lighthouse is
lat. 43° 20' 38", long. 124° 22' 20".    "
Cape Arago was seen by Captain Cook, and described by him as follows—
" This point is rendered remarkable by the land of it rising immediately from
the sea to a tolerable height, and that on each side of it is very low."
Vancouver says—" This cape, though not so projecting a point as cape
Orford, is nevertheless very conspicuous, especially when viewed from
northward, being formed by a round hill on high perpendicular cliffs some of
which are white a considerable height from the level of the sea; above these
cliffs it is pretty well wooded, and is connected to the mainland by land
considerably lower. About a league northward of the pitch of the cape, the
rocky cbffs composing it terminate, and a compact white sandy beach commences, which extends along the coast 8 leagues, without forming any visible
projecting point or headland.    Our observations placed it in lat. 53° 23'.
I
■1
* Mr. Davidson U.S. Coast Survey, observes "When off the entrance to the Coquille
river in 1854 we saw about a dozen houses which had been built by the miners engaged in
washing the auriferous sand and gravel at the back of the beach. In approaching this
coast we encountered a very heavy swell, with the water changing to a dark brown colour
and after passing through-it tacked off shore, hove to, and sounded near its outer limit
but found no bottom with 84 fathoms of line."192
KOOS  BAY.
Ill
Koos Bay.—At nearly 2 nules E.N.E. from the northern extremity of
cape Arago is the wide and well-marked entrance to Koos bay. The south
point, named Koos head, is high and bold, being tho base of the hiUs forming
the cape; it consists of a precipitous rocky bluff, extending from tho inside of
the entrance as far as cape Arago,—this, of course, does not change, but
the beaches around it alter considerably,—places in which the bed rock is at
times bare, wiU, at others, be covered by several feet of sand, always, however,
presenting bold sides to the channel inside of the rock which Ues at tie south
side, and which has been known to be on low water mark. The north point
of tie bay is low and sandy, with shifting sand dunes that reach 100 feet in
height. In 1861 a narrow channel across this point, formed a tolerably large
island, which was washed away before the close of the season. Such changes
are constantly taking place, and involve changes in the bar and channel. The
points be nearly north and south of each other, and about $■ of a mile apart.
The bar (1861) Ues N. 62° W., 1 mile from Koos head; N. 86°B., lj
nules from cape Arago, and its width between the 12-feet lines on the nortb
and south sides is only 150 yards, with a maximum depth of 13 feet;—
thence tie ciannel, increasing in width, runs straight to the north tangent
of tie head, with 10 fathoms of water at that point. In 1853 and 1854 a
depth of only 9 to 9.J feet could be found on tie bar. During the working
season of 1861 tie bar moved northward, thus indicating great changes in
this as in all other river bars on tie coast. Vessels enter and leave on the
flood tide because the bar is smoother; with tie ebb there is a heavy break,
unless the sea be remarkably smooth. The currents run very strong, as
might be supposed, from tie extent of the bay and tie size of the channel.
The sea has been observed to break completely across the entrance in
moderate north-west weather, and the mail steamer has tried to enter, but
upon seeing the danger would not take the risk. In 1861 the party examining
it could get but one day's work on the bar during several months. In
October, 1862, the surveying brig Fauntleroy could not enter.
Traffic is drawn hither by tie mining of Ugnite, wiici is carried to tbe
San Francisco market. It has been found unfit for steamship consumption,
but it is used for smaU stationary engines and domestic purposes. A tugboat is employed at the entrance for the towing of vessels over the bar.
Tides.—The corrected establishment at the port is lib. 26m. The mean
rise and fall of tides is 6*1 feet, of spring tides 68 feet, and of neap
tide 8*7 feet.
The approximate geographical position of Koos head is lat. 43° 21' 4",
long. 124° 18'.
The bay is very irregular in outline, and its general shape is somewhat like
the letter U, with, the convexity to the north. One smaU branch stretches
southward behind Koos head; it is called the south slough, and has but 2 or
8 feet of water in it. North of the entrance the bay proper begins, and has a
good depth of water. Abreast of the north point tie width is 600 yards, and
the depth from 8 to 7 fathoms; thence northward it increases in width to
nearly a nule, and runs very straight on a N. by E. J- E. course. The channel
runs on the eastern side of this part, the western half being filled with sand
flats and shallows. A sunken rock, caUed " Fearless", is on the eastern side
of the channel, abreast of the upper part of the rocky shore. The whole
length of the bay is believed to be about 25 nules, the head of it being a Uttlo
further south than the entrance.    Koos river empties into the bond of theUMPQUAH RIVER.
198
beyond tbe great
bay, and wUl give passage to boats for 20 miles from its mouth, where a
smaU slough that empties into the CoquiUe river is so near as to leave a portage of only l£ miles between the two waters, and about 15 miles from the
mouth of the CoquiUe.
Excepting the peninsula, which forms the western shore of the bay north of
the entrance, tie entire country is an immense forest of various kinds of pine.
No land for cultivation is found without clearing, and even on Koos river the
bottom lands, which afford excellent soU, have to be cleared of the thick
growth of laurel, maple, and myrtle. The coal mines are
bend, near the head of the bay, and on the western side.
UMPQUAH RIVER.—North of Koos bay to the Umpquai river is
another straigit, low sand beach, with sand dunes, backed by a high ridge of
. hiUs densely timbered. The shore runs nearly North, presenting a very white
appearance when the sun shines upon it, and having from 10 to 15 fathoms
of water 1 nule off the beach. The southern point of the entrance to the
river is a marked spur of the mountains from the south-east, and is bordered
by sand dunes. The north side of the entrance is a long range of white
shifting sand hiUs, running with the coast for 2 miles, and suddenly changing
to high, rocky hiUs covered with wood. The river is the largest stream
entering the Pacific between the Sacramento and Columbia rivers. It is
51 miles N. £ W. from cape Orford, and 21 miles north of cape Arago.
The lower reach of the river is long and narrow, running nearly North for
6 miles; bordered on the south side by a rocky, wooded shore ; on tie norti,
for 2 mUes, by loose sand hills, changing after the first mUe to sand sparsely
covered with coarse grass, bushes, and fir, and in 4 miles to steep, high,
rocky banks covered with large trees. An immense flat, mostly bare at low
water, stretches southward from tbe north point to within 300 yards of the
south side of the entrance, through which narrow space runs the channel,
having (1858) a bar with only 18 feet upon it, and less than 100 yards wide.
From tie bar the point of bluff, just inside the entrance, bears N.E. by E.,
and is distant l£ miles. During the year 1851 or 1852 two range marks
were placed on the south shore for running in by, and they are frequently
referred to as data by which to trace the changes of the bar • but the captain
who erected them bas asserted that the bar was not on their range, but to
the southward of it.
In January, 1858, it was announced that tie bar had been marked by
buoys. Two third class nun-buoys, painted white, with white and black
perpendicular stripes, are placed in Une with the Ughthouse, which bears
from them E. by N. J N. The inner buoy is just within the bar, and in
8£ fathoms at mean low water, and can be passed on either hand, but only
* In the United States Coast Survey Beport for 1861 is the following—" The channel
in Koos bay presents a good depth of water. It passes along the western shore, and
vessels should be careful to avoid being set near the eastern shore, as several reefs make
off from the rocky bluff which forms that side, opposite-to and a mile above the entrance.
The peninsula which separates the bay from the ocean is composed entirely of sand,
some of the hills on it attaining an elevation of 100 feet. The sand shifts so much, with
strong winds, that in one case the part of a hill on which a signal had been set gained 15
feet in height in the course of a few weeks.
The trade of Koos bay consists of lumber and coal. Of the former, the laurel, myrtle,
&c, are extensively used on the Western Coast in the manufacture of furniture. There
are at present two saw-mills in operation, capable of turning out about 15,000 feet
per day."
om
Hi
194
UMPQUAH RIVER.
close to it. The outer buoy is just outside the bar, in 10 fathoms at the
same stage of the tide, and can also be passed on either hand. Keeping the
two buoys in range with tie bghthouse, 14 feet may be carried over the bar
at mean low water.*
These directions show that tie bar of the river has moved about
400 yards to the northward of its position, as determined by tie iydrographic
survey of 1858, and has, moreover, deepened. In Ught weather it can be
readUy determined by tie breakers on each side, but with a heavy swell tie
sea is terrific. In October, 1852, the Coast Surveying steamer Active lay off
tie bar two days trying to get in, but found it impracticable. Several steamers
have thumped heavUy on tie bar, one nearly carrying away her stern-post,
and in 1858 the maU steamship Columbia in coming out had her decks swept
fore and aft by tie tuge combers rolling in like high walls. In January,
1861, when going in, this same steamer suffered stiU more terribly. Several
vessels have been lost at its entrance, and within a very recent period no
pilots belonged to the river, because the trade was too small to pay.
During the early part of November, 1858, the bar at tie entrance to the
Umpquah changed greatly, and the depth of water upon it was so much
decreased that the steamship Columbia, which thumped over it, could not
leave the river for several weeks. Upon sounding at tie entrance it was
found that tie channel across the bar had moved about i a mile northward
of its former position.
From the bar the Ught bears E. by N. £ N., distant about a mile (1858).
After crossing the bar the channel, when approaching the Ughthouse, runs
close to the south shore, and increases hi depth from 3 A- to 18 fathoms off the
point of bluff. Abreast of tie meeting of the sand beach and bluff on the
south side, Ues a rock, visible at extreme low tide, upon the 8-fathom Une.
It is not laid down on any chart, nor has its position been accurately
determined. It has deep water around it. From the point of bluff vessels
steer across the river to strike the east side of the north point about £ of a
mile from its extremity, then haul across E.N.E. to tie other shore, close
along which the channel runs. This course takes them clear of a flat and
rocks in mid-river, and bearing E.N.E. from the south end of tie north
point, and North ft of a mile from the point of bluff on tie south side. The
smaU indentation of the shore-line on the right, after making the first stretch
from the point of bluff, is caUed Winchester bay, having no water, and being
but an extensive mud flat. Three miles inside the Ughthouse tie river continues £ a mue wide, then expands to 1 nule, and is filled with numerous
extensive sand and mud fiats. Five miles from tie Ughthouse it bends sharply
to tie eastward.
This river is said to drain an extremely fertile region, abounding in prairie
land well adapted to agriculture and grazing. Ross Cox mentions a pine tree
discovered hi tie Umpquah vaUey measuring 216 feet to its lowest branches,
and being 57 feet hi circumference. The Indian name for the river below tho
rapids is Kah-la-wat-set, and to the upper part they apply the name Umpt'quah.
From the Umpquah the coast runs in a remarkably straight Une N. by
W. \ W., to the south point of the entrance to Columbia river, in no case
varying more than 8 miles eastward of the Une joining these two places.
* We are ignorant if this bar is still buoyed. It is subject to such great and frequent
changes that a stranger must not attempt to enter the river without having the assistance
of some one well acquainted with it. The light has been discontinued, bat the building
may possibly remain (1867).CAPE PERPETUA, &c.
195
Heceta Bank.—N.W. by N., distant 66 miles from cape Orford, is the
southern, end of a bank extending paraUel with the coast for 30 miles, and
about the same distance from it. The least depth yet discovered upon it is
48 fathoms, and the nature of the bottom is very variable, there being blue
mud, coarse blue sand, coral, pebbles, gravel, mud and sheUs. Coasting
vessels have often reported passing over locabties having a heavy swell upon
them, and one frequently so reported near the Umpquah led to the examination which discovered this bank.*
Cape Perpetua.—After leaving the Umpquah 2 or 3 miles, a bold rocky
coast, with high steep hiUs covered with timber, runs straight for about 8
miles, changing to low sandy beach with sand dunes, backed by a high ridge
of hiUs. This continues for 15 miles, when the hills stretch out to the shore
and crowd upon it for 13 miles, to end abruptly in steep bluffs forming cape
Perpetua. The face of the cape is nearly 5 miles long, with very sbght
projection from the straight trend of the shore; it is very high, and has a
regular although steep descent to the shore,' bringing the trees to its very edge.
The approximate geographical position of the cape is lat. 44° 19', long. 124° 6',
and from it the lighthouse at Umpquah river (the light discontinued) bears
S. by E. i E. distant 39 miles.
From the Umpquah river to cape Perpetua, at a distance of a mile from
the shore, are soundings of from 8 to 14 fathoms.
In recent maps a small stream called tho Sciisteum river is shown as opening
south of cape Perpetua. It was not seen by the surveyors in 1853 from the
distance of a mile, but they had reason to believe that there is a stream with
the name of Scius-clau, (pronounced Sai-yuse-claw), emptying about 25 miles
above the Umpquah.
Northward of cape Perpetua the coast range of hills is cut by numerous
vaUeys, through which flow many small streams to the ocean.
Yaquinnah river.—Nine miles north of cape Perpetua is the mouth of a stream
believed to be the Yaquinnah. It is said to expand into a bay, 3 mues long
by lit wide running nearly East, and very much contracted at the middle,
where a small islet exists. The south bead to tbe entrance is formed by a
spur of tie lulls from cape Perpetua. The north point has likewise a bold
head with a low sand spit stretching southward i a nule.' The entrance is in
latitude 44° 27', (approximate).
Recent maps place the Alciyco river in about this latitude. No name is given
in the last Coast Survey reconnaissance, and it was not seen at all by Lieut.
McArthur U.S. Navy, in 1850.
Tie names of the streams hence to the northward are very conflicting, and
wiU continue so until a land exploration is made along the seaboard for
determining their pecuUarities and the latitudes of their mouths.
Celetse river.—North of cape Perpetua the shore continues straight, high,
and bold for 5 nules, when a cluster of rocks occurs, and the bluff changes to
low sand beach, running nearly to the mouth of a. small stream about 5 mues
southward of cape Foulweather, caUed Alseya on the Coast Survey reconnaiss-
* "When Heceta was upon this coast, and in this vicinity, he said—" On Sunday I found
great differences of depth, at 7 leagues I got bottom at 80 fathoms ; and nearer the coast
I sometimes found no bottom." Should a thorough examination of bis discoveries here
satisfactorily show that he did'really cross this or any yet undiscovered adjacent bank, it
would be a tribute to his explorations on this coast to apply his name to it.
O 2if
19G
CAPES FOULWEATHER AND LOOKOUT.
ance of 1850, and Celetse on the original sheets of 1858; tbe latter name is
tie proper one. The north bead, which is bold, has a rock close under it.
Thence the shore is low and sandy to cape Foul weather. The country in the
interior is very broken and mountainous, and covered with wood.
Cape Potdweather.—From cape Perpetua, to this cape the soundings
at about a mile from the shore, range from 7 to 12 fathoms. The cape is in
lat. 44° 45', long. 124° 4', and consists of a high, bold headland, k a mile in
width, jutting out about £ a nule from the low beach, and backed by high
mountains. It is covered with wood, and has several small rocks on its southwest face, with one rocky islet a mile from it. Northward of the cape are
three rocky islets standing a short distance from the low beach, and readily
distinguished by being projected against it. In August 1858, the astronomical
party of the coast survey was very desirous of effecting a landing on or near
this cape, but the sea was rolling in too heavily to warrant the attempt. There
was no appearance of a landing being at all feasible, except in remarkably
quiet weather.
This cape was named" by Cook on the day he made the coast, March 6th,
1778, but tie point of the headland, so called on the Coast Survey reconnaissance of 1858, is not that referred to by him. At noon he was in lat. 44° 83',
and the land extended from N.E. A N. to S.E. by S., about 8 leagues distant.
In this situation he had 73 fathoms over a muddy bottom, and 90 fathoms a
league further off shore. He describes the land of moderate height, diversified
by hiUs and vaUeys, and principally covered with wood. No striking object
presented itself, except a high hiU with a flat summit, which bore East from
him at noon. This may have been what he subsequently called cape Perpetua.
At tbe northern extreme the land formed a point, which he named cape Fonl-
weatier, from the exceeding bad weather he met with soon after. The
expression " northern extreme" has led some geographers to place the cape as
high as lat. 45£°, but he judged the Foulweather he named to be in 44° 55'.
Being here driven off the coast by continued bad weather, he had no opportunity
to verify his position, and did not sight tie land again until in hit. 47° 5',
thus passing by tie entrance to Columbia river. Vancouver places it in latitude
44° 49'. Both of these determinations evidently refer to the northern part of
the high land.
Nekas river.—Soon after passing cape Foulweather tho shore becomes
abrupt and moderately high, with an increased depth of water immediately off
it. Four miles south of the Nekas, which is in lat. 44° 56', it changes to low
sand dunes stretching into a narrow point, forming the south point of the
stream, whfle the north point is a low bluff. The entrance is very narrow
and shoal, and inside the river is reported to spread out into a bay of about a
mile in extent, and to receive the waters of a stream draining a valley coming
from the eastward.
From the Nekas river to cape Lookout the distance is 24 miles, and course
N. by W. i W., with a shore-line broken by several small streams, amongst
which are the Nechesne in lat. 45° 2', with rocks in the entrance; the Nes-
tuggah in lat. 45° 6', having a large rock off its mouth; and the Nawuggah in
lat. 45° 14', having on tie south side of its entrance a single rooky islet,
hereafter referred to.
Cape Lookout.—The soundings from cape Foulweather to this cape show
from 18 to 81 fathoms of water at the distance of a nule from the shore, increasing from 18 fathoms north of lat. 45°.TILLAMOOK BAY.
197
This cape is situated in lat. 45° 20', long. 124° 0'. It projects somewhat
sharply into the sea for £ a nule, and as seen from the south the top is tolerably
flat and regular; its highest part is considered to attain an elevation of 3000
feet. The face directly toward the ocean is perpendicular, high, andjtoward
the south destitute of trees. About 8 miles southward of it is a large single
rock off the Nawuggah, estimated to be 250 feet high, and standing weU out
from the low sand beach behind it. No rocks lie off this cape, but one appears
very close inshore, about a nule northward of it.
Cape Meares.—At 2 or 3 nules after leaving cape Lookout the land falls to
a low sand beach, behind which is a long lagoon, caUed the Nat-a-hats, stretching northward, and having an opening under the south head of the well marked
point to tie northward, which is the termination of a spur or ridge running
from tie souti-eastward, presenting an abrupt front to the ocean for about 2
nules, and being part of the western boundary of TiUamook bay. Mr. Davidson,
U.S. Coast Survey says " When coming down this coast in the fall of 1857,
we made a few notes upon some objects, and find the following memorandum
made whilst near this point: ' Three high rocks (one arch) off point south of
False TUlamook; one more on the north side.' Not being then aware of any
doubt as to the name of the cape, no other particulars were noted. Four rocks
are laid down off the south-west face on the Coast Survey reconnaissance of
1850, and one on the north. Three large rocks and one small one are laid
down off the south-west face in the original sheets of the reconnaissance of
1853, the most distant being 1 mile from shore, with several smaU ones
between them and the shore, and two or three others off the north-west face.
In 1775 Heceta placed La Mesa (the Table) in latitude 45° 28'—a flat-topped mountain, seen at a great distance.
In July 1788, Meares, in tie Felice, after passing False Tillamook, says—
' The distant southerly headland we called cape Lookout. This cape is very
high and bluff, and terminates abruptly in the sea. At about the distance of
2 nules from it there rose three large rocks, which are very remarkable for the
great resemblance they bear each other. The middle one has an archway,
perforated, as it were, in its centre, through which we plainly discovered the
distant sea. They more particularly -attracted our notice as we had not observed between King George sound and this place any rocks so conspicuously
situated near the land; their distance from each other might be a J of a mile,
and we gave them the name of the Three Brothers. By 8h. p.m. we were
within 3 or 4 leagues of cape Lookout, which we judged to be in lat.
45° 80' N., long. 235° 50' E. (124° 10' W.)
In 1792 Vancouver described it as a small projecting point, yet remarkable
for the four rocks which be off it, one of which is perforated as described by
Meares.    He places it in lat. 45° 32'.
In the Coast Survey reconnaissance of 1853 the northern part of this
cape is placed in lat. 45° 30', long. 123° 58' and sketching southward 2 miles
to the cluster of rocks above described. We appbed the name to this cape
in 1857."
Tillamook Bay.—On the Coast Survey reconnaissance of 1853 the
entrance to this bay is placed in lat. 45° 34',—4 nules north of cape Meares.
The southern point is low, and the termination of a spur from the crest of the
cape, whilst the north head is high and bluff. The entrance is very narrow,
and reported to have very bttle water upon tie bar; inside it expands into a
long wide bay, stretching to the S.S.E. behind cape Meares.    No survey has198
CAPE FALCON AND TILLAMOOK HEAD.
yet been made of it, and some doubts are expressed about tie enlarging of the
river to form a bay. Two nules northward of tie nortiern head are a couple
of large rocks; thence the coast runs nearly straight to cape Falcon, receiving
a considerable stream, called tie Nehalem, in lat. 45° 41'. Clarke, when
about 5 miles south of Tillamook head, says that "th(j principal town of the
KiUamucks is situated 20 miles lower (south) at tie entrance to a creek called
Nielee, expanding into a bay, which he named KiUamucks bay. Upon this
bay were several KiUamuck towns. KUlamuck river is at the head of tie bay,
100 yards wide, and very rapid; but having no perpendicular faU, is a great
avenue for trade. There are two small viUages of KiUamucks settled above
its mouth, and tie whole trading portion of tie tribe ascend it tiU by a short
portage tiey carry their canoes to tie Columbia valley, and descend the
Multnomah to Wappatoo island." This information he obtained from Indians
and traders. On this stort expedition ie made all iis distances from cape
Hancock and point Adams too great, and reducing tie forementioned 20 nules
by the proper proportion, it would give us 18 miles as about the position of
the Nehalem. His name seems to agree with this, but the description appbes
to what is generaUy known as TiUamook bay.
The shore about the Nehalem is low and sandy, with sand dunes backed by
high wooded hiUs, and cut up by many valleys. It was here that Meares
stood in for an anchorage, (July 1788,) until he found bottom in 10 fathoms,
but hauled out again and named the place Quicksand bay, and tie adjoining
ieadland north, cape GrenviUe.
Cape Falcon.—The northern part of this headland Ues in lat. 45° 47',
long. 127° 58'. When passing it close in 1857, the surveyors considered
it to be not less than 3000 feet high;—its sea-face faUs precipitously to the
ocean, and off it are two prominent rocky islets. Seen from southward the
top appears irregular and the hiUs inshore fall away. Like some other headlands in this district, the southern face of the cape is destitute of trees, but
covered with a thick growth of grass, bushes, and fern. Two nules south of
it is a stretch of sand beach and sand dunes.
From cape Lookout to this headland a depth of 20 fathoms may generaUy
be found at a nule from shore; but, as upon the whole coast, a heavy regular
sweU always roUs in from the the west. The Indian name of the head is
Ne-a-kah-nie.
Tillamook Head.—This prominent cape, in lat. 45° 58', is 12 nules
N.N.W. from cape Falcon, and 19 nules S.E. by S. -J- S. from cape Hancock.
The coast from cape Falcon curves 2 nules eastward; it is bold and rugged,
guarded by many high rocky islets and reefs, and in Beveral places bordered
by a low sand beach at tie base of the cliffs. Two miles south of tie iead,
is said to be a creek 80 yards wide at its mouth, named Ecola. From tie
south bar of Columbia river the summit of Tillamook head appears flat
for some distance back ; it has an estimated height of 2500 feet. Off tie
face of the cape, which is very steep, be several rocky islets; one of them is
high and rugged, and stands out about a mile from the south-west face.
Around it the water is bebeved to be deep, a steamer having been seen to
approach almost upon it in a thick fog; but inside of it be several high rocks.
From the bar of Columbia river, two rocks can be distinctly seen, the
inner being the larger, and its apparent distance from the head about half the
apparent height of tie cape.    Whether the smaller is the one off cape Falcon,COLUMBIA RIVER.
199
has not been determined. As seen from southward the large rock has a
perpendicular face to the westward, and slopes to the east; it is the resort of
thousands of seals.
This cape is a good landmark for making the mouth of Columbia river,
no such high headland occurring on the coast northward of it for over 70 nules,
and before being up with it tie moderately high land of cape Hancock is seen
and made as two islands. The face of the cape is much broken, and formed
principally of yellow clay, presenting a bright appearance in the sunlight. It
has been said that at 1200 feet above the ocean occurs a stratum of white
earth, used by the Indians as paint; and that the hill-sides sUp away in
masses of 50 to 100 acres at a time.
Upon tie top of the cape, Clarke says (1805—6) he found good, sound,
solid trees growing to a height of 210 feet, and acquiring a diameter of from
8 to 12 feet. From Tillamook head southward many mUes was the country
of the KiUamuck Indians, then estimated to number 1000 people, and having
50 houses.
The coast from point Orford to TiUamook head is weU diversified by high
hills and vaUeys, presenting a country weU watered by numerous smaU streams
emptying into the ocean. It is densely covered with various woods, and for
a few nules inland looks favourable from tie deck of a vessel. At some
distance in the interior are ranges of mountains, the general direction of which
appears to be paraUel witi tie coast-line, wiici attains its greatest elevation
and compactness between cape Falcon and Tillamook head, after which a
sudden and marked change takes place, and a stretch of low sandy coast commences and runs for nearly 100 miles northward, only broken by cape
Hancock, the north point of Columbia river.
COLUMBIA RIVER.—The great valley of Columbia river" is by far
the most important and interesting part of Oregon, not only on account of the
variety of soU, productions, and climate, but also from its being the great and
only line of communication between the sea coast and the interior. The river
is estimated to be 750 miles long, and is navigable from its entrance, a distance of about 100 nules, as far as the Cascades, by vessels drawing over
12 feet of water. Altiougt it possesses at aU times a good depti of water,
it is so difficult and dangerous to enter, tiat it can be said to possess but few
advantages as a port; it therefore is not of such value to the district as the
length of its course and the magnitude of its waters would lead us to expect.
It also has the disadvantage of a shifting bar, so that it is impassible for large
vessels to enter without a pilot.
The coast at 2 miles northward of TiUamook head is followed by and consists of a peculiar Une of low sandy ridges, running parallel to the beach
towards point Adams, (the south point of entrance to Columbia river), and
appearing like huge sand waves covered with grass and fern. Between some
of them run small creeks, whilst the country behind is low, swampy, and
covered with wood and an almost impenetrable undergrowth. About 3 nules
north of the head Clarke says a beautiful stream empties witi a strong rapid
current.    It is 85 yards wide, and has 3 feet at its shallowest crossing.
Point Adams is low and sandy, covered with bushes and trees to the
line of sand beach and low dunes; and although it is reported to have washed
away over £ a nule since 1841, the surveyors were able to detect only comparatively smaU changes since the  survey of Brougiton in 1792.     The200
COLUMBIA BJVEB.
geographical position of the point (at £ a mile inside it) is, lat. 46° 12' 80'',
long. 123° 56' 56".*
Cape Hancock.—This cape is tie only headland from TiUamook head
to lat. 47° 20' that breaks tie low line of shore. It presents a geological
formation not before met witi on the seaboard, being composed of horizontal
columnar basalt, rising to an elevation of 287 feet, disposed in a succession
of huge round hiUs, broken on tie sea front by short strips of sand beach, and
covering an irregular area of about 8 nules by 1 nule. The sea-faces of all
tie hills and irregularly projecting knobs rise perpendicularly for many feet,
then slope sightly inshore to narrow ridges; are destitute of trees, but covered
with grass, fern, and bushes, and have an excellent though thin soil. Inland
of their erests the trees commence, and their tops reaching above the summits
of tie bills increase their apparent height. The inshore slope of the hills is
more gentle, so that paths can be easUy carried to their tops; in 1851 an ox-
team road was constructed to the summit of the cape. When the evening
fogs from the northern bays do not cover the cape, a dense fog has occasionally
been observed rolling down the river about sunrise, enveloping everything
below tbe top of the cape which consequently looked bke an island of less
than 100 yards in extent, and surrounded by tie river fog. The evening fogs
are so regular that tie surveyors state they were 85 days on the cape before
obtaining a single night's observations.
As seen from southward, when off TiUamook head, cape Hancock is made
as two round-topped islands; approached from north-westward it rises in a
similar manner ; from tie westward and south-westward it appears projected
upon the mountains inland, but the slightest haziness in tie atmosphere
brings it out in sharp rebef. This cape being basaltic, and showing an almost
iron front- to the river and sea, it is impossible that, as asserted by some, it
can have been worn away some hundred feet by the sea and strong currents
that run by it.    The Indian name for cape Hancock is Kah-eesef
* At present (1867) point Adams has not a lighthouse upon it, bnt as the establishment
of one has been repeatedly urged upon the authorities by those engaged in tbe coasting
trade between San Francisco and Juan de Fuca Strait, there is a probability that when the
trade of Columbia river becomes more developed a light of some kind will be established
on the point. Daring the early part of the evening dense fogs, formed over the waters of
Gray and Shoalwater bays, are brought southward by the summer winds, and roll over
cape Hancock, which they completely shut in before reaching across the river, so that a
vessel might make a light on point Adams when the other oape was invisible; but by
seeing both lights (that on point Adams and that on cape Hancock) a vessel could hold
any required position at night off the entrance to the river, and run in and take a pilot
upon the first opportunity; for it would be assuming too great a risk to enter the river at
night, or without a pilot.   The Indian name of point Adams is Klaat-sop.
The beach around point Adams and southward of it some distance is usually called
Clatsop beach. Upon it, many years ago, before the whites occupied the country, a
Chinese or Japanese junk, with many hands and a cargo of beeswax, was cast ashore and
went to pieces; but the crew were saved. In support of this Indian tradition, there are
occasionally, after great storms, pieces of this wax thrown ashore, coated with sand and
bleached nearly white. Formerly a great deal was found, but now it is rarely met with.
Sir Edward Belcher, E.N., mentions having a specimen; and many people on the Columbia
possess pieces. In a late work (Perry's Japan) this wreck has been confounded with
another that took place near cape Classet (Flattery).
+ "On the first landing beach on the inside of the cape we found a deposit of auriferous
and ferruginous " black sand," the flakes of gold being very small and scarce. This
ferruginous deposit—the "black sand" of the California gold digger—caused a local disturbance in the magnetic variation, amounting to 36**2, being that quantity less than theCOLUMBIA RIVER.
201
A Ughthouse has been erected on the pitch of the cape, at a little to the
west of the south-east point, and about 95 feet below the highest part. The
tower is whitewashed, placed 192 feet above the level of the sea, and being
40 feet in height and projected against a dark green background, shows well
in daylight. The Ught is fixed, at 230 feet above the sea, and can be seen
from the distance of about 22 miles. Its geographical position is, lat.
46° 16' 33", long. 124° 2' 13".
Counting round seaward from southward, the bght commands the horizon
for about 135°; that is, from S.S.E. to W.N.W.; so that vessels coming from
northward cannot see it until nearly in the latitude of the river. Placed on
the top of the cape, it could have been easUy made to show over the northwest
part of it, and would also have commanded the entire river and Baker bay.
From cape Hancock point G-renville bears N.W. by N. \ N., distant
62 miles; Destruction island N.W. by N., 84 nules; and Flattery rocks
N.W. | N., 118 nules.
A fog-bell of 1600 lbs. placed on the bluff in advance of the Ught-tower,
is sounded during foggy and thick weather, night and day. The machinery
is on a level with the ground, in a frame bunding, whitewashed, and with the
front open to receive the beU.
The entrance to the Columbia, the great river of the Pacific coast, is 5 miles
wide between the nearest parts of cape Hancock and point Adams, bearing
S. 58£° E., and N. 58£° W. from each other; but the passage is obstructed
by shifting shoals that lie 2 or 3 miles outside of the Une joining the points.
The numerous surveys that have been made of tbe river prove so conclusively^
the great changes which the channels through the shoals undergo, that it is
useless to attempt to give any directions for it. The best advice we can offer
therefore is, when up with the bar, wait for a pilot. The maU and coasting
steamers enter tie souti ciannel, (October, 1857,) paraUel and close to the
beach souti of point Adams; but, with a heavy sweU from westward, they
roll very much after rounding the point. In heavy weather some of them
prefer entering the north channel, although it gives a detour of some miles,
but that bar has, and always has bad, more water upon it than that at the
souti ciannel, and does not so frequently ciange its position, from tie un-
wearing nature of tie cape. Sailing vessels cannot beat into the south
channel against the summer winds blowing from north-westward, but almost
invariably come out through it. The heavily laden vessels of the Hudson
Bay Company have always used the north channel.*
During heavy weather, and especially in winter, tbe sea breaks with terrific
fury from north-west of cape Hancock well to the southward of point Adams.f
declination found upon the summit of the cape. Here we also found the remains of the
ovens used by tbe shipwrecked crew of the United States sloop-of-war Peacock, lost on the
north shoals of the north channel in 1841."    U.S. Ooast Survey.
* The bar of the north channel has usually a depth of not less than 4 fathoms upon it,
and that of the south channel about a fathom less, but the latter channel changes so much,
in some seasons closing altogether, that no dependance should be placed upon the depths
as now stated.
+ " The mail steamer has been known to try for 60 hours to find the smallest show of
an opening to get in. Sailing vessels have laid off the entrance 6 weeks, waiting for a fair
opportunity to enter, and many lie inside for weeks trying to get out. The mail steamer,
meanwhile, exerting all her power, would drive through the combers, having her deck
swept fore and aft by every sea.   Few places present a scene of more wildness than this202
COLUMBIA RIVER.
ills
During tie season of freshets, about June, tie pUots say that the the river
brings down such a vast body of water that they can frequently take up for
use fresh water upon the bar.
When off the entrance in fine, clear weather, tie beautiful snow peak of
mount St. Helens shows over the lowest part of the land inside, and apparently
in tie middle of tie river vaUey. It is very regular in outline, and presents
a pyramidal appearance, iaving a base equal to either side. It is more than
75 nules eastward from tie entrance to tie river, and attains an estimated
elevation of 18,500 feet. It is volcanic, and occasionaUy disciarges volumes
of smoke. On the 28rd of November, 1842, during an eruption, tie asies
from it feU over tie DaUes of the Columbia like a Ught faU of snow. On the
18ti of November, 1848, mounts St. Helens and Rainier were both active.
The current.—In October, 1851, whilst lying at anchor in the souti ciannel
off Sandy island, the strength of tie ebb current was measured, and found to
be nearly 5£ nules per hour.
From the entrance to the mouth of the Cowbtz river the general course of
tie Columbia is E. by N., and the distance in a straight Une 46 nules from
tie bar, and by tie windings of the river about 52 nules. The Cowbtz runs
N.N.W. for 24 nules ; thence N.E. to its headwaters in tie Cascades; it is
navigated by canoes about 28 nules to tie Cowbtz landing. The stream is
very rapid, and boats have to be poled the greater part of the way; at high
stages of the water they are pulled up by hauling upon tie bushes growing
upon its banks. At the Cowbtz landing traveUers take mules or horses
through to Puget sound, a trip of 52 nules. On the west bank of tie
Cowbtz, 5 mUes above its mouth, are a few smaU houses, locaUy known as
the town of Monticello. On the souti bank of tie Columbia, opposite the
Cowbtz, is another small settlement, caUed Rainier.
From tie CowUtz the next course of tie Columbia is S. 82° E. for
29 mUes to tie mouti of the Willamette river. About 16 nules above
the CowUtz the Warrior branch or slough of the river makes in from the west
side and runs around Multnomah island, coming into the Willamette 2 nules
above its mouth. The Willamette continues tie same general course of the
Columbia for 16 mUes to tie falls, wiere is situated the town of " Oregon
City," destined to become a place of importance, on account of tie extensive
water-power; the river there falling perpendicularly 88 or 40 feet. Six nules
lower down on the WiUamette is tie rapidly improving town of Portland
bar during a south-east gale, contrasting strongly with many times during the summer,
when not a breaker is seen to mark the outline of the shoalest spot. From the summit of
cape Hancock we have often watched the bar in varied states of wind and weather,
and crossed it when calm and breaking. What is most needed here is a powerful propeller
tug, which the amount of trade would assuredly warrant, when we know that the much
smaller trade of Humboldt bay supports handsomely a tag for that bar. In bad weather
the pilot-boats cannot venture out, but a steamer might; and the mail steamers, to avoid
delay, now regularly carry a bar pilot with them."   Mr. Davidson, U.S. Coast Survey.
Commander Wilkes, U.S. Navy, says of the breakers on the bar—"Mere description
can give but little idea of the terrors of the bar of the Columbia; all who have seen it have
spoken of the wilderness of the ocean, and the incessant roar of the waters, representing
it as one of the most fearful sights that can possibly meet the eye of the sailor. The
difficulty of its channel, the distance of the leading sailing marks, their uncertainty to one
unacquainted ,with them, and want of knowledge of the strength and direction of the
currents, with the necessity of approaching close to unseen dangers, the transition from
clear to turbid waters, all cause doubt and mistrust."COLUMBIA RIVER.
203
situated at the head of ship navigation, with a population of nearly 5000.
The vaUey of tie Wulamette is well settled, contains several thriving towns,
and is remarkably productive.
The river takes its rise on the western slope of the Cascade range, about
lat. 48f °, between the snow peaks of mount Jefferson and mount Laughbn;
then runs westward to within 50 miles el the coast, and nearly in tie latitude
of cape Perpetua, turning siarply to tie northward, and very slowly leaving
the coast.
From the mouth of the WiUamette the general course of the Columbia to
fort WaUa-Walla is N.E. by E. i E., 170 miles.
Five miles above the Willamette, on the north side, is the mibtary post of
fort Vancouver, which, with tie town of Vancouver, covers part of tie grounds
formerly occupied by the Hudson Bay Gompany as a mercantile station, but
then designated as fort Vancouver. The Hudson Bay Company still have a
trading station here, but their farms and grazing lands have been occupied by
settlers. The site for a town is one of the most beautiful on the river, and
capitally located for increasing trade.
About 30 mues further up the river we reach the foot of the Cascades,
which are a series of rapids 4 miles long, where the river bursts through the
eastern part of the Cascade range of mountains," tie basaltic walls of which rise
precipitously over 3000 feet on either side, presenting a magnificent sight.
Below the rapids the current rushes by with great velocity and depth, but
smaU steamboats ply regularly from Portland and Vancouver to the foot of the
rapids ; thence passengers are carried by stages to the head, where one or two
fine steamboats convey them 50 miles to the DaUes. The Hudson Bay
Company carried their large trading boats up the rapids by a system caUed
cordeUing. Steamboats have gone up 1 or 2 miles, and, in one instance, a
brig, with every saU set and a moderate gale astern, was carried safely to the
foot of the railroad, which runs from the head to within 1\ miles of the lower
end.    At each extremity of the rapids are small miUtary posts.
The snow peaks of the volcanic mount St. Helens and mount Hood lie
exactly hi Une with the Cascades, the former N.W. | N., 85 miles distant;
the latter S.E. \ S., 28 miles distant.
Mount Hood is an extinct volcano covered with cellular lava, and, according to
Dana, is between 15,000 and 16,000 feet high. According to other authori:-
ties, it attains an elevation of 18,316 feet.
At tie Dalles the river is contracted between narrow perpendicular walls,
and during freshets rises 100 feet above its ordinary level.
East of the Cascades the forests cease, and above the Dalles stands the
only tree in a stretch of 60 miles beyond Walla-Walla, where the river makes
a great bend to tbe northward, in the direction of its source at the base of the
Ebcky mountains.
On the lower parts of the Columbia and Willamette many saw-mills have
been erected since tbe gold discovery in Cabfornia, and a large trade was
carried on in lumber. Between San Francisco and Portland a very large and
increasing general trade exists.
Commander Wilkes, U.S. Navy, makes the following general observations
on Columbia river—" The principal dangers in the entrance are the cross
tides, their velocity, and the influence of an under-current, together with tbe
heavy swell. These become greater from the distance of the leading marks
for the channel, and their indistinctness when the weather wUl permit entrance.ill w
ill
204
SHOALWATER BAY.
It is necessary to use them, in consequence of the compass bearings being of
Utile or no use.*
It is safest to enter the river on the ebb-tide, with the usual north-west
wind, which sets in about 10 or lib, a.m., during the summer months. The
entrance should never be attempted with a flood-tide and N.W. wind, unless
the Clatsop channel be foUowed, and the sea is smooth.
When passing cape Hancock, care must be taken not to be becalmed by it;
if this should happen, the only resource is to down anchor at once, and wait
a favourable tide. The current wiU be found very strong. It sometimes
runs from 5 to 6 knots an hour—a perfect miU-race—and no boat can make
way against it when at its strength.
When entering the river, tie foUowing precautions should be attended to:—;-
1. The entrance should never be attempted when the passage between the
north and souti spits is not weU defined by breakers; it is equally dangerous,
whetier it be concealed by tie sea's breaking all the way across, or so smooth
as not to show any break.
2. The wind generaUy fans, or falls Ught, in tie passage between the north
and south spits, if it blows but a moderate breeze; and leaves a vessel at tie
mercy of a strong tide and heavy sweU.
8. The best time to enter and depart, is after ebb, and before quarter flood ;
the tide then runs direct through the channels, and is confined to them.
With the prevailing westerly winds, for those intending to take the north
channel, tie best time to enter is after half-ebb, though the wind may be
scant; yet the ebb-tide, acting on the lee bow, wiU enable the vessel to keep
to windward, and avoid the spits on the middle sands."
Tides.—At Astoria the corrected eslabUshment is 12h. 42m. The mean
rise and fall of tides is 6*1 feet, of spring tides 7*4 feet, and of neap tides
4-6 feet.
The tide makes 40 minutes earlier at cape Hancock than at Astoria.
SHOALWATER BAY.—The bold cliffs of cape Hancockf, after
extending about 8 nules northward, change suddenly to a low, broad, sandy
beach, running N. by W. i W., 18 miles, in nearly a straight line to tie
soutiern point of tie entrance to Shoalwater bay. At lj nules behind this
beach Ues the southern arm of tie bay. Its waters reach within 1 or 2 nules
of the north side of the cape, and the portage from them to the Wappalooche,
emptying into Baker bay (Columbia river) is said to be about a nule long, and
* After alluding to the loss of his consort, the Peacock, on the bar, he says—" The
cross-tides change every half hour, and are at times so rapid, that it is impossible to steer
a ship by her compass, or maintain her position; and no sailing directions can possibly
embrace the various effects produced upon them by a vessel. A singular fact in illustration of this remark is, that the safest time to cross the bar is when both the tide and wind
are adverse; and this is the only port, within my knowledge, where this is the case.
During the summer, haze and fog occur almost every day, in the afternoon."
+ The coast from cape Hancock northward to Juan de Fuca strait is rocky, much
broken, and affords no harbours, except for very small vessels; it must, therefore, be considered as extremely dangerous, and particularly on account of its outlying rooks. The
soundings however, serve as a sure indication by which danger may be avoided, and safety
can always be insured by not approaching the land into less than 70 fathoms. The bottom
is believed to be regular, and to shelve almost gradually, until the depth of 90 fathoms
is reached; but a short distance beyond that depth, and at about 15 miles from the land,
the bank suddenly falls off, and no bottom is obtained with a line 200 or 250 fathoms long.SHOALWATER BAY.
205
is always used by the Indians and settlers. The peninsula thus formed is
covered witi trees and a dense undergrowth of bushes. Within k a nule of
its extremity it becomes very low and sandy, and has a covering of coarse
grass, but no trees. This point is known as Leadbetter point. The Indian
designation is Chik-lis-ilh. Its approximate geographical position, is bit.
46° 36' 45", long. 124° 0' 45".
From Leadbetter point to Toke point (tie north point of entrance to Shoal-
water bay) tie bearing and distance are N.W. by N. § N., 5 J nules. Half a
mile of this point is low, sandy, and destitute of trees, but some tolerably
high land covered with wood rises immediately behind it, being the only
elevated ground between cape Hancock and point GrenviUe that approaches
the shore-line. On account of this formation of tie point it has been said
ttat the entrance resembles that of Columbia river, but the surveyors assert
that they were unable to detect any resemblance after passing near it several
times. The isolated position of cape Hancock and the seaward face of its
bold cliffs without trees form a pecuUar feature. This, witi Scarborough
bin, partly bare, lying 8 or 6 mUes eastward of it, the high mountains inland,
and in clear weather tie beautiful snow-peak of mount St. Helens, have no
counterparts at Toke point, and should remove aU doubt in regard to general
resemblance.
The Indian name of Toke point is Quahpt-sum.
The Ughthouse upon Toke point is 4l£ feet high, and shows & fixed bght,
varied by flashes, at 85 feet above the sea, visible about 14 miles. Its
approximate geographical position, is lat. 46° 44' 11", long. 124° 2' 24''.
The navigation of Shoalwater bay is too intricate to be attempted by strangers
without a pilot, and there are reasons for beUeving that tie channels are subject to great and frequent changes. The bay is seldom entered even by
coasting vessels. Mr. Davidson, U.S. Coast Survey, has the foUowing remarks
upon it;—" There having been no survey of Shoalwater bay previous to the
preliminary one of the Coast survey in 1852, and tie completion of it in 1855,
it is impossible to state what changes have taken place. Judging by tie
cianges of the Humboldt, Umpquah, and Columbia bars, we should conclude
that similar effects take place here. In less heavy weather than would cause
the sea to break on tie Columbia river bars, it breaks here with fury quite
across tie entrance.    This description appUes to 1852.
Four nules off the entrance a depti of 10 fathoms is found, and wien well
off siore a nigh double peaked mountain shows to tie eastward, weU inland.
Meares noticed it, and placed it in latitude 46° 30', quite close to the coast,
designating it as Saddle mountain, a name it still retains, although one of the
same name is found S.E. of point Adams.
At the present time there are two channels, denominated from their position
the north and south channels, witi a large shoal called tie middle sands lying
between them, and partly outside of the Une joining the two points.
The bar at tie south channel has 4 fethoms of water upon it, is a nule wide,
and Ues 2 nules off the beach south of Leadbetter point, with tie northernmost trees bearing N.E. by E. Running in on this Une a vessel shoals her
water from 10 fathoms Smiles off shore, to 4 fethoms 2 mUes off; tien
graduaUy deepens it to 5 fetioms, when she should haul close up under the
point of breakers northward of her, and about i a nule distant; run along in
from 6 to 7 fetioms until abreast of tie low grassy point, wien tie course of
the channel wiU be N. by W. * W. for l£ miles, witi from 8 to 10 fetioms,206
SHOALWATER BAY.
hard bottom, its outline being weU marked by the breakers outside. From
thence a course N.E. by N. for 2 miles wiU lead to 18 fathoms, and over a
nule inside the Une joining Leadbetter point and Toke point, tie western
trees on Leadbetter point bearing S. £ E. 8$ miles distant. If tie tide is low,
sand bars and flats wiU show on both hands, one directly ahead; the broad
deep channel to the south-east distinctly marked by bare patches on either side,
and a narrow deep channel to the north-west running into tie north channel.
From the last position the western trees on Leadbetter point bear South,
distant 4 nules. The greater body of water passes through this channel, and
the current runs very strong. In summer, witi a north-wester blowing, it is
a dead beat after passing the bar, and in some places the channel is less than
£ a mile wide between tie 3-fethom lines. Coasters do not enter it except
with a southerly wind, and always pick" out tie channel from aloft. In summer they have a leading wind out, and start on tie first of the ebb.
The bar at tie north channel ias about 8J fethoms upon it, and bears
S.W. by S. i S., 3 mUes from tie southern extremity of Toke point. It is
about a nule in extent within the 3-fethom line. -
In making tie bay from southward in summer, work to the northward of
Toke point, then run in and foUow the shore outside of the breakers in
6 or 7 fetioms, graduaUy approaching them, and decreasing tie depth to 4i
and 4 fathoms, when the southern side of tie elevated ground of the point bears
N.E. by N. i N. Then head up as near that course as possible, crossing the
bar in 3J fethoms, and contunung in that depth for at least lj nules, taking
care not to decrease it on either hand. Keep under the breakers on the north
side hi from 5 to 7 fethoms, hard bottom, and increase tie depth to 12 well
inside the point, when its southern extremity should bear N.W. £ W., distant
11 nules. If it is low water, sand banks will show in different directions, and
the channels wiU be tolerably weU marked.
The present invariable practice of vessels entering is to seek out tie channel
from tie mast-iead. In calm weather the channels must be known, or a pilot
employed, if one is to be found.
The north bar bears N.W. by N. f N., distant 5 miles.
The middle sands be between the two channels. The southern tail is S.W.
If nules from Leadbetter point, runs N.W. by N. $ N. for 2£ miles, then
N.N.E. 2£ nules, and E.N.E. 1£ nules, with an average width of l£ miles.
One nule outside of it soundings are found in 7 fethoms.
This bay, as its name implies, is so full of shoals that at low tides about
one-half of its area is laid bare. Good but narrow channels are found throui-
out its extent, but no direction can be given for running them. Without a
knowledge of them, or without a pUot, foUow them only at low water. The
currents then run with great velocity, and it is very difficult and frequently
impossible to keep a course against them. The arm stretching southward
toward Baker bay is 15 nules long from Leadbetter point, with an average
width of not less than 3.1 nules, whilst the upper portion stretches to the N.E.
for 9 miles to the north of tie Wbil-a-pah river, reckoning from the middle of
the Une joining points Toke and Leadbetter.
The principal stream emptying into the bay is the Whil-a-pah, at its northeast part. At about 9 miles from Toke point it is less than a | of a
nule wide, with low swampy banks and steep bluffs on each side about 1 ^
miles apart.
The mouth of the Palox, or Copalux, Ues 5 nules N.E. i E. from Lead-SHOALWATER BAY.
207
better point.    It is £ a mile wide at its mouth, contracts very much in 2 miles,
and is bordered by marshes, with numerous sloughs running through them.
The Nasal enters about 11 miles south from the Palux, and abreast of the
middle of Long island.    It has over 20 feet water at its mouth, with bluff n
banks for some distance, until it begins to expand, when it is bordered by
flats.
Several streams open from the north side of tbe bay. One of these, the
Necomanche, near the Whil-a-pah, has 6 feet in the main channel, and shows
li miles wide at high tide.
There are three islands in the bay. Pine island, about l£ mUes N.W. by N.
off tbe mouth of the Palux, is a small sand islet of only 4 or 5 acres in extent,
and occupied by oystermen. It is near the channel and the oyster beds which
stretch for a couple of mfles to the N.N.E. of it. The Indian name of this
island is Nass-too. The north end of Long islandis 8 miles from Leadbetter
point. This island runs irregularly about S.E. for 6 miles, and has an average
width of l£ miles. It is covered with a dense forest of fir and undergrowth.
One mile S.S.E. of Long island is a very small islet named Round island, of
only a few acres in extent, covered with wood and bushes. The shores of the
bay, except on tbe peninsula, are mostly composed of low, perpendicular cliffs
of a sandy clay, in which are strata of recent fossil shells and the remains of
trees. Where the faces of the cliffs are not washed by the waters of the bay
they slope gently, and have a small grassy shore at their base.
N.E. f N., distant 6 miles from Leadbetter point, is a sharp narrow cliff,
60 feet high, making out into the bay, which is wearing it away, and has
exposed many large basaltic boulders. No other place on the bay presents
this geological feature.
The peninsula is a long, flat, marshy, and sandy plain, elevated but a few
feet above the level of the sea, and covered, Uke the entire surface of this
country, with a dense growth of gigantic forest trees, principally spruce, fir,
and cedar, with a few specimens of maple, ash, and black alder. The spruce
frequently attains a diameter of 8 feet. The Indian name of the peninsula is
Tee-choots.
The shoals are covered with shell-fish, among which the oyster is the most
abundant, and the principal article of export. They are small and have a
coppery taste. Cod-fish and halibut abound; sturgeon, said to be of good
quality, are plentiful, and salmon of several varieties and excellent flavour exist
in infinite numbers. In spring vast shoals of small herring enter the bay.
In winter wild fowl are innumerable, but these have been made shy by the bad
' shooting of the Indians. Black and white swan, geese, mallards, canvas-backs,
&c, always reward tbe experienced sportsman.
The yearly shipment of oysters is about 30,000 bushels, and of pUes and
spars about 30,000 feet. The average value of exports is $120,000. The
number of vessels entering yearly is about 25, nearly aU of which are schooners,
counting an aggregate of 2500 tons. In 1855 the population on the bay was
190 males and 60 females.
This bay was discovered by Lieutenant John Meares, July 5th 1788, in the
Felice, when proceeding in search of the Rio de San Roque of Heceta. He
approached it until the water shoaled to 8 fathoms, wien the breakers ahead
warned him to haul off. " From the mast-head it was observed that this bay
extended a considerable way inland, spreading into several arms or branches
to the northward and eastward, and the mountainous land behind it was at a
great distance from us."    He saw " what appeared a narrow entrance at the208
GRAY HARBOUR.
north-west part of the bay," but it was too remote for him to discover whether
it really was so, or only low land. " From under the [low] point a canoe
came out, containing a man and boy," &c. Unsettled weather prevented his
sending in the long-boat to sound near the shoals, in order to discover whether
there was any channel.    He called it Shoalwater bay.
Vancouver endeavoured to enter in 17S2, but, as it was breaking across tho
whole entrance, he considered it inaccessible to his vessels. He says, " The
sandy beach was bordered by breakers extending 8 or 4 miles into the sea,
and seemed to be completely inaccessible until 4 p.m., when the appearance of
a tolerably good bay presented itself," and the point to the north was " somewhat more elevated than the rest of the coast," and in lat. 46° 40'.
It is asserted by settlers here that boats, canoes, &c, whioh have broken
adrift and gone out of the bay, have, in every instance, been found on the beach
north of the entrance, and generally between it and Gray harbour.
From Toke point to point Hanson, the southern side of the entrance
to Gray harbour, the distance is 18$ miles, and the hard ocean sand beach
furnishes an excellent road that can be travelled at half tide by waggons. The
slightly elevated sandy bank is level, covered with coarse grass, and free from
timber for nearly i a nule back, and to within 2 nules of the harbour. Back
of this and parallel with the coast is a cranberry meadow, 6 miles in length,
and separated by a narrow belt of scrubby fir. This meadow is drained by
two small rivulets foroing their way through the sand to the ocean. San
Francisco is the market for the cranberries, which are gathered by Indians and
carried to Shoalwater bay and Gray harbour. Land otter and beaver have
their homes around the meadows and small streams."
GRAY HARBOUR.—Tho following is a description of the bay according to the survey of 1862. The bar at the entrance shifts so frequently and
appears to be subject to such very great changes that instructions for entering
it soon become useless, strangers must therefore obtain the assistance of a
pilot.
The entrance to ibis bay is formed by point Hanson on the south, and the
southern point of Eld island on the north. The northern end of this island
is connected with the outer part of point Brown at low water, but at high tide
the beaches are a J of a mile apart. The south end of the island lies
N. 59° W., IS miles from point Hanson; its length is 1} utiles, and direction
N. 50° W., with a breadth of 200 to 400 yards. Half-way between point
Hanson and the island Ues the north-east end of a shoal or middle ground,
bare at low water, and stretching 8. 15° W. for 1) miles, with an averago
breadth of $ of a mile. The channel in is between the north-east end of this
shoal and the south end of Eld island ; it had in 1862 a width of less than
ji of a mile and a depth of 10 fathoms.*
* In 1860 the surveying brig Fauntleroy, drawing 10 feet of water, laid off the bar
several days, the heavy breakers along tho whole shoal allowing no clue to tho bar, and tho
depth of water upon it unknown. At a comparatively smooth time the bar was sounded
with a boat and the vessel followed, crossing on the last quarter of the ebb with 2) fathoms.
In 1861 the entrance was reported tolerably good, and comparing favourably with the otlicr
bar harbours north of San Francisco. In June 1862, the same vessel laid off tho bar
several days, and finding no possibility of crossing, ran into Shoalwater bay, and the party
being unable to procure a pilot that could carry her into Gray harbour, bad to work from
the former bay. There were only three days during the season when work could be
executed on the bar, and the result showed that no well-defined channel then existed across
the bar, which was very uneven, lumpy, and in one place had only 9 feet upon it. Tho
channel was not straight, as anticipated, but tho seaward end curved well to tho northward.GRAY HARBOUR.
209
The Superintendent of tie Coast Survey has recommended to the Light-
houso Board the placing of buoys to mark the channel, and especiaUy of one
on the seaward extremity of the south sands, where the water probably breaks
during heavy weather in winter, so much as 4 or 5 miles off shore. This
buoy would be of great service to the coasting steamers.
In 1860, wltile the surveying vessel was lying off the bar, a current running
to the northward at the rate of l£ miles per hour was distinctly noticed. An
experience of two years has proved the set of the current along the coast to be
always to the northward. Immediately off the harbour this current strikes the
ebb current of the bay and deflects tbe mass of water to the northward, and
carries the channel that way. With the flood current the mass of water sets
over the south sands. It is estimated that the off-shore current runs across
tie bar at an average rate of 8 mUes.
The Indians use a small swash channel under point Brown to avoid crossing
the bar.
The peninsula terminated by point Hanson is about £ of a nule in breadth
and <H miles long, and covered with fir to within ^ a mUe of the point, which
is a low sand spit embracing a smaU marsh. The general direction of the
peninsula is north-west, and inside it lies South bay, with a widtb of £ a mUe,
affording the safest, and in fact the only safe anchorage near the entrance.
More than half of this bay is occupied by mud flats. To secure the best
position here, bring the northernmost trees on point Hanson to bear S. 71° W.,
distant f of a mue, and anchor in the channel in 3£ fathoms. This position
places the vessel out of the influence of the south channel running to the
ChehaUs (1862).
The anchorage under point Brown is not only uncomfortable but unsafe to
a vessel without heavy ground tackle. At this point there is no protection
against the fuU sweep of the heavy summer winds, which, blowing at times
counter to the strong currents in the bay, cause a very disagreeable, short sea.
Another circumstance tends to render this anehorage unsafe: between point
Hanson and Eld island lies the Middle shoal, which, being bare at low water,
confines the waters to a narrow regular channel; but when the tide rises
sufficiently to cover this shoal the conflicting currents cause a heavy overfall,
especiaUy on the large tides, strong enough to tear a vessel from her anchors.
This happened to the surveying brig in May 1860.
The peninsula terminated by point Brown, is about a mile in breadth and
4£ nules long; its general direction is S.E. by S. The bay shore is covered
with fir. The outer shore is the commencement of a sand waste, stretching
towards the Copalis river. Between the timber and this waste is a large pond
or lagoon, and outside that the sand is covered witi coarse beach grass and
stunted lupine bushes, and cut up with tbe tracks of bears, cougars, wolves,
elk, &c. From the north end of Eld island a body of water stretches into the
sand waste paraUel witi and near the ocean beach for about a mile. Close
under the bay shore of this peninsula runs a narrow crooked channel, which
Whidbey surveyed in 1792 for 2 nules, and in which he gives 4 fathoms.
From point Hanson the mouth of the ChehaUs river bears N. 52° E., distant
12 mfles; and this course is tbe general direction of the south-east side of the
bay, except the indentation forming South bay. The first bluff inside the
point is named Stearns. Around the south-west side of this bluff comes John
river. Within 1£ miles of the mouth of the ChehaUs tie Neuskat'l enteus,
coming from the south-east.210
COPALIS RIVER.
From point Brown point New lies N. 39° E., distant 4$ miles ; off it are
two rocks, named Ned rocks.
. Brackenridge bluff commences about f of a mile east of point New, and
extends 3 nules eastward to the low land bordering tbe Hoquiamts river.
From point New the shore-Une runs nearly straight to the ChehaUs, distant 8
miles, and tbe point of Stearns bluff bes S. 48° E., distant 4£ mUes.
To the N.N.W. of the line joining points New and Brown lies North bay,
consisting of an immense mud flat, bare at low water, and having an area of
22 square miles. At the bead of it Ues Saddle lull. La the stretch of 4 nules
north-west of point New are three smaU streams, caUed the Typso, Chinois,
and Humtolapy, emptying into North bay. They work narrow crooked channels through the mud flats, but at low water there is not sufficient depth to
carry a whale-boat through them.
By measurement it has been found that more than nine-tenths of Gray
harbour is bare at low water. Inside of the entrance the area of the surface-
of the water, bounded by the flats, bare at low tide, is only 4£ square nules.
This will give a fair idea of the Umited extent of the harbour. Through tie
flats lying between this available space and the ChehaUs run two contracted
channels. The northern commences at a point 2 miles N. 67° E. from point
Brown, is the only available one, and would require buoying out for its entire
length. For about 6 miles it is § of a mUe wide, with a depth of 4 fathoms.
The south channel commences just inside point Hanson, and is very contracted
and shallow. The flats are so extensive, and tie mud so soft in places, that
it is impossible to reach tbe shore, except at high tides. This fact has
retarded the development of the trade in lumber, although the shores are
heavily timbered.
The ChehaUs river has been navigated by a small steam-boat for 20 miles,
to the mouth of the Latsop, which comes from the northward. This is the
head of tbe tide-water; but enterprise would render the river navigable much
higher. Boats have come from the bend of the ChehaUs, at the mouth of the
Sbookumchuck, near the road passing from the Cowlitz river to Puget sound.
The country behind the bay appears low and flat, and well watered by the
ChehaUs and tributaries, which drain a section weU timbered and dotted with
many smaU prairies and bottom lands.
In tie winter of 1852—53 tie brig Willimantic
Eld island, having mistaken this for Shoalwater bay
was driven ashore upon
After vainly attempting
to launch her toward the sea she was dragged across tie island and launcied
on the bay side. Then the island was a mere bank of sand, bare at all tides,
and covered with logs and drift-wood.
Copalis River.—From point Brown the shore-line trends about N.N.W.
for 10 miles to the mouth of the Copalis. The barren waste of point Brown
continues along this shore, commencing witi a breadth of over 1 mUe,
stretching from the ocean to a dense forest of fir, and growing narrower as it
approaches the Copalis, where the timber comes to tie water's edge.
This stream is about 100 yards wide, but the mouth is almost closed by a
bar. Upon its banks reside the CopaUs tribe of Indians, from whom the
river derives its name. Like all the streams on this coast it abounds
salmon, but those caught here are celebrated for
Their general appearance is similar to those of
variety rarely exceeds-2 feet in length.    They weigh from 5 to 10 lbs.
In or about October 1854, there was discovered 1 mile north of the CopaUs
in
their richness, of flavour.
Columbia river, but thisPOINT GRENVILLE.
211
the whole stern frame of the General Warren, which had been wrecked on
Clatsop spit, at the mouth of the Columbia river, more than two years previously,
having thus been carried by currents at least 60 miles from its original position. When the hydrographic survey of the entrance to the Columbia was
made by tie Coast Survey parties in 1852 this wreck was found and its position determined. From cape Hancock it bore S.E. by E. almost 4 miles
distant, and was consequently little more than a mile from point Adams. It
then rested on the north edge of the Clatsop spit. This shows a direction of
the current, corroborating Vancouver's account when anchored off Destruction
island, and agreeing with our experience.
Point Grenville.—From the Copalis river to this point tbe shore runs
N.W. i N. about 16 miles, and continues low, nearly straight, and bordered
by sand beach, which changes to shingle, disposed in long rows parallel with
tbe coast. These ridges of shingle dam the mouths of many small streams
and form ponds, abounding in trout, and well stocked with beaver and otter,
according to the accounts of the Indians. The high land also approaches
much nearer the beach, and forms sandstone cliffs, with rocky ledges projecting
into tie ocean.
Point GrenviUe is a bluff, rocky promontory, stretching westward about a
mUe, and then southward about a £ of a mile, forming a very contracted and
exposed roadstead; with the 8-fathom curve extending i a mile from the beach,
compeUing vessels, except of very Ught draught, to anchor so far out that the
point and the rocks off it afford but little protection from the north-west winds.
It is useless during the winter months. The point has high lulls lying behind
it, and many rocks immediately off it; two of these rocks, about 75 feet high,
lie E. by S. 400 yards distant; another lies S.W. f S. i a mile distant,—
this has a depth of 5 and 6 fathoms all around it, and, we believe, is the one
that siows a large perforation through it when viewed from the south-east or
north-west. Other rocks stretch along tbe coast to tbe north-west, one of them
showing from the south as a leg-of-mutton sail. The bluff itself is composed
of fine sandstone, is very steep, and may be ascended by a difficult traU, which
is used by tbe Indians. It is said to be a great resort for sea otters, which
are hunted by the natives. Its approximate geographical position is lat.
47° 20', long. 124° 14'. From cape Hancock light it bears N.W. by N. £ N.,
distant 62 mUes, and from the cape soundings may be had in from 8 to 15
fathoms, 3 or 4 miles from the shore.
North of point GrenviUe to cape Classet the shore is bold and rocky, with
occasional short reaches of sand beach. The timber comes down to the water;
moderately high hills approach the coast, through which empty numerous small
streams, whUst the irregular Olympus range looms up far in the interior. In
winter these mountains are covered with snow, which bes in the gorges and
vaUeys nearly the whole summer. Mount Olympus, tbe highest peak of the
range, attains an elevation of 8138 feet, according to determinations made in
1841 by the United States Exploring Expedition.
From point GrenviUe, the coast begins to increase graduaUy in height. The
shores, in passing, wiU be observed to differ in some respects from those southward of it. They are composed of low cliffs rising perpendicularly from a
beach of sand or small stones, with many detached rocks of various remarkable
forms lying at the distance of about a nule from them. The soundings are
regular of from 16 to 19 fathoms, soft sandy bottom.
Along this part of the coast there appears to be a current setting northward
p 2I
212
DESTRUCTION ISLAND.
at an uniform rate of nearly \ a league per hour, as Vancouver remarks, that
after passing cape Orford he was carried northward more rapidly by 10 or 12
nules per day than he expected. He also observes that in the vicinity of
Destruction island, the strong current or tide set him in-shore, so that te was
obbged to anchor in a depth of 21 fathoms, on a bottom of soft sand and mud,
at about 3£ miles S.S.W. from the island. This in-shore set of the current
was also experienced by Commander WUkes, U.S.N., in 1841.
The coast from Destruction island continues to increase in height to the
northward. Off it are many rocky islets and sunken rocks, extending in some
places a league from the shore. Soon after passing the outermost of these
rocks cape Classet, the south point of the entrance of Juan de Fuca strait, may
be plainly distinguished.
Queniutl', river.—The mouth of this small stream is between 8 and 4 miles
N.W. by W. from point GrenviUe, and is almost closed by the shingle and
gravel thrown up by the surf; there is, however, a contracted opening for the
passage of canoes in calm weather. The closing of the entrance has so dammed
the river as to form a small lake inside, upon the banks of which is situated a
viUage of the Queniutls, a race of Indians hostile to all other tribes. Combined with other Indians to the northward they have ever been notorious for
their hostibty and vindictiveness to the whites. Several Spanish, English,
and Russian vessels and their crews were, in former times, taken and destroyed.
Hence we meet with the names Destruction island, Isla de Dolores, Punta de
Martires, &c, in this immediate vicinity. The river is said to flow from a lake
at the foot of the mountains.*
For 4 miles above the Queniutl the coast trends in the same direction,
N.W. by W., is composed of sandstone cbffs, and bounded by many precipitous
rocks, the height and direction of which are generally that of the cliff. In
the Coast Survey reconnaissance of 1852, one is placed 2£ miles off shore in
latitude 47° 27', and the vessel's track is laid down inside of it. A great
many large rocky islets lie close in shore in this vicinity, but northward tie
coast is nearly clear to Destruction island. It makes a slight curve eastward,
and alternates with bold yellow cliffs and low shores.
Destruction Island.—This island is the only one on the coast deserving
the appeUation after leaving the Farallones, off the bay of San Franciseo. It
is about 150 feet high, quite flat on the top, covered with grass, but destitute
of trees, and has high perpendicular sides of tie same height as the cliffs on
the main. It is said that there are some remarkable perforations through a
rock near it, but these are doubtless, only seen in particular directions, for, in
passing close to it, the surveyors did not observe them. On the eastern end
were formerly some rude Indian huts. In Vancouver's time two or three
dwarf trees grew at either end.
Wien running along the coast, 10 miles off, it is very difficult to distinguish
* The name of this river is usually known by the old settlers as Qne-noith, bat the
Indians are said to pronounce it as if spelled Que-ni-ijtl, accenting the first syllable
strongly, and the last so softly that many persons consider they call themselvs simply
Que-nai. A tribe still further north is called the Que-nait'-sath. The Mukkaws call it the
Quin-aitl.    De Mofras calls it " Kiniat."
These Indians, when travelling by canoes along the low sandy beach south of point
GrenviUe, push out into the rollers, keep between the line of two seas that have broken,
and pole the canoe through the surf. This peculiar mode is rather apt to excite the fears
of those ignorant of what a canoe can be made to do when skillfully handled.DESTRUCTION ISLAND.
21a
this island, because, being within l£ miles of the main, it is projected against
the coast cliffs and cannot be distinguished from them until close upon it.
It is narrow, but about l£ miles long in a N.N.W. direction, running parallel with
the coast, and has rocks for a mile off its southern end. A reef and sand
bank is represented as stretching thence W.N.W. 8 miles to broken water,
and from thence running nearly straight to the northern end. It is probable
that a detailed examination of this locabty might discover that good refuge
could be had under the island during heavy south-east and south-west weather.
No winter harbour of refuge exists between point Reyes and Nee-ah bay,
unless this be such, in which case it is of very great importance.
Between tie island and tie main the soundings range from 7 to 12 fathoms,
and northward of it from 10 to 14 fathoms. The approximate geographical
position of the north end is lat. 47° 41", long. 124° 25'. From cape Hancock
it bears N.W. by N. 84 miles.*
Vancouver in his voyage northward observes " soon after passing Destruction
island, the most remarkable mountain on the coast presented itself. Its summit, covered with eternal snow, was divided into a very elegant double fork,
and rose conspicuously from a base of lofty mountains clothed in the same
manner, which descended graduaUy to hills of a moderate height, and terminated
in low cliffs falling perpendicularly on a sandy beach; off whicb were scattered
many rocks and rocky islets of various forms and sizes. This was generally
considered, though it was not confirmed by its latitude, to be the mount
Olympus of Meares; it being the only conspicuous mountain we had
observed on the part of the coast we had visited."
In June 1855, tbe surveyors discovered in the direction of W. by N., distant
16 mUes from point GrenviUe, " a bank having 15 fathoms upon it, with very
soft mud bottom; at 21 miles distance, 17 fathoms; and at 29 railes, 36
fathoms; and 3 miles S.S.E. of the first position we struck 16£ fathoms, with
the same bottom, in aU the soundings ; but had not time to make an extended
examination. In April 1856, we found 45 fathoms in lat. 46° 54', long.
125° 3', being 16 mUes broad off shore. The soundings of 17, 18, and 19
fathoms, 1 mue from shore, would indicate a greater depth than we obtained.
Vancouver has 50 fathoms inside of our first soundings."
From Destruction island northward the shore is composed of cbffs which
form a regular curve to a point bearing N.W. i W. from the north end of the
island, and 11 miles distant; thence the shore runs nearly straight on that
course for 10 miles to two high, abrupt, and well marked rocks, standing a
nule from shore. The outer one is bold and covered witi taU trees, but the
inner one is bare. They are in lat. 47° 58', long. 124° 40'. Many others,
but smaller, Ue inside of them, and 19 fathoms are found close outside.
Along this stretch the shore is irregular and bluff, with many high rocky islets
off it.    A stream opens about midway in the stretch.
In the indentation northward of Destruction island, and about 4 miles from
it, empties a small stream, which we believe is called Hooch by the Indians.!
* This island is called Isla de Dolores upon old Spanish maps. It received its present
name, (by which only it is known on the coast), in 1787, from Captain Berkely, who sent
a long-boat from Bong George sound to explore as far south as latitude 47°. The crew of
a smaller boat entered a shallow river and rowed up some distance, where they were attacked
and murdered by the Indians.
+ Meares calls the curve of the coast, about Destruction island, "Queenhythe
bay," evidently a corruption of the Que-ni-utl, or Que'-noith.lilt
214
TATOOSH ISLAND.
Flattery Rocks.—From the two rocks just mentioned to cape Classet, in lat.
48° 28', the course is almost N.N.W., passing through a group of high, weU-
marked, rocky islets, in lat. 48° 12', named the " Flattery rocks." Before
reaching these the coast-line curves about a mile eastward, witi a bluff shore
nearly free from rocks for about 8 nules, when a large white rock J- a mile out
looms up prominently, and is distinctly seen against the main land.
Flattery rocks extend between 2 or 3 nules from shore; the outer ledge is
awash with one islet, in it, and the track of tie coast surveying steamer is laid
down inside of it, with soundings in 9 to 20 fathoms. High abrupt timbered
islets be inside, with their ocean faces nearly perpendicular, about 150 feet
high, and sloping landward. Where destitute of trees, these are covered with
grass, bushes, &c.    The latitude of the rocks is 48° 12'.
From Flattery rocks a high rocky coast, bordered by outlying rocks continues
for 8 miles, when a low sand beach occurs, receiving a smaU stream which
runs E.N.E. and finally North, behind the mountain constituting cape Classet,
to within 200 yards of tie beach in Nee-ah bay. A rise of 20 or 30 feet of
the sea would make cape Classet an island, extending 5 nules W.N.W. by 8
mues in breadth. This creek is used by the outer coast Indians during tie
prevalence of ieavy winter gales, when the passage outside the cape would be
impracticable.
From point GrenviUe to cape Classet the hiUs rising from the coast are
about 2000 feet high, densely covered witi trees, and cut up by innumerable
valleys. The shore is inhabited by numerous tribes of Indians, accustomed
to war and bitterly hostile to the wlutes.*
Tatoosh Island.—This island Ues W.N.W. £ a nule from tie point of
cape Classet. It is composed of small islets connected by reefs, is quite flat-
topped, and without trees. The surface is 108 feet above high water, and
the sides are perpendicular; the entire mass is composed of course sandstone
conglomerate with an out-crop of basalt on one of tie reefs. There is a depth
of 2 or 3 feet of soil upon tie top, which was formerly cultivated by tie Indians,
wio resorted iere in summer, about 150 strong, and had several houses near
tbe only boat landing on the inside of tie island, (1852). A reef extends a i
of a mile off the west side of the island, and the wiole extent of tie island
and reef is only $ a mile W.N.W. by £ of a mile. Deep water is found upon
aU sides, except between it and the cape, where a reef exists upon whioh it
breaks very heavUy in bad weather. It has been asserted that smaU vessels
have gone through this channel when jammed by an unfavourable wind;—in
so doing great risk must have been incurred, as the currents in the vicinity
run very irregularly and strong.
From tbe top of tie island a leaning rocky column, about 75 feet high and
one-third of that in diameter, is seen to tie soutt-eastward close under the
face of tie cape.    It is sometimes called Fuca's pillar.
Tie Ughthouse standing on the highest part of the island, consists of a
* These Indians are far superior to those found along the coast to the southward.
Their villages are heavily stockaded, and the houses made of cedar boards, whioh they have
cut with great industry from the tree; some of these boards are over 4 feet wide and 20 feet
long;—the outside edges being about an inch thick and 3 inches in the middle. Their
houses are very large, and partitioned off into stalls for each family. The numerous
streams emptying upon the coast afford them a never failing supply of the finest salinon;
and to obtain means of barter with white traders they fearlessly attack and capture the
different species of whale on tbe coast.CAPE   CLASSET.
215
useful guide to vessels in.
keeper's dwelling of stone, with a tower of brick, whitewashed, rising above
it, and surmounted by an iron lantern painted red, its height being 66 feet
above the top of the island. The light is fixed; it is 162 feet above the sea,
and in clear weather can be seen from tbe distance of 20 miles. Its geographical position as determined by the Coast Survey, is lat. 48° 23' 20", long.
124° 43' 48". The arc of ulumination seaward from tbe Ughthouse, starting
from the land southward, is 263°, hence it is also
Juan de Fuca strait.
Duncan Rock.—This is a small, low, black rock rising above the highest
tides, but always washed by the western sweU, which breaks over it. Deep
water is found close around it. From Tatoosh island Ught it bears N. 83° W.,
distant 2078 yards, or more than a nule, and many vessels pass between them,
as the chart shows 25 to 40 fathoms ; but a rock having been reported in
about midway, it would be prudent to avoid this channel until the doubt is set
at rest.    Vancouver's vessels passed between them.
During a three months' stay at Nee-ah harbour in 1852, the surveyors tried
upon several occasions to land upon this rock with canoes, but without success.
Duntze Rock.—At nearly a J of a nule N.W. by N. from Duncan rock, and
consequently with that rock in one with Tatoosh island, is Duntze rock, upon
which is a depth of 8 fathoms. The sea usually breaks upon it with great violence.   Close to the north side of this rock is deep water, of 60 to 100 fathoms.
Mr. G. J. Gibbon, R.N., when alluding to the supposed existence of this
8-fathom patch, says :—" From tie whirling and broken water extending from
tie Duncan rock, in a N.W. direction, fully \ a mile, I am led to suspect the
existance of a dangerous reef of rocks, and as the tide here trends southward
of West, and runs at the rate of 3 to 5 miles an hour, influenced by the state
of tie weather, the force and direction of the wind, I recommend all strangers
bound into or out of the strait, to keep northward of the stream of it, until at
least 4 or 5 miles east or west of its meridian; nor do I consider it advisable
ever to pass between the Duncan rock and Tatoosh island unless bound into
or out of Nee-ah bay, and then only with a good commanding breeze."
With no wind, a heavy swell from tie west, ebb current, and proximity to
these outlying rocks and island, a vessel's position is unsafe, and great caution
should be exercised in navigating this part of the entrance to the strait of Fuca.
CAPE CLASSET.*—This cape forms the southern head of the entrance
of the strait of Juan de Fuca;  it has a bold, wud, jagged sea-face, about 100
* So named by Vancouver in 1792, probably from the tribe of Indians, or chief of the
tribe inhabiting that region, and by this name British geographers usually recognise it;
but in the American coast survey charts it is called cape Mattery, Captain Cook having
given it the latter name in 1778. Mr. Davidson U.S. Coast Survey says—"In March
1778, Cook, having been driven seaward by heavy gales off cape Perpetua, made the land
about the latitude of 47° 35', and 4 leagues from shore, as he says, when he was in hopes
of finding a harbour to the northward under a small round hill which appeared to be an
island, but on approaching it he became almost convinced that the opening was closed by
low lands and being thus disappointed, he named the point of land to the north of it cape
Flattery, and placed it in latitude 48° 15'. On recent English oharts the cape is placed in
the position of the Flattery rocks, although Vancouver adopted the present usage on this
coast. From an examination of Cook's account, with a knowledge of the coast and the
currents here we are satisfied that he was further north than he estimated on the morning"
of March 22nd, for he says the small round hill like an island bore N. f E., (true), distant
6 or 7 leagues, while the coast extended from N. to S.E., (true). These facts convince us
that his position was in lat. 47° 50', long. 124' 46'; from this situation the Flattery rocks are
distant 7 leagues, bearing N. i E., (true); the extremity of cape Flattery (Classet) bearing216
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
feet high, much disintegrated by the wearing action of the ocean; rises in a
mile to an irregular bib of 1500 or 2000 feet in height; is cut up by gorges
and covered with a dense growth of fir and almost impenetrable undttrbush
from the edge of tie cliffs to the summit. Tie shore-line round to Nee-ah
bay is of the same forbidding character, bordered by reefs, and having but one
short stretch of beach at tie foot of tie bills. Upon this beach is situated
(or was in 1852) Cbsseet vUlage. The soundings i a nule from shore are
deep and irregular, reaching 68 fathoms. The current runs as much as 3
nules per hour, and during the ebb sets irregularly round the cape, Tatoosh
island, and Duncan rock. When seen from south-westward cape Classet looks
hke an island, on account of the vaUey 8 or 4 miles eastward of it. The best
position for seeing this is when a single rock off the cape shows itself
detached. From this direction the high mountains on Vancouver island loom
up and stretch far away to the north-west and to the east.
At the entrance to the strait of Juan de Fuca, 15 nules (by estimation)
W.N.W. from cape Classet, is said to be a bank having 18 fathoms upon it,
which is much frequented by codfish. When the surveyors were encamped
in Nee-ah bay, in 1852, the Indians frequently went out upon some bank off
tie strait to fish for cod, but their assertions were looked upon witi distrust,
as it was believed that they caugit the fish inside of tbe strait. Circumstances
have hitherto prevented an examination of this bank.
STEAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
of the world is tie caution and vigilance of tie navigator
Juan de Fuca strait has its entrance^between latitudes 48° 28' and 48° 36',
on the meridian of 124° 45'. It runs eastward as far as long. 122° 45', or as far
as the west coast of Whidbey island. Its geographical position makes it bable
to all those sudden vicissitudes of weather common to high northern latitudes;
and in few parts
more called into action than when entering it
The breadth of tie strait between cape Classet or Flattery, its southern point,
and Bonilla point, (Vancouver island) its northern, is 18 miles; within these
points it soon narrows to 11 miles, and carries this breadth on an East course
for 40 miles, or until Race islands bear N.E. by E., distant 10 nules; it
then takes an E.N.E. direction for a farther distance of 14 nules to tie siore
of the continent, or more properly Whidbey island.
Between Race islands and tbe southern shore tie breadth of the strait is
8. nules, after which it immediately expands to 17 nules, leading northwards
nearly N., (true); the distance to the nearest point of land a little more than 3 leagues;
and the coast northward of point GrenviUe bearing S.E., (true). The point of land northward of the Flattery rocks was, therefore, bis cape Flattery, and his estimated latitude of it
8 miles too small. Before next day he had a very hard gale from the S.W., accompanied
with rain, and he did not see land again until he reached latitude 49i°. He arrived at the
conclusion that between 47" and 48° there existed no inlet, as had been asserted." There
appear from these remarks to be good reasons for retaining the name as given by Captain
Cook, but from the circumstance of its being better known by shipmasters as cape Classet
wc haye adopted this in preference.STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
21?
to the British possessions by various channels among the labyrinth of islands
known as the Haro archipelago, and southward to those of the United States,
by Admiralty inlet and Puget sound.
The coasts of Juan de Fuca strait are bold, abrupt, and covered with a
heavy growth of varied timber and dense underbush. They are remarkably
free from danger, and may be approached safely within \ a mile; there is one
breaking rock which Ues nearly that distance off tie west point of Crescent bay
on the southern shore.* Tbe soundings in the centre are of great depth, no
bottom being found in its deepest parts with 150 fathoms of line; but within
l£ nules of either shore there is generally under 40 fathoms, and on the
northern side when 5 miles eastward of port San Juan, 8 to 12 fathoms wiU
be found within a nule of tie shore, and, if necessary, vessels may anchor.
On both sides of the strait there are several anchorages or stopping places
which may be taken advantage of by vessels, either inward or outward bound
when meeting with adverse winds;—those on the southern side are Nee-ah
and Callam bays, port Angelos, and New Dungeness bay, all westward of tie
harbours of Admiralty inlet; on the northern side are port San Juan, Sooke
inlet, and Beeher bay all westward of the Race islands, eastward of which
exceUent anchorage may be always obtained with westerly winds.
On the northern or Vancouver island shore of the strait tie hiUs rise
gradually and are densely wooded, but near the coast attain to no great elevation. On the southern side the almost perpetually snow-clad mountains known
as the Olympian range, rise more abruptly and vary in elevation from 4000 to
more than 7000 feet; but though exceedingly grand in their rugged outline,
present no very marked summits as seen from the strait nor any great variety
in their features;—on this shore a steep cbffy coast commences at 30 miles
from cape Classet and continues for about 50 miles,—it is 50 to 200 feet high,
and a flat country behind extends nearly to the base of the Olympian range
and stretches furtier southward as tbe eastern part of the strait is approached.
On the east the face of Whidbey island is very steep; it is about 250 feet high
and appears flat, as does the whole country eastward to the sharp-cut outline
of the Cascade range, stretching its serrated ridge northward, where the snow-
peak of mount Baker is distinctly seen, and to the southward, where the higher
peak of mount Rainier attracts tie eye,—this mountain is beUeved to be more
than 15,000 feet high.
Tides.—It is high water, full and change, at cape Classet at noon and at
midnight; the ebb stream there commences to run strong at 2h. a.m. and p.m.
and continues for about 6 hours.
In tie outer part of Juan de Fuca strait there is no very great strength of
tide; it varies from 1 to 4 knots, seldom so much as the latter unless near
cape Classet; but when approaching the more contracted part in the neighbourhood of tie Race islands, which receives the first rush of the pent up
waters of the strait of Georgia, strengthened and diverted by the labyrinth of
islands which choke up its southern entrance, it is not surprising that eddies,
races, and irregularities occur which almost baffle any attempt at framing laws
* It may be here remarked that almost all the rocky shoals and dangers in these latitudes are well marked by kelp; indeed the kelp line, to a stranger, is in every instance the
danger line, and should be avoided, for though it will sometimes show in a depth of even
40 fathoms, it is always indicative of the presence of rocks, and should not be ventured
into unless it has been well ascertained to be free from sunken dangers.i
w
218
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
which may not rather embarrass than assist the seamen; the result, however,'
of observations continued throughout an entire year at Esquimalt, and partially.
on other parts of the coast during three seasons, appears to warrant the
foUowing conclusions, viz.:—
The flood tide sets to the northward along the outer coast of the continent
and Vancouver island. It enters the strait of Fuca at cape Classet, running
with considerable velocity, sometimes 8 or 4 knots over Duncan and Duntze
rock; it then turns sharply into the strait, passing through the various channels
among the Haro archipelago into the strait of Georgia, and within about ~>
miles of cape Mudge, where it is met by a flood from the northward, which,
sweeping the western coast of Vancouver island, enters G-oletas channel and
Queen Charlotte sound at its northern extreme, in lat. 51°, thence southerly
down the narrow waters of Johnstone strait and Discovery passage, meeting
the tide which enters by Fuca strait, and reaches about midway between tie
northern and southern extremes of Vancouver island, or close to the spot
where the broad expanse of the strait of Georgia merges into the narrow
channels adjoining it.
On the western side of the island the tides were found to be regular—flood
and ebb of 6 hours' duration, the times of high water on the fuU and change
at Nootka sound, and at the entrance of Goletas channel varying very little,
and occurring near noon, the greatest range 18 feet; nor is any marked
irregularity observable in Johnstone strait-and Discovery passage, except tie
not unusual circumstance that the ebb stream continues to run to the northward for 2 hours after it is low water by the shore, the water rising at the
same time, the ebb stream being of 7 hours' duration, tie flood About
5 hours.
The great and perplexing tidal irregularities may therefore be said to be
embraced between tie strait of Juan de Fuca, near tie Race islands, and
cape Mudge, a distance of 150 nules; and a careful investigation of the
observations made at Esquimault, and among tie islands of the Haro archipelago, shows that during the summer months, May, June, and July, there
occurs but one high and one low water during the 24 hours, high water at tie
full and change of the moon happening about midnight, and varying but
•sbghtly from that hour during any day of the three months; the springs
range from 8 to 10 feet, tie neaps from 4 to 5 feet. The tides are almost
stationary for 2 hours on either side of high or low water, unless affected
by strong winds outside.
During August, September, and October, there are two high and low waters
in tie 24 hours; a superior and an inferior tide, tie high water of tie
superior varying between lh. and 8h. a.m., tie range during these months
from 8 to 5 feet, the night tide the highest.
During winter almost a reversal of these rules appears to take place; thus,
in November, December, and January, the 12-hour tides again occur, but the
time of high water is at or about noon instead of midnight.
In February, March, and April, there are two tides, tie superior high
water occurring from lh. to 8h. p.m. Thus it may be said that in summer
months the water is low during the day, and in winter low during the night.
The ebb stream has always been found to run southward through the Haro
archipelago, and out of Fuca strait for 2 | hours after it is low water by tie
shore, the water rising during that time; tie ebb is stronger than the flood,
and generally two hours' longer duration.STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA:
219
The tides during those months when two high and two low waters occur in
the 24 hours, are far more irregular than when there is only one 12-hour
tide, and another anomaly exists, viz., the greatest range not unfrequently
occurs at the first and last quarters, instead of at the full and change of
the moon.
Currents.—A southerly current has been found to prevail on the western
coast of Vancouver island more or less throughout the year, particularly from
August to November, probably in some measure caused by the N.W. winds
which blow constantly during the summer. This current joining the ebb tide
out of Fuca strait has been known to set vessels between 4 and 5 mUes an
hour to the southward, and during fogs there is great risk of being drifted on
to cape Classet, or some of its off-lying dangers; extreme caution should
therefore be observed in entering the strait at such times, especially near the
full and change of the moon, when the tides are at their strongest.
Winds.—Within the strait of Juan de Fuca, in the winter season, the
winds usually assume its direction either up or down. During summer, the
prevailing winds from N.W. or S.W., take a westerly direction within the
strait; whue tbe S.E. gales of winter blow fairly out.
Although a westerly wind may be blowing within the strait, it frequently
during the change of the seasons blows heavily outside at the same time from
S.S.W., or sometimes suddenly changes to that direction, from a Ught
easterly wind on opening the entrance, which makes that part of the coast of
Vancouver island between port San Juan and Bonilla point a dangerous lee-
shore to a ship without steam power.
The coast winds in summer prevail from S.W. and N.W., the former
during the early months, and the latter blow fresh and with great regularity
during, June, July, and August. In September and the early part of October
the winds are very uncertain and there is generaUy a great deal of calm,
gloomy weather.
The barometer usually stands above 30*00 inches during summer; should
it faU to 29*90 a south easterly wind with thick rainy weather may be
expected, but of short duration and clearing up with a westerly wind as soon
as the barometer rises.
The winter winds are S.E. or S.W., more frequently the former; they set
in towards tbe end of October, and continue until the middle of April. S.E.
gales are generally preceded by a short interval of calm, cloudy weather;
they spring up graduaUy from East or E.S.E. veering to the southward,
accompanied by rain and thick weather, the barometer falling rapaidly; when
tie barometer becomes stationary the wind shifts suddenly to S.W. and blows
heavily with clear weather, but frequent squalls of rain; the barometer begins
to rise immediately the wind veers to S.W., from which quarter it generally
blows from 12 to 20 hours.
The violence and duration of these S.E. gales is always proportioned to the
fall of the mercury ; with the barometer at 29*50 a strong gale may be looked
for from this quarter ; it seldom falls below 29*20, when very bad weather is
eertain to follow. On two or three occasions in as many years it has been
known to fall to 28*90, and has been followed by S.E. gales of great violence.
A S.E. gale sometimes springs up, though very seldom, with the barometer
above 30*00 inches. On such occasions the wind has always been preceded
by calm, cloudy weather and rain, witi a high but falling barometer; such
gales are not violent and of short duration.220
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
S.E. gales are always accompanied by thick dirty weather, and rain ; they
seldom continue from that quarter for more than 12 or 18 hours, unless the
barometer falls very low, and almost always shift to S.W.
When tie S.W. gale of winter is not preceded by tie south-eastern, the
barometer seldom falls ; it either remains stationary, when the gale may be
expected to continue longer, or rises slowly, when it will graduaUy subside
and fine weather foUow. S.W. gales are accompanied by heavy banks of
clouds, and passing showers of rain, sometimes snow.
The barometer has been known to fall during winter as low as 29*45 and
has been foUowed by no gale or bad weather, but on such occasions there
has been a heavy foil of snow on the hills, and a sudden fall of 15 degrees in
the temperature.
A fine northerly or N.E. wind frequently occurs at intervals during tie
months of December, January, and February; it is always accompanied by a
high barometer above 30*0, and at such times a continuance for several days
together of clear, cold, frosty weather may be looked for; the barometer on
these occasions wiU sometimes rise as high as 80*70, and tie fine weather
wiU tien probably last a fortnight or more.
Fogs.—Although fogs in this region are not nearly of such frequent occurrence as on the neighbouring coast of California, where they prevail almost
uninterruptedly during summer and as late as the middle of October, yet from
August to November they occasionally occur in Juan de Fuca strait, and are
sometimes very dense over tie entrance for several days together. They are
generaUy accompanied by calms or very Ught winds from N.W., which renders
them more dangerous to sailing vessels closing the land.
Soundings.—Between tie parallels of 48° and 49° the 100 fathom bank
extends for 32 miles off shore, and for 5 or 6 miles on either side of the
paraUel of 48° 80', which passes through the centre of Juan de Fuca strait,
no greater depth than 55 fathoms is found at the distance of 40 miles from
the entrance. Steering for the strait within these limits of latitude, viz. a
few miles on either side of 48° 30', from 55 to 60 fathoms will be carried for
20 miles, tbe bottom fine dark sand, sometimes varied by gravel and small
stones, when it wiU deepen to 80 and 90 fathoms, generally muddy bottom,
for a farther distance of 10 miles ; a vessel will tien be within 8 or 10 nules
of the strait: if to the nortiward of 48° 80' the water should shoal to 86 and
40 fathoms rocky or gravel bottom ; if to tie southward it will continue deep
and wiU increase to more than 100 fathoms, when within 8 or 9 nules of
cape Classet.
The outer edge of the bank is rather steep, falling from 90 to 150 fathoms
and then no bottom with the ordinary Une. There is one peculiarity which
should not pass unnoticed ; the deep channel of over 100 fathoms, which runs
through the centre of the strait, on entering tie ocean is deflected to the
southward, probably owing to the superior strength of the ebb stream and the
southerly current, and a zone of deep water about 3 nules in width, with from
140 to 160 fathoms, extends in that direction to the 48° parallel; between it
and the shore, a distance of about 8 nules, the depth decreases suddenly to
80 fathoms fine dark sand, and immediately outside it from 67 to 80 fathoms
wiU be found.
Mr. Davidson U.S. Coast Survey says, 1862,—" At the time of our first visit
the southern shore of the strait of Juan de Fuca was inhabited by large numbers of Indians, living in heavily stockaded villages.    They were tolerablySTRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
221
expert in the use of fire-arms, of which they seemed to have a good supply.
They lived mostly by fishing, but raised a fair supply of remarkably good
potatoes from the stock seed of tbe Hudson Bay Company.
During dry summers the Indians and settlers set fire to tbe forests in every
direction, and the country soon becomes enveloped in a vast smoke that lasts
for two or three months. At such times it is frequently impossible to make
out the shore at % a mile distance. The strong westerly winds coming up the
strait disperse it for awhile, but only to fan the fires and give them renewed
force and activity.
In summer the prevailing wind draws into the strait, increasing towards
evening, and frequently blowing a 10-knot breeze before midnight; but unless
the wind is strong outside little is felt in the strait, and very frequently vessels
are a week from cape Classet to Admiralty inlet, or vice versa. In winter the
south-east winds draw directly out, and create a very heavy cross sea off the
entrance, the great south-west swell meeting that rolling out. In such cases
trading vessels try to gain Nee-ah bay or San Juan harbour, and remain at
anchor until the wind changes. In beating in or out vessels may run as close
under either shore as wind and currents warrant, as no hidden dangers have
been found \ a mile off shore, except at the west side of the small indentation
called Crescent bay, near Striped peak, 44 miles inside of Duncan rock.
At the entrance the currents acquire, during the ' large tide' of each day, a
velocity of 4 mUes per hour, and after strong north-west winds, a very large,
short, but regular swell is encountered west of Nee-ah bay during the ebb
current. If the wind is Ught, and no steerage way on the vessel, the feeling
is decidedly disagreeable, especially as the current seems constantly to set
close around Duncan rock and Tatoosh island. If a vessel falls into the trough
of this swell she is bound to fetch away something.
Settlers are graduaUy advancing from Puget sound and Admiralty inlet
along the strait westward, and are destined to meet those coming up the coast
from Gray harbour and Shoalwater bay.
Washington Territory has a cbmate excelled only by that of California.
We know not where to point to such a ramification of inland navigation, save
in the British possessions to the northward. For depth of water, boldness of
approaches, freedom from hidden dangers, and the immeasurable sea of
gigantic timber coming down to the very shores, these waters are unsurpassed,
unapproachable.''
Directions.—Vessels from southward or westward bound for Fuca strait,
except the coasting steamers which all carry pilots, should make cape Classet;
there is no inducement to hug the coast, on which a long rolling swell
frequently sets, and this swell meeting tbe south-easterly gales of winter,
causes a confused sea. The cape and its off-lying rocks should not be approached within a distance of at least 3 miles, as the tide occasionally sets
over Duncan and Duntze rock with great velocity, an additional reason why
these dangers should not be too closely approached. It is equally necessary
either in entering or leaving the strait to avoid the coast of Vancouver island
between port San Juan and Bonilla point, when there is any appearance of
bad weather.
It is recommended to pass at the distance of at least 10 miles from the
coast, unless working to windward against a fine northerly wind, which is
frequently found during summer, when it may be safely approached within
8 miles or less.11
IS
m l a
222
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
To vessels making the strait in bad weather it wiU be more desirable to run
in and seek shelter than to remain outside. If the land has been made either
to the southward of cape Classet or on the Vancouver island shore within a
moderate distance of the entrance, or if tbe latitude can be rebed upon within
2 or 3 miles, it wUl be advisable to run for the strait. The powerful light on
Tatoosh island (cape Classet) wiU, unless in very thick weather, or fog,
be seen at a considerable distance, and as soon as a vessel is actually within
the strait she wiU have comparatively smooth water, with sufficient sea room,
and may run boldly up the centre for tbe Ught on Race islands, or by the
assistance of that on Tatoosh island, maintain her position in the strait if
preferred. It is to be remarked that when Tatoosh island bght is brought to
bear westward of W.S.W., it becomes shut in by the land about Nee-ah bay,
and that the Race island Ught from a similar cause becomes obscured by
Beechey bead when brought to bear eastward of E.byN. J N. ; therefore,
when either of these Ughts ^are obscured, the distance from either coast wiU
be accurately judged, and in the latter case a ship wiU be getting too close to
the northern shore.  -
Coming from westward with a heavy westerly or north-west gale, thick
weather, and uncertain of the latitude, it would be prudent to lay by at not
less than 30 miles from tie entrance to tbe strait, or on the edge of the bank
of soundings. These gales seldom last more than 12 hours, and if they veer
towards the S.W. the weather wUl clear, and a vessel may immediately bear
up for the strait.
With a S.E. gale it is recommended to close the land, smoother water wUl
be obtained, and the bank of soundings off tbe Vancouver island shore will
give a vessel pretty accurately her distance from the land. Gales from this
quarter sometimes continue in the winter season for 80 hours, and when a
vessel strikes soundings on the edge of the bank in 90 fathoms, and carries
them in to 60 she may put her head to the S.W., and will have plenty of room
for drift.
It is of great importance in making the strait during bad weather to strike
the outer edge of the bank of soundings, as the ship's distance from the bind
wiU then be accurately known. It has been already observed that after
running 20 miles eastward the depth increases from 55 to 80 and 90 fathoms,
which latter depths, if the lead has not been previously kept going, might be
mistaken for the outer edge.
Should a sailing vessel be overtaken by one of those dense fogs which sometimes hang over the entrance of the strait, she should not close the land but
stand off sufficiently far to avoid being set by the southerly current too near
cape Classet. If a steamer has made the land or light, and is certain of her
position, she should get tbe northern or Vancouver island shore aboard, when,
with the assistance of the chart and lead, she may feel her way in. When 8 or 10
miles eastward of port San Juan there is anchoring ground in 12 fathoms a mile
from the shore, and if the fog is very dense a stranger should anchor; it
must be remarked, however, that not unfrequently the weather is clear a few
miles within the strait while the entrance is totally obscured.
SOUTHERN SHORE OF THE STRAIT.
NEE-AH BAY.—From the bghthouse on Tatoosh island the coast trends
4 miles E. by N. f N. to Koitlah point, the western side of Nee-ah bay.STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
223
From cape Classet the shore is nearly straight, high, and rugged, backed by
hiUs about 1500 or 2000 feet high, and covered with timber. Deep water is
found within £ of a mile of the bluffs, and at a distance of % a mile, a depth
of 20 fathoms is obtained. Within a mile of Koitlah point was a large village
of the Mukkaws, in 1852.
The bay is about l£ miles long S.S.E., and the same in width at the
entrance. The western side is high, precipitous, and bordered by craggy outcropping rocks 300 or 400 yards from the shore. The 3-fathom line ranges
about 600 yards from the foot of tie bluff. Tbe general dfrection of this side
is S.E. for 1 mUe, when the hills suddenly cease, and a low shore, with sand
beach backed by woods, curves graduaUy to the N.E. by E. for lj miles to
Ba-ad-dah point, formed by a spur of the hills.
The east side of tie bay is formed by Waaddah island, the northern end of
which bes l£ miles from Koitlah point in an E. by N. £ N. direction. This
island is a narrow,, high ridge, about 250 yards wide, and J a mile long,
covered with trees, and having a direction S.E. £ E., pointing towards Ba-ad-
dah point, and presenting the appearance of a continuation of that spur, but
separated from it by a 4-fathom channel 500 yards wide. Off the south-west
part rocks extend for 250 yards, and the 3-fathom line is 600 yards distant.
Along the sand beach tbe 3-fathom Une is within 200 yards of the shore, the
depth increasing to 7 fathoms, then decreasing to 5 in the middle of the bay,
and again increasing to 10 on tbe outer line of the bay. Much kelp abounds
in this harbour, even in deep water, the lower and thinnest portion being used
by tbe Indians for fishing-lines. When coiled away and dry they break like
grass, but soaking them in salt water renews their elasticity and strength.
The best anchorage is in the south part of the bay, in about 5 fathoms,
being then off the smaU stream which comes in at the eastern foot of the hills.
No direction can be given about anchoring off any particular village, as the
Indians change their location so frequently ; but near this stream will generally
be found some bouses, with an abundance of fresh water. During southerly
weather little swell is felt here, and the wind can do no harm; but when a
large westerly swell is coming up the strait it reaches here, and a vessel rolls
uncomfortably unless she rides head to it.
The low ground abreast of the anchorage, and but 200 or 300 yards from
tbe beach, is the head of a small stream that runs through the low prairie
lands behind cape Classet, and empties into Nisco bay south of the cape, near
a winter village of the Mukkaws, called Wa-atch. This stream is frequently
used by them in winter, when they cannot take their canoes outside the cape.
Observations made behind the beach at about 400 yards eastward of the
smaU stream before referred to, determined its geographical position to be lat.
48° 21' 49", long. 124° 37' 12". From tbe N.W. end of Waaddah island it
bears S. by W. i W., distant If miles.
" A good berth wiU be found in Nee-ah bay, in 6 fathoms sandy bottom,
with the outer point of Waaddah island N.E. by N., and Koitlah point W. by N.;
a short distance within this position kelp grows in large patches all over
the bay, and some care is necessary in selecting a berth. Large sailing
vessels may anchor in 7 or 8 fathoms a little outside the above bearings, in
the centre of tbe bay, with the outer point of the island N.E. by E.
A vessel should leave this bay on any indication of a north-east wind, and
if too late, and unable to weather Waaddah island she may, with the assistance of the chart, run between it and the main; the passage is 2 cables in224
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
breadth, and the least water 21 feet; she must, however, be careful to avoid
the ledge off the south-west end of Waaddah, and in haubng out should give
the eastern side of the island a berth of at least a J of a mile. Vessels
have ridden out north-west gales close to the south-east end of Waaddah in
6 fathoms, but it is more prudent to get out into tie strait at tie commencement of the gale. During strong westerly or south-west gales, or after they
have been blowing outside, a considerable sweU roUs into tie bay, which
renders it at such times a somewhat disagreeable though not unsafe anchorage ; small vessels may go close in and get smooth water, even among the
kelp which grows in 4 and 5 fathoms."—Vancouver Island Pilot, 1864.
Tides.—The corrected establishment of the port is 12h. 33m. The mean
rise and fall of tides is 5*6 feet; of spring tides 7*4 feet; and of neap tides
4*8 feet.
At about 2 miles eastward of Waaddah island, and within the limits of the
kelp, is a rock 150 feet high, called Sail rock by the United States Exploring
Expedition, and by Captain KeUett, R.N., Klaholoh (seals).* The Indian
name is Saelok. Behind it enters a small stream called Okho on the
Admiralty charts, but this is not the Indian name.
CALLAM BAY.—From the eastern point of Nee-ah bay to Sekou poirit,
the western part of CaUam bay, the course is E. £ S., and distance 18£ miles.
The shore-line is nearly straight, bluff, and bordered by rocks, with an
occasional stretch of sandy beach. At a mile off shore the average depth of
water is 20 fathoms. The bay is at the western termination of a high, bold,
wooded ridge, running parallel to the shore, witi an almost perpendicular
water face, and falling away rapidly in-shore. This easUy recognised ridge is
about 1000 feet high and 7 miles long;—its western extremity bes E. % S.
16 miles from Waaddah island, and is called Slip point; its eastern is designated Pillar point. The width of the bay from Sekou point to Slip point is
2 nules, and the bearing E. by N. % N. Outside these limits is a depth of
15 fathoms. The form of the bay is nearly semicircular, and the depth of tie
curve nearly a mile, witi soundings of 6 fathoms in about the middle. Into
it empties a small stream from the south-eastward, having low land on its
eastern side, and a small rise on the west. Some sunken rocks are said to
lie off Slip point.
CaUam bay is quite open to all winds from northward and north-westward,
and is consequently only safe during the prevalence of those from southward
and south-eastward. The usual anchorage is in 8 to 6 fathoms. It must be
considered only as a temporary stopping place.
The water along the face of the ridge (just mentioned) is very deep, and
the bottom rocky and irregular. About half way along it is the entrance to a
vein of lignite, which has been worked, but it is not fit for steam-ship consumption. Off this mine, at a distance of a cable's lengti, a depti of 35
fathoms is found, with a swell upon the rocks sufficient to destroy any boat
loading there. The so-called coal is very easily broken, and crumbles by
exposure to the weather.
Pillar point is in lat. 48° 13', and nearly E. ^ S. from the north end of
Waaddah island, from which it is distant 23 miles.    This point is named
* This rock shut in with the south-east end of Waaddah island is sat rf to clear the rocks
extending from Koitlah point.STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
225
Pillar point from tie circumstance that it terminates in a bare columnar
shaped rock, slightly separated from the main ridge by a depression, it is
consequently a rather remarkable object, where from tbe character of the
country, generaUy thickly wooded from summit to water Une, few objects
present themselves by which vessels may accurately fix their position. From
this point the shore trends S.S.E. about a nule, and receives a stream coming
from tie westward, caUed Canel river. An Indian village exists here. The
Indian name of the stream is Pisht-st.
From Pillar point the next prominent object is a wooded hill called Striped
peak, bearing E. by N., and distant 17 miles. Within this distance the shore
retreats to the southward of this hue of bearing (E. by N.) about 3 miles,
having alternate bluff and low shores witi many little streams opening upon
them, and at the distance of 11 or 12 miles from Pfllar point is Low point,
at the mouth of a stream caUed tie Lyre.* Rocks abound close along tie
Bhore. The kelp generaUy extends out to 5 fathoms, and the average depth
of water, a nule off, is 10 fathoms. One nule before reaching the western
part of Striped peak is a sunken rock, upon which the sea breaks at low
water.f A
Crescent bay
Striped peak is several hundred feet high, and wooded, and was doubtless
named from a well-marked Une upon its water side, occasioned by a land slide
from its summit. This mark is being rapidly obbterated by tbe growth of
vegetation. The base of the hill towards the water presents a straight Une,
running E. by N. for 3 nules, with deep water off it.
FRESHWATER BAY.—The eastern part of Striped peak forms the
western boundary of Freshwater bay; it is named Observatory point, and has
several rocks off it. The eastern side of the bay is tie low delta called
Angelos point, at the mouth of the river Elwha, and the two points are distant
from each other 3 miles in an E. by N. f N. direction. Inside of this line
the depti of tie curve is about 1J nules, with water ranging from 16 fathoms
in the middle to 4 or 5 close in-shore. The western shore of the bay is bluff,
the eastern low, with bluff in the rear. The waters of the Elwha bring down
such quantities of earth that a depth of only 10 fathoms is found at a distance
of £ of a nule from its mouth.J
slight indentation of the shore here has received the name of
* The Indian name of the river'is Kwa-ha-mish.
+ This rock is the only known detached sunken danger off the southern coast of the
strait, with the exception of a rock 11 feet under water, a short distance from the land, at
about 6£ miles westward from the lighthouse on New Dungeness. Westward of it some
kelp grows a short distance from the beach on the somewhat sheltered part between Striped
peak and Pillar point, and here the depth of water at a mile from the shore varies from
8 to 16 fathoms; westward of Pillar point it deepens to 40 fathoms at that distance.
J At the time of the survey, this river had two mouths, but as it runs for some distance
close to the beach, it is likely that the position and number of these entrances depend very
much upon the melting of the snow, and from other sources of supply in the Angelos valley,
whence this river flows. From Angelos point, the hills recede, and leave a level space
between them and the coast; thence they rise suddenly to a great height, their summits
capped with snow, evep in summer, forming some of the highest peaks of the mount Olympus range. The most conspicuous break in these mountains is a deep and narrow valley
abreast this point, called Angelos valley, whence, as before remarked, the river Elwha flows
in a good sized stream, having sufficient water to admit boats. The whole of this country
is covered with fine wood, and abounds in deer and other game, but it is difficult to penetrate,
from the underwood and fallen trees.   There are several Indian lodges on and near the coast.226
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
Freshwater bay being quite open to aU winds from northward, it should only
be used as a temporary stopping place. It is usual to anchor in 9 to 6
fathoms.
PORT ANGELOS.—At 4 mUes eastward of tie river Elwha commences a
long, low, very narrow sand spit, stretching out from the bluff in a general E.N.E.
direction for 3 miles, to tbe point called Ediz hook, which bes 1-J nules off the
main shore, thus forming an exceUent and extensive harbour, with deep water
of 25 to 30 fathoms, sandy bottom, close under the inside of the sand spit,
almost to the head of the bay. Through the centre of the bay the surveyors
say they " found a line of 15 fathoms, sticky bottom, and between that and
the main it shoals very regularly with tie same kind of bottom." On tie
outside of tie spit very deep water is found close to it, and tie hook may be
rounded within a cable's length in 25 fathoms. In the indentation between
Angelos point and the head of the bay the water is shoal, 10 fathoms being
found at 2 miles from shore.*
The hook is covered with coarse grass, and in many places with driftwood,
showing that the sea sometimes washes over it; it is so low that it cannot be
distinguished, even in good weather, until a vessel is close upon it. From the
middle of the strait it cannot be made out unless the appearance of tbe bluff
beyond is known. At the bead of the bay is a large salt-water lagoon. Fresh
water is found on the south shore in several places, but tbe extensive flats
render it hard to obtain. The bluff, 70 feet high, comes directly to the high-
water bne, and is covered with trees. Three Indian viUages of the ClaUums-)-
existed on its shores in 1852, when a secondary astronomical station of the
Coast Survey was estabbshed near the Imdian graveyard at the head
of the harbour, the geographical position of which is lat. 48° 7' 52",
long. 123° 27' 21"; from this station the extremity of Ediz hook bears
N.E. by E., distant 2| miles.
Coal of fair quabty is reported to have been found within 3 miles of port
Angelos.
Captain G-. H. Richards, R.N. says—" Ediz hook curves from a high bluff
in an E.N.E. direction for nearly 3 nules, and forms a large and good harbour.
On tbe north or spit side the water is deep, varying from 15 to 80 fathoms;
but southward of a line drawn through tie centre there is exceUent anchorage
in from 7 to 10 fathoms in any part of tie port. The outer part of tie spit
is steep and may be closely rounded, after which the port extends for 2£ miles
in a westerly direction, by more than a mile in breadth. Although open to
easterly winds, they do not blow home. A large spar beacon painted white
has been erected on Ediz hook, which is a good guide to the entrance during
day time.
* It may be remarked here that, in every instance these remarkable shingle spits are
thrown out in the direction of the flood stream, and it is probable that thia is a rule which
obtains in every part of the world, for wherever a shingle spit is thrown out, it generally
takes the direction of the flood stream, let the prevailing winds be what they may. This
circumstance may be a useful hint, in the construction of works for preventing the growth
of shingle spits.
+ The tribes now generally but erroneously known by this name call themselves the
Nus-klai-yum; they occupy the American side of the strait from the O'ke-ho, 13 miles
from Ne6-ah bay. Their congeners are the T'sok and Sugh-us on part of the Vancouver
side.STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
227
Fresh water is to be obtained from streams on the south side of the port.
The spit is so low that at times the sea washes over it, and as it is impossible to see it at any distance, vessels would be apt at night to run on it if
passing close to the southern shore of the strait; Dungeness bght therefore
should not be brought to bear northward of E. by N. \ N., which wUl lead
more than 2 miles off, but as tbe spit is nearly 13 mile3 from the light, the
latter would not in all states of the weather be visible. At a distance of more
than 2 mUes from the shore a depth of 14 fathoms wiU be found N.N.W. from
that part of the spit which joins the main land; at night vessels should not go
within this depth."
The Coast.—From the extremity of Ediz hook to the lighthouse on New
Dungeness the bearing is N.E. by E. and distance 12J miles, being a chord
of a large but not a deep bay. From the Indian lodges abreast the entrance
of port Angelos to Green point the bearing is N.E. by E. £ E. and distance
5 miles; this coast is composed of high sandstone cliffs, mostly bare. With
reference to port Angelos, it wUl be seen that the cliffs on both sides are for
the most part bare of trees, and composed of white sandstone; whilst those
within the harbour are nearly covered with trees, and thus form a dark break
or interval in tbe white line of cUff, which is easily distinguished from seaward.
At 2 miles from the lodges there is a break in the cUff, where a smaU river or
brook finds its^Way to the beach; an Indian lodge is close to it. The beach
is mostly shingle and sand, but at low water the flat portion as weU as all the
salient points are found to consist of boulder stones ; this is particularly the
ease at Oreen point, where another small stream runs out, and a break in the
cbff affords access to the country by means of a narrow vaUey. From Green
point to the bight or turn of the bay, which is marked by another break in the
cbff, the bearing is N.E. by E. £ E. and distance 2£ miles; this part of the
coast makes a sweep or bend, and is formed of the same high and inaccessible
sandstone cliffs, as before described, and it may be remarked here that they
preserve this character all the way to the turn of the Dungeness cbffs, and
that there is but one break in them.
At high water spring tides, the sea washes the foot of these cbffs, but as
the water recedes, a road is formed by tbe fine sandy beach, which the Lidians
and wild animals prefer to forcing their way through the thick forest above
them. At 1£ mUes N.E. by E. from Green point, and £ a mile from the
beach, lies a sunken rock, having only 11 feet on it at low water, but 6 to 10
fathoms aU round; it is weU marked by kelp, and only lies in the way of
vessels working up under the lee of New Dungeness. From tbe before mentioned bight or break in the cbff, the coast runs north-easterly for 4£ nules;
of this only 2 miles are cbff, for it then makes a sudden bend to eastward for
2£ mUes, forming the base of the long, curved, Dungeness spit, which commences at the spot where the cbffs turn, and where they become less steep,
and are clothed with trees. From the termination of the above straight line,
the spit sweeps round, and runs N. 49° E. l£ miles to the point. The whole
of this spit is composed of shingle and sand, and is very narrow, except at the
northern apex of the interior lake, where the junction of the inner and outer
coast lines forms a broader and higher belt. With this exception, when the
tides are high and a strong westerly wind is blowing, the sea washes over the
whole of it, covering its summit with abundance of drift wood, amongst which
are some very large trees.
Within a supposed line connecting Ediz hook and New Dungeness, the
Q 2228
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
soundings are regular, shoaling from 18 and 25 fathoms to 5 and 8 fathoms,
the latter being at a J of a nule from tbe beach. Outside the line the soundings increase very graduaUy to 80 or 90 fathoms, but abreast the turn in the
spit tie deep water approaches very close, and continues to do so up to the
shoal that runs from tbe end of it, as much as 50 fathoms being found at less
than $ of a mUe from the beach.
Pn easterly winds, anchorage may be had in this bay, but it is too much
exposed to westerly and north-westerly winds to be recommended.
From the extreme end of Dungeness point, a shoal extends in a north-easterly direction nearly £ a mile, having only 2 to 2f fathoms over it at low water
spring tides. It is narrow, but very steep, the lead falling almost at once
from 5 or 6 fathoms just off its extremity into 20 to 80 fathoms; therefore,
when haubng round the point, be careful to give this shoal a wide berth, as
the tide sets over it with considerable strength, causing a strong overfaU, and
in bad weather a very nasty sea.
NEW DUNGENESS BAY.—The spit just described encloses a large
space available for anchorage, where shelter may be found from any winds,
from North, round by the west, to S.E., in from 5 to 10 fathoms, and even witi tie
wind at S.E.; this space is known as New Dungeness bay. The land immediately eastward of the bay around port Discovery and Protection island prevents
any great sea, which is consequently not felt tiU tie wind gets about East.
The bottom is stiff mud, forming a very tenacious holding-ground, and there is
but little tide. Very good water may be had in a cove at the bottom of the
bay close to tbe entrance of the lagoon. At low tide, however, the flat which
fills up this bight and extends some distance out is a great hindrance to a
watering-party. When going either up or down the strait, New Dungeness
bay is a more convenient place to wait for tide or dayUgbt than port Discovery,
or the anchorage under Protection island, as it is more easy of access and
egress, and has less-depth of water.
The outside of the spit has been described; the inside is precisely similar,
except that the beach, which shoals off very graduaUy, leaves a mud flat, narrow
towards the point, but graduaUy widening as it sweeps into the bigbt of tie
bay, where it extends f. of a mile off tbe shore, and is mostly dry at low water
springs, leaving, however, a very narrow channel into the lagoon. The southern part of the spit, enclosing the lagoon, is of the same character as that
outside, but narrower and not so high. The entrance to the lagoon is narrow
and choked with shoals, but at high water a small vessel may enter, and find
sufficient depth within to float her at low water. The southern side of the
entrance is formed by two points or spits, the inner one of which runs out from
the east end of the cbff before mentioned, and almost overlaps the North spit.
The outer point is the end of a spit of shingle which forms tie commencement of
tie beach that runs to the eastward and makes the coast bne in that direction.
A lighthouse coloured black and white has been erected on the extremity of
the sand spit. It is 89 feet high, and shows a fixed Ught at 100 feet above
the sea; visible 14 miles. Its geographical position is lat. 48° 10' 59", long.
123° 6' 7", and from it Striped peak bears S.W. by W. £ W., distant 21
mUes; Race rocks Ughthouse, West, 18 nules; Esquimalt harbour Ughthouse,
N. 66° W., 20 miles; Victoria harbour, N.W by W. f W., 17| nules ; Smith
island bghthouse, N. 81° E., 13£ miles; point WUson, E. by N., distant
14f miles; and Admiralty head Ughthouse, S. 73° W., 17$ nules.
Fog-beU.—Upon the outer extremity of the spit a fog-beU of 1100 lbs.STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
has been placed, and is sounded every 10 seconds during foggy or other thick
weather day and night.    The striking machinery is in a frame building, with
the front open to receive the bell, painted black, raised 80 feet abov
ground on an open structure, whitewashed.
Mr.Davidson U.S. Coast Survey thus describes New Dungeness bay "The
shore from point Angelos graduaUy curves to the north-eastward, and about
8 Or 9 miles from Ediz hook another long, low, narrow sand spit, covered with
grass, leaves the bluff shore and stretches in a general N.N.E. direction for
8% mUes, forming the north-western shore of the roadstead of New Dungeness.
On tie inside, 1 nule from tie eastern extremity, another narrow sand spit
makes l£ nules southward towards the main shore, forming a large inner shoal
:b'ay, witb a narrow opening, through which the water passes, as over a rapid
at low tide. Abreast of this point is a smaU stream, affording an abundance
of fresh water but boats must obtain their supply at low tide, and come out
when tie tide has sufficiently risen. The western side of this stream is a bluff
60 feet high, and upon it is a large village of the ClaUums. The eastern shore
of tie stream "is low, swampy, and covered with trees and brush. It forms the
southern or main shore of the roadstead, and off it lie extensive mud flats,
which are bare at low water for f of a nule, and run as far as Washington
harbour. Shoal water exists some distance outside of these flats. Soundings
of about 20 fathoms are found at a J of a mile southward of the bgbthouse,
tie depth regularly decreasing across the bay, with a soft, tenacious, muddy
bottom. The usual and best anchorage is to bring the lighthouse to bear
about N. by E. £ E., $ a mile distant, when 10 fathoms are found at £ of a
mUe broad off the beach. With the lighthouse bearing N.W. by N. f of a
nule distant, the same depth and bottom are found. The nearest shore wiU
bear South l£ miles, and the mud flat £ of a mile in the same direction. A
south-east wind drawing out of the strait blows directly into this harbour, but
the bottom wiU hold any vessel with good ground tackle. The only diffculty
wiU be to get the anchors out of the mud after riding a couple of days to a
gale. In the last position a vessel can readily get under way and clear the
point.
This point is so low that vessels bound in or out, before the erection of the
lighthouse, were upon it before they were aware of their danger. Several had
run ashore on the outside beach, and in 1855, while we were anchored close
in, with the weather thick and hazy, a vessel from Admiralty inlet had been
set out of her course by tbe currents, and came driving in with studding sails
out, and only saw her mistake and danger when the black huU of our vessel
attracted her attention.
A shoal with 2£ fathoms makes out from the end of the point for £ a mile,
and a heavy tide-rip runs over it at the change of the currents.
Tides.—The approximate corrected establishment is 3h. 3m., and the
approximate mean rise and fall of tides 5 feet."
From New Dungeness harbour the coast trends in an E. by N. direction
14f nules to WUson point on the east side of the entrance to Admiralty inlet,
the channel leading to Puget sound. Within this space are Washington and
Discovery harbours, of which the latter is the easternmost.
WASHINGTON HARBOUR.—From New Dungeness roadstead to
the entrance of this harbour the immediate shore is low, flat, covered with
trees, and bordered by an extensive mud flat; but behind it, at a very short
distance, rises a level plateau."   The bluff at the N.E. point of the harbour is280
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA,
seen from Dungeness point. The entrance to the harbour is nearly closed by
a low sand spit stretching across it from the east almost to the west coast,
where a narrow channel way exists having a depth of 2 fathoms through it;
this cannot be seen from Dungeness point, which is 6£ mUes from it in a
N.W. direction, on account of the outward curving of the intermediate shore.
Inside of this spit are soundings of 17 fathoms shoaling to 8 fathoms as the head
of the harbour is approached. The width of the harbour is a bttle over a nule,
and its length is about 3 nules; its general direction is S.E. by S. The
depth at a mile outside of the sand spit is 10 to 12 fathoms, deepening rapidly
to 30 and 35, with a bottom of stiff mud. The Indian name of the bay .is
S'quim, by which it is generally known to the settlers.
Protection Island.—The western extremity of this island Ues E. f S., distant
7|- miles from Dungeness Ughthouse, whence it extends If mUes N.E- i E.;
it is a narrow island, curved outward to the strait, and having a low point at
each end, with shoal water stretching from the western. Its sides are very
steep, and about 200 feet high, the seaward part covered with timber, and
that towards port Discovery undulating and covered with fern. It Ues 2 mUes
directly off (N.W.) tbe entrance to port Discovery. Southward of it is
very deep water, but northward or outside it a Une of kelp, about £ a nule out,
marks the 4-fathom curve, and from this a bank runs out N.N.W. for 3 miles,
having from 5 to 15 fathoms upon it, with a shoal spot of 3 and 4 fathoms at
about 2 nules from the island. Upon this bank, named DaUas bank, is good
anchorage with light airs and strong adverse currents; the bottom is irregular
and faUs off suddenly.
Protection island, with ports Angelos and New Dungeness, affords the first
examples of the pecubar feature of low, sandy, and graveUy points covered
with coarse grass and bushes, making out from the high clffs, where the
tendency of strong currents would seem to be to cut them off.
It was caUed Protection island by Vancouver in 1792, and on account of its
position in relation to port Discovery is very aptly named.
PORT DISCOVERY.—From Dungeness light the west side of the
entrance to port Discovery, called Challam point, bears E. by S. -J S., distant
9 miles. From Washington harbour the distance is 4 miles;—the intermediate
shore is composed of high steep cbffs. Cape George, tbe eastern point of the
entrance, bears N.E. |E. 1| nules from Challam point, and is a steep bluff
rising directly from the water. The average width of the bay is nearly If
nules for 9 miles of its length, and then decreases rapidly to tie Salmon river
at its head. It makes four general courses from the entrance to the head, as
follows : If miles South, 4 miles E. by S. $ S., 2£ miles S. by E„ and
If mUes S.W. by S. The shores are abrupt, and covered with wood to their
edges, and the projecting part3 are all terminated by low points stretching out
short distances. On the second point, on tbe eastern side,*|were the remains
of an extensive stockaded village of the ClaUums in 1856 Mount Chatham
Ues off the south-western part of the bay, and reaches a height of 2100 feet.
When weU in this bay Protection island so completely shuts up the entrance
as to make it appear as a large lake. The great drawback to this port is the
depti of water, which in mid-channel is not less in any place than 25 fathoms,
and in some is 40 fathoms. Under the second low point on the east side the
surveyors could not find less than 25 fathoms at a few ship's lengths from the
beach, but found good anchorage in 20 fathoms, soft bottom, on the western
shore, 2 miles S.S.E. from Challam point, and abreast of a low swampy beach.STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
231
At the head of the bay it contracts in width, the water shoals, a large mud flat
exists for the last mile, and the shores become higher, but in places the hills
retreat, and give a scanty space for a few settlers' cabins. For a few years
after the settling of San Francisco many vessels came here for pUes and spars;
but a saw-null has been buUt here.
Vancouver says " The projecting points in port Discovery usuaUy acquire a
form somewhat circular, though irregular; and, in general, are nearly steep-to,
extending from the cliffy woodland country, from 100 to 600 yards towards
the water's edge, and are composed of a loose sandy soU. The surface of some
was almost entirely occupied by a lagoon of salt water, or brackish swamp;
others were perfectly dry; no one of them produced any trees; but were
mostly covered with a coarse spiry grass, interspersed with strawberries, two
or three Bpecies of clover, samphire, and a great variety of other smaU plants,
some of which bore very beautiful flowers. On a few of tie points were some
shrubs that seemed to thrive excessively, such as roses, a species of sweet-
briar, gooseberries, raspberries, currants, and other smaU bushes, which in
their respective seasons, produce most probably the several fruits common to
this and the opposite side of America. These aU appeared to grow very
luxuriantly ; and, from the quantity of blossoms with which they were loaded,
there is great reason to bebeve them very productive.
We had Utile, trouble in clearing a sufficient space for our encampment,
which was commodiously situated, close to the north side of the stream or
brook. In my excursion up tie harbour, I found that it extended about 4
nules from the ship, and then terminated in a muddy flat across its bead,
about a J of a nule from the shore. The water, which was 7 fathoms deep
close to the flat, graduaUy deepened to 10, 20, and 30 fathoms, good holding-
ground. On this bank were found some smaU indifferent oysters. The shores
beyond it are low and thickly wooded, and through them there appeared to ran
a very considerable stream of water, with several smaUer ones, emptying themselves into the harbour. The back country had the appearance of a swampy
fen for a considerable distance. We landed not far from the largest rivulet,
where we found a deserted viUage, capable of containing about 100 inhabitants."
If port Discovery lies under any disadvantage it is its great depth of water;
but tie bottom is exceUent holding-ground, and free from rocks. Towards'
the upper part of the harbour it decreases in depth, and there is perhaps not
a more ebgible spot for riding than off the first low sandy point on the western
shore, about 4^- nules from the entrance; here Vancouver anchored, and
obtained suppbes of wood and water. Tbe country in tbe neighbourhood of
the port is of moderate height, although bounded on the west side by mountains
covered with snow, to which the land from the water's edge rises, in a pleasing
diversity, by hiUs of gradual ascent. The snow on these hills probably dissolves as tie summer advances, for pine trees are produced on their very
summits. On the sea shore the land generally terminates in low sandy cliffs ;
though in some spaces of considerable extent it runs nearly level from higb
water mark. There are few places where the variety and beauty of the flowers
are so great as they are iere; tbe general character of the soU around this harbour
is a thin, black, vegetable mould, with a substratum of sand and gravel. The
vigour and luxuriance of its productions prove it to be a rich fertile mould, which
might possibly be considerably improved by the addition of tbe calcareous
matter contained in the marrow-stone that presents itself in many plaees.282
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
f r
The trees grow so closely, that in some places the woods are almost impenetrable. The timber consists principaUy of pine, fir, and spruce. Of the latter
there are two species, one of which resembles the hemlock-spruce of the United
States; it has a very tall growth, and puts out but few, and those but small
lateral branches. Some maple-trees grow in the open ground' and on the
banks, but they are too smaU to be of any service to the settler.
Port Discovery was visited in 1841, by Com. Wilkes, U.S. Navy, who
remarks:—| After passing Protection island, an extensive bay opened, on the
shores of which we saw the long poles mentioned by Vancouver, and represented
in his book. The use of these he was unable to discover, but tbe Indians
informed us that they were for the purpose of suspending nets for taking the
wild-fowl that frequent these shores in great numbers. On these poles the
nets are set up at night, at which time the geese search these grounds for
food; fires are then Ughted, which alarm the birds, and cause them to fly
against the nets, by which they are thrown upon the ground, where, before
they have time to recover themselves, they are caught and killed.
The description of Vancouver is so exactly applicable to the present state
of this port, that it was difficult to bebeve that almost half a century had
elapsed since it was written. The beautiful woods and lawns of Protection
island, in particular, exist unchanged. The lawns stiU produce the same
beautiful flowers and shrubs, and though closely surrounded by dense woods,
do not seem to have been encroached upon by their luxuriant growth, although
there is no apparent reason why it should not, long ere this, have overrun
them.
The name of port Discovery was given by Vancouver.    Protection island
covers it completely to the north, and would render it easfly defensive against
■ the most formidable attack.    The only objection to it as a harbour is the
great depth of the water, which in the middle is nowhere less than 40 or 50
fathoms, and is often as much as 16 fathoms close to the shore."
Point Wilson.—At about 6 miles eastward from port Discovery is point
WUson, tbe western point of the entrance to Adtniralty inlet. From Dungeness light it bears E. by N., distant nearly 15 miles, this course passing over
the outer edge of the 3-fathom shoal (Dallas bank) off Protection island.
The extremity of the point is composed of low sandy hUlocks, covered with
coarse grass; but west of it the hill rises 200 or 300 feet, and again falls
" inshore. This appearance is weU seen in approaching it from the strait, and
is a good mark. Between the point and port Discovery the shore is high,
with steep yellow cliffs, and about midway a sbghtly projecting angle is
formed, caUed Middle point. To the north-west of the point 15 fathoms can
be obtained a mile from the shore, but tie water shoals suddenly, and when
running in a fog the lead must be kept going. Off the eastern end of the
point 20 fathoms can be got at a ship's length from shore. During ebb tides
a very strong eddy current sets to the eastward along shore between port
Discovery and point Wilson. The surveyors state that " in 1855, when
coming out of the inlet on the large ebb, with scarcely any wind, we kept
outside of the rip showing the line of the eddy. A vessel 2 or 3 miles ahead
was in the eddy at the same time. We were carried past Protection island,
but she was drifted back to point Wilson. The Indians when bound to
Dungeness keep weU out in the ebb."
The country between ports Discovery and Townshend of which point
Wilson is tbe northern extremity, consists of a peninsula 3 miles in breadthSTRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
283
and 10 nules in length, offering great advantages as a location for a town.
It is known as Quimper peninsula.
NORTH SHORE OF THE STRAIT TO CHATHAM ISLANDS.
From point BoniUa to Owen point, the western head of the entrance to
San Juan bay, the shore runs 13 miles in an E. £ N. direction. It is nearly
straight, rocky, and bluff, with high mountains rising immediately behind it,
and all heavuy wooded. A depth of from 10 to 20 fathoms is found within
i a mile of the shore. Vessels are apt to lose much of the wind when close
under eitier store of tie strait, and at present it is impossible to say where
the strongest currents run.
SAN JUAN BAY.—This is the first bay on the north side of Juan
de Fuca strait eastward of BoniUa point. It is a good roadstead with all
winds from tie land, but not with those from south-westward as it is
quite exposed to that quarter, and when the wind blows with any strength in
the offing a heavy sea is sent in. Although tbe sweU can generaUy be
avoided to some extent by anchoring well within the bay, at a moderate
distance from either side, it js not considered advisable to remain when there
is an indication of the wind veering to the south-westward, but to weigh
immediately and seek shelter either in Nee-ah harbour or in some convenient
bay within the strait. Nee-ah harbour bears S. by W. 10£ nules from this
bay.
Port San Juan can be recognized from a considerable distance, in consequence of the opening making as a deep gap between two mountain ranges.*
From the bgbthouse on Tatoosh island (cape Classet), the centre of the
entrance bears N.N.E. i E., and Observatory rocks off the east point of
entrance N.E. by N. f N., distant 14f mUes. The Ught is visible from the
anchorage, and is of service to vessels entering or leaving the bay.
The west point of port San Juan is known as point Owen. It has some
rocks about it, and a low flat rock, named Owen island, Ues off it at rather
more than a cable's length; this island is awash at high water, and at a very
short distance from its south side is a depth of 8 fathoms. Within the bay,
on this (its west) side, are other rocks and broken ground to the distance of
about a mile from Owen island ; and extending out 2 cable's length from the.
shore. Tbe outermost of the rocks is a small patch awash at low tide
situated N.E. i E., 4 cable's from Owen island, and as much as 2f cable's
length from the shore ; as there is a depth of 4 fathoms, rapidly deepening to
6 and 7 fathoms, close to this rock, it requires some care to avoid.
The east point of port San Juan is distant about lj miles E. £ N. from
tbe west point, and is readily known by the Observatory rocks (some high
pinnacles having a few trees growing on them, and about and around which
are other rocks) a short distance off it. At nearly i a mile northward from
these rocks, and on the same side of the bay, a reef, partly above water and
named Hammond rocks, extends out from the shore H cable's length.
* Mr. Davidson, U.S. Coast Survey says " The sides of port San Juan are steep, high,
and backed by heavily timbered hills and mountains. At a distance in very clear weather
it is difficult to distinguish the entrance unless one is acquainted with the locality, but in
moderately hazy weather the indentation is readily made out. "When steering up the bay
a mid-channel course clears everything well."234
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
From the entrance the bay runs nearly 8£ miles in a N.E. by N. direction,
and maintains throughout a breadth of l£ miles. Its head consists of a beach
of muddy sand, at the north end of which is Gordon river, and at the southern
end Cooper inlet; these streams are sufficiently deep at high water to permit
the entrance of vessels of Ught draught.    On the south bank of the river
Gordon is an Indian viUage named Onismah.
The
soundings
at the entrance to port San Juan, midway between Owen
island and Observatory rocks, are 18 to 11 fathoms. From this depth they
gradually decrease towards its head, where at £ of a mile from the beach is a
depth of 14 to 17 feet; in this latter part the sea breaks during heavy gales.
Throughout the bay the bottom
A sweU usually prevails in the entrance,
consists of fine muddy sand.
The usual place of anchorage is in 7 to 6 fathoms at about If miles from
the head of the bay, with Owen island bearing S.W. and Adze head (the
second projecting point of the east shore, from Hammond reef) E.S.E.
The approximate geographical position of Observatory rocks is lat.
48° 81' 30", long. 124° 26' 38".*
The Coast.—From port San Juan the shore of Vancouver island trends
east 24 miles to Sherringham point, and presents no very remarkable features;
tie country is thickly wooded, and the land rises to a considerable elevation.
At 8 miles eastward of port San Juan is Providence cove, a smaU inlet only
fit for boats; and at the distance of 7 mUes farther eastward, in a small
bight, is a stream named Sombrio river. The river Jordon, a considerable
stream, is 18£ miles eastward from port San Juan, and 5£ miles westward
from Sherringham point. The soundings off this coast so far as Sombrio
river are deep and not very regular, being from 16 to 20 fathoms at a mile
from the shore, then suddenly dropping into 50 and 60 fathoms. Between
Sombrio river and the river Jordan the depti is 7 to 10 fathoms at a mfle
from tie land; off the latter river tie depth of 10 fathoms extends further
out than 2 miles. At a mile southward from Sherringham point are soundings of 40 to 50 fathoms.
Eastward of Sherringham point the shore curves a little to the northward,
and at the distance of 4£ miles in an E. J N. direction is Otter point. From
Otter point the entrance to S°°ke inlet is E. by N. £ N., distant 8f miles,
the intervening coast forming rather a deep indentation named Sooke bay, in
which vessels may anchor in fine weather at rather more than ^ a mile from
the shore in 8 fathoms. GeneraUy speaking tie projecting points on the
north side of tie strait are not remarkable nor easuy distinguished unless
viewed from close in shore ; some of their extremes are partially bare of frees.
Vessels running or working up the strait at night should be careful not to get
so near the north shore as to shut in Race island Ught by Beechey head.
SOOKE INLET.—This is a narrow channel, 8£ nules long, leading
into a wide basin 2 mUes in extent, which is perfectly landlocked, and has a
depth of 10 to 15 fathoms. The inlet is difficult to navigate, on account of
its winding direction.    On its northern side the water is shallow, and sends
* The Observatory rocks are 17' 15" east of Tatoosh island lighthouse, considered to be
in long. 124° 43' 48". From the observations of Captain G-. H. Richards, R.N., the
Pinnacle rook, north side of the bay, is in long. 124° 27' 37", supposing Duntze head,
Esquimalt harbour to be in long. 123° 26' 45". Unfortunately the Pinnacle rock is not
mentioned in the Admiralty plan of port San Juan (No. 1910).STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
285
off several spits of shingle, one of which joins Whiffin island, so that tie
entrance is Umited to a few yards in width. The depth is from 8 to 9 fathoms,
and the course in is along the eastern shore; but such is the strength of the
tides, and the intricacy of tie channel, that it is recommended not to attempt
to enter without a pUot.
Vessels may anchor in 10 fathoms at i a mile outside the entrance of Sooke
inlet, and, if necessary for shelter, may with a fair wind run inside Whiffin
island, where there is sufficient space to anchor.
Whiffin island is low, graveUy, and as afready noticed is always connected
with the western shore of the islet. Its eastern point (bearing N.N.E. distant
f of a nule from the centre, between the two entrance points) must be rounded
close, leaving it on the port hand, as a reef lies only i a cable eastward from
it. On rounding the point drop the anchor at a cable's length within in
8 fathoms; here there is a space of deep water 2 cable's in extent.
From the depth of 10 fathoms outside the entrance to Sooke inlet a high
hiU on tie eastern side of the inlet, named mount Maguire, will bear
about N.E. It is partiaUy covered witi trees, but the bare rock shows
distinctly in many places, and this feature now commences to distinguish the
south-east part of Vancouver island. The shore in many places is bare and
rocky, witi patches of land covered with fern and destitute of trees, and the
houses of settlers begin to appear.
Secretary Island.—On the eastern side of Sooke inlet, and at l£ cable's
length from the coast, is Secretary island, a small, but bold rocky islet,
separated from the shore by soundings of 15 to 16 fathoms. Its approximate
geographical position is lat. 48° 19' 85"., long. 123° 42' 40"* The depth at
l£ miles southward of it, is 80 to 90 fathoms.
BECHER BAY.—From Secretary islano* to Beechey head, the west
point of entrance to Becher bay, the distance is 2£ mues in an E. £ S.
direction. The shore between is bold and steep, and has deep water almost
close to it. The head, a bold wooded cbff, has soundings of 40 to 50 fathoms
immediately off it; around it the currents have very great strength, hence
more than ordinary care is required when seeking anchorage in Becher bay.-J-
When bound eastward through the strait, the land about this headland should
have a berth of 2 nules if it be intended to pass southward of Race islands.
The approximate geographical position of the iead is, lat. 48° 18' 30", long.
123° 39' 27".*
Becher bay has an extent of l£ miles. Its east point, cape Church, is
distant from Beechey head 2f miles in an E. by N. i N. direction. The bay,
as an anchorage, cannot be recommended as it is open and exposed to tbe
full force of southerly winds. About and around it are high rocky bibs, and
even in fine weather inconvenience is occasioned by the strong gusts which
descend from the mountains; vessels bound westward through the strait and
meeting with a southerly wind are therefore recommended to seek in preference the anchorage in Parry bay, as they wiU then be sheltered from heavy
seas by Race islands.
* Dependent upon Duntze head, Esquimalt harbour, being in long. 123° 26' 45". The
Indian name of the inlet is T'sok.
+ " The currents go by Beechey head with a rush. In this vicinity'.we recollect the
instance of a United States revenue cutter striking the bold shore with her flying jib-boom,
and only striking her forefoot after the jib-boom had been carried away." Mr. Davidson,
U.S. Coast Survey.286
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
II
Hi
it
Off cape Church are three rocky islets, of which the outermost bears the
name of Church island; this has a depth of 9 fathoms close to it, rapidly
deepening to 25 and 40 fathoms, the latter being at about \ of a nule from it.
Westward of these, and on the eastern side of the bay, are several smaU
wooded islands, caUed the Bedford islands. Within the bay are Frazer and
Wolfe islands with some small islets about them; the easternmost and largest
island is that named Frazer,—the westernmost is Wolfe island. Some small
islets also Ue in the eastern part of tbe bay, close to tbe shore.
The depth at the entrance to Becher bay, midway between Bedford islands
and the western shore, is 50 to 40 fathoms on a rocky and irregular bottom;
thence it graduaUy decreases to 9 and 6 fathoms at its head. The passage
in is between Frazer and Wolfe islands and is 4 cables' length wide. From
these islands the course to the anchorage is north-easterly about f of a nule.
The usual place of anchorage'is at about f of a mile N.N.E. from the centre
of Frazer island in 10 fathoms at low water.
Bentinck Island.—From Becher bay to Bentinck island, off the south-
easternmost part of Vancouver island, the coast trends irregularly 2£ utiles.
This island is rather more than \ a nule in extent, is about 100 feet high,
and, like the adjacent land, covered with pine trees ; its southern and eastern
sides are fringed with kelp, outside of which it is believed there are no sunken
dangers.    Its shape is very irregular, as it is almost divided in the middle.
The harrow channel between Bentinck island and the shore is so thickly
strewn with rocks so as to be scarcely navigable; it is however sometimes
traversed by boats. Coasters who are weU acquainted with the locality
occasionally anchor in the eastern entrance to this channel, and obtain shelter
from southerly winds. The currents hereabout have great strength, and also
.run through the passage witiAonsiderable velocity.
Race Islands.—These are a cluster of low, rocky islets, the larger of
which are about 10 in number, situated a short distance south-eastward of
Bentinck island. The outermost and largest islet is 5 miles E. by N. from
Beechey head, and 1 mUe S.E. from Bentinck island. Tbe extent of the
group is rather more than \ a mile north and south, and the same east and
west, and all the islets are bare of trees or bushes, grass only growing on the
principal ones. Tbe bottom for about i a mile from them in a south-easterly
direction is irregular, with points of rock in 5 fathoms. Tbe tides among
them run from 3 to 6 knots per hour, and during bad weather heavy and
dangerous races occur; it is consequently a very difficult neighbourhood for
saUing vessels during calms. In light winds the islands should have a good
berth, especially when eastward of them, as the ebb sets strongly towards
them. In I860 a large vessel was drifted on them by the ebb tide in a calm,
and became a total loss.
The outermost, or Great Race islet, is lj cable's in extent and 25 feet
high. It should always have a berth given to it of about a mile, at which
distance is a depth of from 40 to 50 fathoms; it may, however, be rounded
at a less distance, the outermost danger from it, the Rosedale rock, 5 feet
under water, being nearly \ a mile from it in a S.E. by E. direction.
The Ughthouse on the Great Race islet consists of a keeper's dwelling of
stone with a tower of the same material, the latter being painted with alternate horizontal black and white bands. It exhibits, at an elevation of
118 feet above the mean level of the sea, a light flashing every 10 seconds,
visible in clear weather at a distance of 18 miles.    Its approximate geograph
ical position is lat. 48° 17' 45", long. 123°
From it, the light atLLr ... •■ i- -
§£ 'ScMB" JSEHaJCTO
;^'«i>
m\*s8%*'i
KSP'<5«
Im
fe&&
^
-£?;"*
$a&-»/
V:
at about f of a mile from the shore, and find good shelter from all windsSTRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
287
8 \ miles;  entrance to Victoria
islands N.E. by N., 10* miles:
island
miles.
Ught N. 65°
Attached to
E.,
tie
Esquimalt harbour bears North, distant
harbour N. by E. + E., 9 nules; Trial
Discovery island N.E. by N., 15 miles; Smith
|26£ miles; and New Dungeness Ught East, 18
lighthouse is a fog-bell.
The channel between Bentinck island and Race islets is nearly -J- a nule
wide, and with the exception of some rocks (covered at high water) at a
cable's length westward of the nortt islet, is believed to be free from danger;
its least depth is 14 fathoms. This passage may be taken by a steamer;
but it is not recommended for a sailing vessel under ordinary circumstances,
on account of tie strength of the tides, and races caused by the irregular
rocky bottom. A case may arise, however, either inward or outward bound,
when a vessel overtaken by a strong S.E. wind would do better to run through
than risk weathering the Great Race by less than a mile; if so the Bentinck
island shore should be kept aboard at a distance of 2 cables, or just outside
tie kelp, for the north islet which forms the southern side of tie passage, is
only 11 feet above water at high tide, and the strongest tides and eddies are
found in its neighbourhood.    The course through is N.N.E. and S.S.W.
PEDDER BAY.—L-nmediately northward of Bentinck island is Pedder
bay, an inlet having an extent of nearly 2 miles in a W.N.W. direction. It
is about f of a nule wide at the entrance, where is a depth of 18 to 7 fathoms,
and decreases rapidly in width and depth towards its head; its western part
is consequently only avaUable for vessels of Ught draught. As this bay is quite
exposed to easterly winds, it should only be frequented when the wind is
from southward and westward; it is a convenient stopping place for awaiting
the turn of the tide off Race islets.
The usual place of anchorage for ordinary vessels is in 7 fathoms with
cape Calver, tie south point of the bay, bearing S.E. by S., distant about
£ a mile. The holding ground is good. Close to the cape is a small patch
of 3 fathoms.
In the narrow part of tie bay is a depth of 4 to 2 fathoms, and this
graduaUy decreases to 7 feet at its head. The upper part of tie bay is
therefore rarely visited except by boats.
Parry Bay.—Immediately northward of WiUiam head, the north point
of Pedder bay, is Parry bay, an open roadstead facing the east. Its north
point, Albert head, is moderately high and slopes to the sea, it is also bare
of trees at its extremity but wooded immediately behind; at a cable's length
from it is a reef. William bead somewhat resembles it, but is lower. The
depth off tiese teadlands is too great for anchorage.
The soundings in Parry bay graduaUy decrease from 20 fathoms at f of a
nule from tie shore, to 6 and 5 fathoms at l£ cable's length from the beach.
The usual anchorage is in 9 fathoms witi WiUiam head bearing S.W. by S.,
distant from £ to f of a mue. With a south-easterly wind there is ample
room to get under way, which a vessel should immediately do, and if not able
to round Race islands and proceed to sea, should run for Esquimalt harbour.
The shelter in Parry bay is from westerly winds, and the ground holds
weU.    AU winds from eastward, between North and S.E. blow directly in.
ESQUIMALT HARBOUR.—From Albert head the coast trends
northward nearly 8 miles to Esquimalt harbour, the space between forming
what is known as Royal Roads. Here vessels may anchor in 10 to 12 fathoms,
at about f of a mile from the shore, and find good shelter from all winds238
STRAIT OT JUAN DE FUCA.
except those from eastward and south-eastward. A berth that is recommended
is at about a mile S.S.E. £ E. from Fisgard light, as the harbour will then
be open and can be entered if necessary.
The lighthouse on Fisgard island, on tie western side of entrance to
Esquimalt iarbour, shows a fixed light at 65 feet above the sea, visible
10 miles. The Ught shows white between the bearings from it of S. f E.,
easterly, to S.E. by E. ■£■ E., and red from S.E. by E. \ E. easterly and
northerly to N. by W. f W.; hence when approaching tie harbour a vessel
is in safety so long as the white bght is visible.
" Esquimalt harbour * is a safe and excellent anchorage for ships of any
size, and witi the aid of the Ught on Fisgard island may be entered at all
times with great facility. The entrance, which bears North 8£ nules from
the Ughthouse on Great Race island, is between Fisgard island and Duntze
head, and is 3 cables' in breadth, opening out immediately within.
The only dangers are the Scrogg rocks which lie on tie eastern side, =S.S.E.,
3 cables from Duntze head, and cover at three-quarters flood. Inskip islands
kept weU open of the head leads clear to the. westward of them, but«the best
mark for entering witi a leading wind is Thetis cottage, a conspicuous white
btulding on Dyke point, just upon or on witi the western Inskip rock, bearing
N. by W. f W., which leads in mid channel.
Fisgard island should not be passed within less than a cable's length,
keeping just without the kelp, which extends about £ a cable eastward of it,
for a rock with 7 feet water over it Ues f of a cable north-east of the Ughthouse.
Vessels entering the harbour at night with a strong wind after them should
take care to shorten saU in time, as tbe space for rounding to is somewhat
limited; and it is desirable to moor if any stay is intended, as the winds are
changeable.
The best time to leave the harbour is early in the morning, when either a
calm or light land wind may be expected; there is Utile strength of tide in
the harbour, or for some distance without, and it sets fairly in and out.
The strongest and most frequent gales blow from S.W. and S.E. which are
leading winds in, but rarely from N.W. The S.W. is a summer wind, generaUy fresh, and brings fine weather, unless it blows a gale. S.E. winds may
be looked for during the winter months, or between November and March,
and generally a strong gale once in a month with rain and thick weather*
The N.E. wind rarely blows with much strength, and always brings fine clear
weather; a direct South wind, to wbich some parts of the harbour are open,
seldom blows, and there is never sufficient swell to render the anchorage
inconvenient.
Whale Rock.—The Whale rock witi only 7 feet on it at low water, Ues
W. £ N., 2 cables from Inskip islands, or nearly midway between them and
the western shore of the harbour. This rock is of small extent, and not
marked by kelp; it has a clear passage on either side, that to the eastward
being the widest. Yew and Rodd points, just touching, point to the rock;
Yew point, just touching the Ughthouse on Fisgard island, S. by E. f E.,
leads nearly a cable's length westward; and when Ashe head is weU shut in
by Inskip islands, a vessel wUl be clear to the northward.
• The instructions for Esquimalt and Viotoria harbours and the coast to Chatham islands
are from the Vancouver Island Pilot, 1864.STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
289
Anchorage.—The most convenient anchorage is in Constance cove, on the
eastern side of tie harbour, immediately round Duntze head, the general depth
being 6 fathoms, and the holding ground good; there is, however, safe anchorage in any part of the harbour, in not less than 4£ fathoms, as far northward
as Dyke point. A cable's length above this point the water shoals to
3 fathoms, and from thence to the head of the harbour is a flat with only a
few feet on it at low water.
Thetis cove in Plumper bay, on tbe eastern side, immediately north of
Constance cove, is a snug aneborage, with the harbour entrance just shut in
by Inskip rocks, in 4£ fathoms; but vessels proceeding above these rocks must
take care to avoid the Whale rock.
Water may be obtained during the winter months without difficulty from
the many streams that empty themselves into the different bays, caused by
the great quantity of rain which usuaUy falls at that season ; but in summer
watering is a tedious process, and boats must be sent either to Rowe stream,
at the head of the harbour, or to the salt lagoon just outside the entrance.
Both offer difficulties, unless at or near high water.
Water, however, might be conveyed at all seasons, and at a trifling expense,
from the chain of lakes just over the western side of the harbour, near
Colwood farm.
VICTORIA HARBOUR is a Utile more than 2 mUes eastward of
Esquimalt, with its entrance between Ogden and MacLaughbn points.
Macaulay or Sailor point, a remarkable projection nearly midway between the
two harbours, is a bare flat point about 30 feet high, showing as a yeUow
clay cUff, worn by the action of the sea and weather into a rounded nob at the
extreme. The coast on either side of this point for a mile is fringed with
sunken rocks, and is dangerous for boats in bad weather, many fatal accidents
having occurred.
The entrance to this harbour is shoal, narrow, and intricate, and with
S.W. or S.E. gales a heavy roUing sweU sets on the coast, which renders the
anchorage outside unsafe, while vessels of burthen cannot run in for shelter
unless at or near high water. Vessels drawing 14 or 15 feet water may,
under ordinary circumstances, enter at such times of tide, and ships drawing
17 feet have entered, though only at the top of spring tides.
The channel is buoyed, but it is necessary to take a pilot, and the space
is so confined and tortuous that a long ship has considerable difficulty in
making the necessary turn; a large per-centage of vessels entering the port,
smaU as weU as large, constantly run aground from these causes, or from
trying to enter at an improper time of tide, or neglecting to take a pilot.
Such accidents, however, are seldom attended with more than delay and inconvenience, as the shoalest and most intricate part of the passage is sheltered;
when within, the port is perfectly land-locked, and vessels may lie in from 14
to 18 feet at low water, but the harbour accommodation is limited.
Doubtless Victoria harbour is susceptible of improvement by artificial
means, though it is improbable that it can ever be made a safe and convenient
port of entry for vessels of even moderate tonnage, at all times of tide and
weather, and it appears not a little remarkable that with the exceUent harbour
of Esquimalt within 2 miles, Victoria should have been continued as the
commercial port of a rising colony, whose interests cannot but suffer materiaUy
from the risks and delays which shipping must encounter in approaching the
commercial capital.240
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
Victoria was selected by the Hudson's bay company as the depot of their
estabbshments in consequence of the quantity of clear good land in tie
immediate neighbourhood, and tie harbour being sufficiently spacious for tie
few smaU vessels in their employ; as a site, in these respects, it was
admirably chosen, but it has been a fatal mistake at a later date not to have
adopted Esquimalt as the commercial port.
Victoria is a free port, the government site, and the largest and most
important town in these colonies. It enjoys a considerable foreign and coasting trade, which is annuaUy increasing. The resident population is upwards
of 4000, and the town has made great progress since 1858, when it may be
said to have sprung into existence; it now covers a large extent of ground,
substantial and handsome stone and brick buildings everywhere replacing
the wooden structures first erected. %
Along the eastern side of tie iarbour in front of the town there are about
400 yards of fair wharfage, with a depth of from 10 to 16 feet at low water
spring tides. Between Songhies and Limit points on the opposite side of the
harbour is a smaU sUp capable of receiving vessels of about 200 tons burthen;
larger vessels, however, may heave down alongside the wharves.
Supplies.—Provisions of all kinds, and of an excellent quality, may be procured at nearly the same prices as in England, and water is to be had from
a floating tank capable of going outside tie iarbour, the charge for it being
about 4s. 2d. per ton. Suppbes for refitting and repairing vessels, except
timber, are scarce and expensive, but of fair quabty. Coals are plentiful,
varying in price from 25 to 40 shillings per ton.
Anchorage.—Vessels anchoring outside the harbour to wait for the tide, or
from other causes, should not come within a line between Ogden and Mac-
Laugblin points, the former being W. £ N., the latter E. £ S., midway
between, or a f of a nule from either; this is a good stopping place with
off-shore winds or fine weather, but is by no means recommended as a safe
anchorage for sailing vessels during the winter months, when bad weather
may be looked for with bttle warning.
Pilots.—There are three or four pUots attached to the port, who keep a
good look out for vessels off tie entrance. PUotage is compulsory to all
merchant vessels, except coasters, but the charges are moderate.
Brotehy Ledge.—About 4 cables from Holland point, and right in the
fairway of vessels entering Victoria harbour from the eastward, Ues the
Brotehy ledge with 5 feet on its shoalest part; it is covered with kelp, and
about a cable in extent within the 5 fathom line. There are 9 fathoms
between the ledge and the shore.
A spar buoy, painted white, marks this ledge. It Ues in 12 feet water
with the beacons on Beacon hill in line, bearing N.E. by E.; Odgen point
N. £ W., distant 5 cables ; and Holland point N.E. 4 cables. The buoy is
occasionally washed away during the heavy winter gales.
Fisgard island Ughthouse, the north part of Brothers island, and Macaulay
point in Une W. f N., leads a cable north of the ledge in 9 fathoms, between
it and the shore ; and the Ughthouse, just open southward of Brothers island
W. by N. f N., leads 2 cables .south of the ledge in 21 fathoms.
In entering and leaving Victoria iarbour keep either of tie above marks on,
tiU past tie Une of the beacons on Beacon hiU in Une, when a vessel wiU be
clear of the ledge. Coasters, and those acquainted with tbe place, usually go
north of it.STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
241
General Remarks.—After rounding Race island bghthouse at the distance
of a mile, the course for Esquimalt harbour is N. £ W. 8£ miles. The lighthouse on Fisgard island is very conspicuous, and will be seen immediately on
rounding the Race islands; a course direct for it wfll clear aU dangers, but
attention must be paid to the set of the tides. " The ebb runs almost directly
from tie Haro and neighbouring straits towards the Race islands, and a
sailing vessel unless with a commanding wind should give them a berth of
more than a mUe, and steer N.E. by N. for 3 or 4 miles, before she bears up
for the harbour; the flood sets in the opposite direction to the N.E., and with
light winds vessels are bable to be carried to the eastward, and if near to the
Vancouver island shore, up Haro channel, where the water is generaUy too
deep for anchorage; therefore with the flood the coast of Parry bay should be
kept aboard if possible, where good anchorage may be had in moderate
with all westerly winds, less than a mile from the shore in 10
and
weather
fathoms.
By night,
boldly for it.
when Fisgard
island light bears N. by W., a vessel may steer
The only precaution necessary is to keep the white bght in full
view; if it becomes dim or shaded, she is getting too near the shore, and
should immediately haul out to the eastward until it is again distinctly seen;
the two lights by their bearings will immediately.show a vessel how she is
being affected by the tides.
Entering Esquimalt harbour, the Fisgard island light should be left from
1 to 2 cables on the port hand ; when it bears N.W. by W. £ W. the light
changes from white to red, and shows the latter colour within the harbour;
and when it bears S. by W. at a convenient distance, a vessel may anchor in
7 fathoms, or stand into Constance cove if preferred. The Scrogg rocks on
the eastern side of the entrance of the harbour must be avoided ; they bear
E.S.E. from Fisgard island distant nearly 4 cables. If not desiring to enter
tbe harbour at night, good anchorage may be had in Royal roads in 9 fathoms;
Fisgard island light bearing N. by W. from £ a mile to a mUe.
The entrance of Victoria harbour being only 2 miles eastward of Esquimalt,
the same precautions are necessary as regards the tides. The course from a
mile off the Race islands is N. £ E.; during day-time Christ church, a conspicuous white buUding with a spire, and standing on an eminence, will be
seen shortly after rounding these islands, bearing N. by E.; it should be kept
just on the starboard bow. At night or during bad weather it is strongly recommended not to run for this harbour, as it can only be entered at certain stages
of tbe tide, 'and the anchorage outside is at such times exposed and unsafe,
while Royal bay or Esquimalt harbour is always available and safe; but if it
is decided to run for Victoria, it must be borne in mind that when Fisgard
island Ught changes from white to red, a vessel wfll be very near the shore.
The Coast.—The coast from Victoria harbour trends in an easterly
direction for 2 miles to Clover point, and is for tbe most part faced by white
sandy cliffs, varying in height from 10 to 80 feet; a sandy beach extends
along the whole way, and at a cable's distance off in many places are rocks
and foul ground. At 2 cables east of HoUand point, and a cable off shore, are
the Glimpse reefs, which cover at three-quarters flood, and have 7 fathoms
just outside them.
Beacon hiU, a gentle rise of the land, 2 cables from tbe water's edge and a
mUe east of the harbour, is grassy and bare of trees ; its height is 140 feet,
and there is a staff or beacon on the summit.242
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
Clover point, at 2 miles eastward of the entrance to Victoria harbour, is low
bare of trees,  and projecting; it is steep-to, and off it are some strong tide
rips, dangerous to boats in heavy weather.    Ross bay, eastward of it is mien
but sometimes used by smaU craft if waiting for the tide,-there being from
4 to 5 fathoms at 2 cables distance off shore.
*nF,0Ul*b^y' D?arly^!e north-east of Clover point, is of smaU extent and
filled with rocks Off its entrance are the Templer rocks, about 4 feet under
water, and marked by kelp.
Foul point on the east side of tie bay is rocky, but has not less than
4 /athoms at a cable s distance; the land at the back of the point rises to a
hs^l"L23?^ a *S^ng Vv°Cky ndg? °r 8Ummit' k*0™ « G^es hill.
TRIAL ISLANDS-These are situated nearly If miles eastward from
Clover pomt on the south side of Enterprize channel, are two in number, bare
and rocky, but generally appear as one. The south or largest island is 80 feet
high, and steep-to at its outer end; the northern one is low, and from it foul
ground exists some distance. Strong tide ripples prevail off the southern
island especiaUy during the flood, which runs nearly 6 knots at sprines'iust
outside it. r    6 J"
Enterprize Channel, between Trial islands and the Vancouver shore is
a narrow,_tortuous, but deep channel, much used by steamers and coasters trading
to Victoria harbour, as a sbght saving of distance is effected, and less tide
experienced than by going south of the Trial islands; its length is about a
mile, its width m the narrowest place £ a cable and there are not less than
24 feet m the shoalest part.
McNeil Bay on the north side of the channel to the eastward of Foul point
is upwards of 3 cables m extent, with from 2 to 6 fathoms water * it is onTn
.to the southward, and foul ground exists in its east part, but the bay is much
used by smaU vessels waiting for the tide. "mou
Mouatt Reef, in the eastern part of the channel, 8 cables from Trial island
and nearly 2 cables off shore, is about a cable in extent, and covers at a
quarter flood; this rock is dangerous for vessels using the Enterprize channel
as it lies just north of the fairway. McNeil farm, just open west of KhS
islet, a bare yeUow rock 4 feet high on the east side of McNeil bav h^W™
W. £ N leads * a cable south of the reef; and Channel £1 Sin Ttif
the west side of the Great chain .islet N. by E. £ E., leads nearly 2 cables
If bound eastward through the Enterprize channel, when past Foul hav
give Foul pomt a berth of 2 or 3 cables, and steer for tbe west side of McNeil
bay on a northerly course; approach it close-to, after which steer direct for
Kitty islet and when within £ a cable of the latter, haul quickly eastward
keeping McNeil farm just open west of Kitty islet, bearing W £ N ■ this wHl
lead safe through the narrowest part of the channel and south of Mouatt reef
^nChanne point and the west side of Big Chain islet come in Une
N. by E. |E. the vessel wiU be weU east of the reef, and may round Gonzales
pomt close-to, proceeding up through any of the inner channels
GONZALES POINT forms tie souti-east extremity'of Vancouver
island     It is a low salient pomt, rocky, bare of trees, and steep-to on the
OAK BAY.-From Gonzales point, the Vancouver shore trends northward, and at a mile from the pomt forms a sandy bay which is somewhat lei
than a nule m extent, and affords fair anchorage near its north part in tY™
8 to 4 fathoms. r u™STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
243
The best anchorage is northward of Mary Todd islet in the south part of the
bay. This islet is bare, and about 30 feet high; at 2 cables east of it is
Emily rock, 4 feet above high water, and the same distance south from it the
Robson reef, which uncovers at low water.
CADBORO BAY, 2£ miles northward of Gonzales point, is about £ a
mile in extent, and open to the south-eastward; no sea, however, rises
within it, and there is good anchorage in from 3 to 4 fathoms near the
entrance.
The shore from Gonzales point to this bay is low and bghtly timbered with
dwarf oak and pine trees; northward of Oak bay it is clear of danger at a
cable's distance.
Mayor Channel, northward of Gonzales point, and west of Chain islets,
is about 2 nules long in a winding direction northward, its breadth in the
narrowest part is 3 cables, and the soundings in it vary from 9 to 13 fathoms.
The channel is bounded on the west side by Thames shoal and Fiddle reef,
and abreast the latter on its opposite side bes Lewis reef. The tide seldom
runs more than 3 knots through this channel, and it is the one generaUy used.
Thames Shoal, of 2 fathoms water, is of small extent, and marked by kelp ;
it bes nearly £ a mile N. by E. from Gonzales point, at the south-west part
of tbe Mayor channel. Channel point in Une with the west side of Great
Chain islet, N. by E. £ E., leads a cable east of this shoal, and the highest
part of Trial island in line with Gonzales point S. f W., leads £ a cable west.
Lee Rock, which only uncovers at low water springs, lies 1^ cables westward
of Thames shoal; it is marked by kelp and steep-to on the east side. Between
this rock and Thames shoal is Mouatt channel, a cable wide, with from 7 to 9
fathoms.
The highest part of Trial island in Une with Gonzales point, S. f W., leads
midway between Thames shoal and Lee rock; also through the fairway of the
north part of Mayor channel between Fiddle and Lewis reefs.
Fiddle Reef, at the north-west extreme of Mayor channel, and upwards of
a mile from Gonzales point, is of smaU extent, and awash at high water spring
tides ; it may be approached close-to on the east side.
Todd Rock, at 2 cables west of Fiddle reef, in the entrance to Oak bay,
covers at two-thirds flood, and is marked by kelp.
Lewis Reef, at the north-east part of Mayor channel, nearly 3 cables southeast of Fiddle reef, and 2 cables west of the Chain islets, covers at high
water, and may be approached close-to on the west side. The passage
between it and the Chain.islets is fined with kelp, but has not less than 2
fathoms.
CHAIN ISLETS, midway between Discovery island and the Vancouver
shore, are a bare rocky group, f of a mile long in a westerly direction, and
£ a mUe wide. The largest, caUed Great Chain islet, is about a cable in
extent and 30 feet above high water; it lies at the south-west side of the group,
and its south part may be approached to a cable's distance.
Spencer Ledge, off their east side, at a distance of 2 cables from the easternmost high water rock, is marked by kelp, and has 9 feet on its shoalest part;
if going through Hecate passage it requires to be guarded against. Cadboro
point, open west of Channel point N.N.W. £ W., leads a cable east of this
ledge through Hecate passage.
Caroline Reef, at the north part of the group, and connected to it by a rocky
ledge, is of small extent, and covers at a quarter flood, but is well out of the
" b 2I •
244
STRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
track of vessels using any of the channels.    Foul ground with from 3 to 4
fathoms, and marked by kelp, exists upwards of a cable west of it.
DISCOVERY and CHATHAM ISLANDS.—Discovery island is
2 nules north-east of Gonzales point, at the junction of the Haro and Fuca
straits. It is wooded, about f of a mile in extent, and its shores on aU sides
are bordered by rocks, extending in some places more than 2 cables off.
Rudlin bay on its south-east side is fiUed with rocks, and should not be used
by any vessel.
Chatham islands, to the north-west of Discovery island, and separated
from it by a narrow boat pass, are of smaU extent, forming an irregular group,
low, wooded, and almost connected with each other at low water, the tide
rushing with great strength through the passages between them ; their west
side is steep-to.
Leading point, at tbe south extreme, is a bare rocky islet at high water;
to the eastward of it is a small boat cove. Channel point, their west extreme,
is also bare and steep-to, tbe tide runs strong past it.
Strong Tide islet, the north-west of these islands, is rocky, about 50 feet
high, and wooded; its west side forms the eastern boundary of Baynes
channel, and is steep-to; the ebb tide runs very strongly past it, nearly
6 knots at springs.
Refuge cove, on the east side of the Chatham islands, is smaU, and has
1£ fathoms in the centre; coasters or smaU craft entangled among these islets
may find shelter in it. Alpha islet, the easternmost of tbe group, is bare, and
10 feet above high water; it is steep-to on the east side, but only a boat
ought to go westward, or inside it.
Fulford Reef, 3 cables north of tbe Chatham islands, is about a cable in
.extent, and covers at three-quarters-flood.    Vessels using Baynes channel
should keep weU to the westward to avoid this reef, as the tide sets irregularly
in its vicinity.
Hecate and Plumper Passages.—Discovery island is separated from
the Chain islets by a passage £ a mile wide in the narrowest part, forming an
apparantly clear and wide channel, but near the middle of the south part Ues
Centre rock, which has only 3 feet over it, and though marked by kelp, this,
from tie strength of the tides, is often run under, and seldom seen. There is
deep passage on either side of this danger, the one to the westward being
called Hecate, and the eastern one Plumper passage; the latter is wider and
best adapted for large steamers, but the tide sets very strong through both
of them.
Cadboro point, open west of Channel point N.N.W. £ W., leads through
Hecate passage in mid-channel, west of Centre rock.
Cadboro point, weU shut in north of Leading point N.W. f N., leads through
Plumper passage in mid-channel, east of Centre rock.
Baynes Channel, between Cadboro point and the Chatham islands,
connecting these inner channels with Haro strait, is upwards of a nule long
and £ a mile wide ; the soundings in it are irregular, varying from 4| to 30
fathoms, and the tide at springs rushes through it with great velocity, strongest
along the eastern side.
The Five-fathom shoal lying in the centre of the channel, is not marked by
kelp;
side of mid-channel.
if wishing to avoid it a vessel has only to keep a little over on eitherSTRAIT OF JUAN DE FUCA.
245
CADBORO POINT, on the Vancouver shore, at the termination of tie
inner channels, is nearly 8 miles north of Gonzales point, and f of a mile west
of the Chatham islands. It is about E>0 feet high, rocky and bare of trees.
A small islet Ues just off it, also a reef which covers; in passing do not approach the islet within 2 cables.
The coast west of Cadboro point to Cadboro bay, is low, very much broken,
and there are some off-lying rocks. Jemmy Jones islet, which is bare and
15 feet above high water, bes 8 cables off shore, midway between tie two
points; foul ground exists around it for upwards of a cable in some parts, and
though there is deep water between it and the shore, none except smaU craft
should go through that passage.
Directions.—None of these inner channels, though deep, should be used
except by steamers of moderate size or small craft, unless in cases of necessity.
Coasters and smaU steamers, when taking advantage of them, generaUy proceed
through the Mayor channel. If using this channel, after passing Gonzales
point keep the west side of Great Chain islet in line with Channel point
N. by E. £ E. tiU within 2 cables of the islet, when tie vessel wiU be clear of
the Thames shoal, after which haul to tie north-west bringing the highest part
of Trial island in Une witi Gonzales point S. f W., and witi that mark on astern
steer N. f E., which wiU lead between the Fiddle and Lewis reefs, and on
through Baynes channel, to Haro strait. When past Lewis and Fiddle reefs, a
vessel may, if necessary, haul a Utile to the eastward for the fairway towards
Strong Tide islet.
Going through Mouatt channel, which is very narrow and seldom used,
after rounding Gonzales point at a cable's distance, bring the highest part of
Trial island in line with the point, S. f W.; keeping this mark on astern,
and steering N. f E., wiU lead through clear of danger.
The Hecate and Plumper passages are nearly straight, and better adapted
for large steamers than those west of the Chain islets. H using either of
them, after passing £ a mile south of the islets on a north-easterly course,
bring the leading marks (page 244) on, and keep them so tiU northward of the
Centre rock, when steer up in mid-channel towards Cadboro point, and through
Baynes channel into Haro strait.
Tides.—The high water at full and change is irregular and much influenced
by prevailing winds; the greatest rise and fall of tide at Discovery island is
12 feet. During summer months in ttese channels, the flood stream commences at llh. 15m. a.m., running with great strength tUl nearly 3h. p.m.,
after which but bttle tide is felt till 4h. a.m. on the foUowing day, when the
ebb commences and runs strong tiU nearly llh. a.m., the time of low water
by the shore.
CONSTANCE BANK, lying in Juan de Fuca strait, nearly 6 mUes
S.E. by E. £ E. from Fisgard island bghthouse, 3 nules S. by W. from Trial
island, and 7 miles N.E. from Race island Ughthouse, is upwards of a mile in
extent, and has upon it a depth of 9 to 14 fathoms. A vessel should not
anchor on it, as the bottom is rocky.
FONTE BANK: about a mile in extent, witi from S£ to 5 fatioms and
marked by kelp, Ues nearly in the middle of Fuca strait, 6 miles S. £ W. from
Cattle point (San Juan island), 8 nules E. by S. from Discovery island, and
8 nules W. £ S. from Smith island lighthouse.
This bank ought to be avoided, as there may be less water on it than
shown on the chart."m
246
ADMIRALTY INLET.
I I   I
ADMIRALTY INLET,  PUGET   SOUND, AND
HOOD   CANAL.
SMITH  ISLAND.—On the north-eastern side of the approach to
Admiralty inlet is Smith island, which we now proceed to describe because it.
is an important object to vessels making the inlet either from Rosario strait
or from westward.    The direct course from Juan de Fuca strait into Admiralty
inlet is between this island and the Ughthouse on New Dungeness.
Smith island Ues at the eastern termination of the strait of Juan de Fuca,
within 6 miles of Whidbey island, and 7 mfles from the southern entrance to
Rosario strait. It is quite small, not occupying half a square mile, and rises
regularly from the eastern to the western extremity, where it attains a height
of about 55 feet, with an almost perpendicular cbff of clay and gravel. Upon
it are or were a few dreary looking trees, but none of great thickness or height,
and the surface is covered with a growth of bushes 10 or 12 feet high. There
is no fresh water to be found on the island, and at 2 or 3 feet below the surface
is a stratum of hard, dry clay with pebbles.
A very small, low islet caUed Minor, exists at 1 mile north-east of Smith
island, and at very low tides is connected with it by a narrow ridge of boulders
and rocks. A field of kelp extends westward of Smith island for 1^ miles,
and has a width of a mile. When sailing through this field the surveyors
found the depth of water very uniform at 6£ fathoms, and in no place got less.
The bottom is hard and sandy, and no rocks' have been discovered in it.
Another smaller field is' seen westward of the one just mentioned. Good
anchorage is found on tbe north side of the island, east of the kelp, in from
10 to 5 fathoms, and on the south side, east of the kelp, in from 10 to 8
fathoms, hard bottom. Very deep water is found close to the eastern end of
the small islet.
The Ughthouse on Smith island shows a revolving light, flashing every half-
minute, at 90 feet above the sea, visible 15 miles. Its approximate geographical position is lat. 48° 19' 1", long. 122° 50' 2". From it Discovery island
bears West, distant 16£ miles; Race island Ught, S.W. by W. f W., 26£
mUes : New Dungeness light, S.W. by S., 13f- miles; Point Wilson, S.E. £ S.,
11 miles; and cape Colville, tie south-west point of the entrance to Rosario
strait, N. £ W., 6f mfles.
Fields of Kelp.—At 3 miles S. £E. from Smith island is a field of kelp over
a mile long by a mile wide. Through it tie soundings range from 6 to 12
fathoms, and tbe bank stretches off to the E.S.E. for 2 miles, with 10 and 12
fathoms upon it. This locality requires sounding out, as it would prove a
great advantage for vessels drifting at tie mercy of the currents to know of
the existence of such anchoring grounds. The detailed hydrography of all the
sheet of water eastward of Race islands wfll probably develop many interesting
features of bottom.
At 8 miles W. £ S. from Smith island, is another field of kelp nearly a mfle
in extent, named Fonte bank, mentioned in page 245. The depth of water
upon it is very uniform at 5 fathoms. Recent partial examinations show that
this field marks the N.E. portion of a bank lying nearly North and South, withADMIRALTY UNLET.
247
a length of 4 miles,  and a breadth of 1* miles within the limits of the
20-fatiom line.
At a mile southward of the south-eastern point of San Juan island, and 8£
miles N.W. by W. f W. from Smith island, Ues a smaU field of kelp about
£ a mfle square, with 8 feet to 3 fathoms upon it. Recent examinations show
that this is connected by a 4-fathom bank with the south-eastern end of San
Juan island, and stretches S.S.E. therefrom for 2* miles, with a breadth of
f of a mUe within the Umit of the 10-fathom line.    It is named Salmon bank.
AU these fields and patches of kelp should be avoided, as they denote rocky
bottom; and isolated points of rocks frequently exist among them and escape
even a very scrutinizing survey.
ADMIRALTY INLET.—Admfralty inlet, at the south-east extremity
of Juan de Fuca strait, may be described as a vast canal, running in a general
S.E. by S. direction for 60 miles to tbe south end of Vashon island. It has
for that length an average width of S£ miles, and then branches into a
multitude of arms, which cover an area of about 14 by 22 miles ; tbe general
direction of these is S.W. f S., and they comprise what is called Puget sound.
At 16 miles from the entrance to the inlet an arm called Hood canal opens
upon the western side, and runs 60 miles S. by W., with an average width
of l£ nules. At 25 miles from the entrance of the inlet another arm opens
on the eastern side, runs north and north-west behind Whidbey island, forming
Possession sound, ports Gardner and Susan, &c, and leads on to tbe strait
of Juan de Fuca through Deception pass, at the north end of Whidbey island,
in lat. 48° 24*'.
The shores of these inlets are generally bluffs, ranging from 50 to 500 feet
in height, with then* sides kept bright by the gradual wearing action of the
water, and their tops covered with trees and thick undergrowth to their very
edges. There is so much sameness in the shores that it requires some
acquaintance with tbe different points to recognize them by their trifling
pecubarities. The depth of water in the channels is remarkably great, and
it is sometimes difficult to find anchorage sufficiently far from the shore to
afford room for getting under way. Many superior harbours are found in
every direction, and small settlements are gradually springing up in favourable
locaUties.
Admiralty inlet, Puget sound and Hood canal have an aggregate shore-bne
of not less than 803 mfles, yet the number of dangers known to exist in them
is remarkably few.
One of the inlets or arms of Puget sound reaches within 2 miles of the
bead of Hood canal, and between them lies a large lake. The southern waters
of this sound are also within 65 miles, in a direct line, of the Columbia river,
at tbe mouth of the Gowlitz, which is 52 miles from cape Hancock; and
within 20 miles of the upper waters of the Chehalis river, which runs into
Gray bay. At present the route travelled from the Columbia is by canoes,
for 28 miles, up the Cowlitz to the settlement at " CowUtz landing," (or by
horse over a somewhat bad path,) and then by horses or mules to Olympia,
52 miles, over a tolerably level country, and by a road moderately good in
summer but bad in winter. The distance can be made in one day with a good
horse. From where the road strikes the Chehalis the river is said to be
navigable for large boats to Gray harbour. The surveyors judged the stream
to be about 100 yards wide. It had apparently plenty of water and a slow
current.    The Cowlitz has a rapid current, and at a low stage of the waterII
in
248
ADMIRALTY INLET.
canoes are poled up its channel; during freshets they are dragged up, the
crews clinging to the branches of the frees upon its banks. Two days of
labour are then required for the trip, but in summer it is made in one.
The importance of these close relations of the waters of the Columbia river,
Puget sound, Admiralty inlet, Gray harbour, and Shoalwater bay, in view of.
the prosperity of the two Territories, must be manifest without entering into
details of the feasibility of their connection by railroads and canals.
We shaU not attempt to give in fuU and explicit detafl aU the pecuUarities
of this vast area of waters, but, foUowing the mid-channel courses, wfll only
note generaUy the objects as they come under the eye of the navigator.
The entrance to the inlet Ues between point Partridge (Whidbey island)
and point Wilson (on the main) at the entrance to port Townshend. The
bearing of the latter point from the former is S.E. by S. £ 8., i£ miles; and
the bluff head lying 2 or 8 miles to the east of this line, and destitute of trees
and marked by a Ughthouse is Admiralty head, around which the ebb current,
and an ebb eddy on tbe flood, sweeps with force.
The first course inside of the entrance of the inlet is E.S.E., 6£ miles,
passing port Townshend on the South, Admiralty head on the North, and
cianging the course abreast of Marrowstone point.
Point Partridge, the western point of Whidbey island, and directly facing
the strait of Juan de Fuca, is very steep and yeUow, and flat on the summit,
which is covered with spruce, fir, and cedar. The point is so rounding that
it is not easily recognized on coming from westward, but from southward and
northward, it is weU marked and prominent. Its face is composed of loose
sand, which, being blown up the hill by tbe strong west winds, has formed a
very peculiar ridge on the outer face of the top. This is so narrow that it
can hardly be travelled, and in many places it is 35 feet above the ground
inside; yet, being overgrown with bushes, the ridge is now permanent.
The highest part of the point is about 260 feet above low water. The
approximate geographical position of the southern part of the point is lat.
48° 12' 59', long. 122° 45' 7". From point Wilson it bears N.W. by N. | N.,
4f miles ; and from Admiralty head Ughthouse N.W. by W. f W., 5f miles.
Port Townshend.—This harbour is favourably situated at the termination of the strait of Juan de Fuca, at the outlet of the waters of Admiralty
inlet, Puget sound, &c, and in proximity to the great inland waters of British
Columbia. The entrance Ues between point Wilson and Marrowstone point,
the latter bearing E.S.E. 3f miles from the former. Upon this Une, and
even outside of it, Ues a bank extending two-thirds of the distance from
Marrowstone point, and having upon it from 6 to 15 fathoms, with hard,
sandy bottom. Inside of point Wilson, which is composed of low, sandy
hiUocks, as heretofore described, Ues another low point caUed point Hudson,
distant If miles S.E. by S. £ S.
Starting from tbe entrance bne, about 1* miles from Marrowstone point,
the mid-channel course of the bay. is S.S.W., 3 miles, with an average width
of 2 nules; thence S.E. £ S. for 3f miles, with an average width of If miles.
The depth of water throughout is very regular, and ranges from 8 to 15
fathoms, with soft, muddy bottom inside of point Hudson. Vessels coming
from the strait steer for point Hudson, as soon as it is opened by point Wilson,
passing the latter close, as 20 fathoms are found 100 or 200 yards off it.
Upon approaching point Hudson, and when within £ a mile of it, graduaUy
keep away about a f of a mile in from 5 to 10 fathoms, and, as it opens, runADMIRALTY INLET,
249
quite close, with the summer wind off shore, to save making a tack; keep
along £ a mile to the town situated under the Prairie bluff, and anchor any- •
where off the end of the wharf, in 10 to 12 fathoms, about a f of a mile from
shore.    In winter anchor further out, to clear point Hudson in getting under
way witi a souti-easter.
When coming down the inlet, bound into the bay, with the current ebb,
pass Marrowstone point nearly f of a mile before heading in for the town, and
bo avoid a very strong eddy which comes out of the bay along the bluff shore
west of this point. If the wind be Ught and the current strong, pass the
point quite close by ; run along tbe outside of the rip, and try to get upon the
bank as soon as practicable.
In summer vessels frequently drift about the entrance for days, without a
breath of wind, and in very strong currents.
Tides.—The corrected establishment of the port is at 8h. 49m.; the mean
rise and faU of tides is 4*6 feet, of springs 5*5 feet, and of neaps 4 feet.
The geographical position of tbe station of the Coast Survey, upon point
Wilson, is lat. 48° 8' 43", long. 122° 44' 49"; and the position of the station
on the extremity of pointHudson, is lat. 48° 7' 6*7", long. 122° 44' 25*8";
hence point Hudson is about 1' 25" west of Telegraph hiU, San Francisco.
The town of port Townshend has increased very much since the discovery
of gold on Fraser river. No fresh water (1862) is to be had, but vessels can
obtain a smaU supply near the military post. Some fine farms, Ue near the
town, and vegetables are plentiful at reasonable prices. The place was noted
for tie rough character of its " beach combers."
A mflitary post has been estabbshed on the bluff, 2£ miles S. by W. from
the town, and on a site which commands one of the most beautiful views in
these waters, having the bluff and varied shores of the bay on either hand;
Admiralty head, 6 mfles distant, in the middle ground; several distant,
wooded ridges, and in the back ground the snow-covered double summit of
mount Baker, "10,900 feet in height, with the mouth of the crater distinctly
visible between the peaks, and at times emitting vast volumes of smoke.
The elevation of the line of perpetual snow upon this mountain is 3145 (?) feet.
On the east side of the bay, abreast of the town, Ues a. long sand spit,
nearly closing the north entrance to Kilisut harbour, which runs parallel to
the inlet, and is separated by an island 1 mile wide and 6 miles long. At
high tide this harbour communicates by a crooked boat channel, with Oak bay
at tbe south end.
At the bead of port Townshend is a narrow channel opening into a large
flat, bounded by a low, sandy beach, separating it from Oak bay. The Indians
frequently use this as a portage.
The shores are generally bluffs, about 120 feet high, and covered with wood,
except behind the town. Between the town and fort Townshend are two low
pieces of grass and sand beach, backed by marsh and ponds. The 5-fatbom
curve extends but a few hundred yards from any part of the shores. A small
patch of kelp Ues off the southern point of Prairie bluff, and another off the
north face of Marrowstone bluff.
Marrowstone point is a low sandy point stretching 300 yards eastward from
the base of the bluff, and forming an indentation on its southern face, where
anchorage may be had in 12 fathoms, with a current or eddy invariably
running ebb. SmaU craft coming out of the inlet with a head wind can easily
take advantage of this for 2 or 3 miles above the point.Ill '
\\
250
ADMIRALTY INLET.
Admiralty head.—Abreast of the entrance to port Townshend, is a perpendicular cliff 80 feet high, falling on the eastern side to alow, pebbly shore,
which runs 2 miles to the E.N.E. and strikes the high cbffs on the eastern
side of the inlet. Behind this beach is a large lagoon, and off it is Admiralty
bay, with hard, sandy bottom, in irregular ridges, and a depth of 15 to
25 fathoms of water. A strong current always makes out of the bay, and it
is exposed to the full sweep of south-easters. The current is so strong that
a vessel rides to it, and consequently lies in the trough of the sea.
The Ughthouse on Admiralty head consists of a keeper's dwelling, with a
tower rising through the roof at one end; both are painted white, and the iron
lantern surmounting the tower is painted red. The height of the tower from
the base to the lantern is 41 feet, and the elevation of the Ught above the
mean level of the inlet is 119 feet. The bght is fixed, and visible about
17 miles. Its geographical position is, lat. 48° 9'" 22", long. 122° 40'8".
It illuminates an arc of 270° of the horizon, and commands Admiralty inlet
and the approaches. From point Wilson it bears N.E. by E., distant
3f miles ; from Marrowstone point N. by W. f W., distant 3f miles; from
New Dungeness light N. 73° E., distant 17f miles; and from point Partridge
S. 60° E., distant 5f miles.
Starting from abreast Marrowstone point tbe mid-channel course up
Admiralty inlet runs S.E. by S. £ S. for 7 miles. The shores on either hand
are bluffs of apparently uniform height, covered with trees. After running
thus about 5 miles there will be passed, on tbe eastern shore, a low point,
with one or two clumps of trees and bushes, to which has been given the
name Bush point. On the western shore is a rounding bluff point 1 mile
north of the point which forms the north-east part of Oak bay; off this point
is good anchorage in 12 or 15 fathoms. The peeuUar geological formations
found in the vicinity suggested the designation Nodule point, which it now
bears. The high bold headland, several miles directly ahead, is Foulweather
bluff, and that to the E.S.E. destitute of trees, except one large clump, which
marks it conspicuously from this direction, is Double bluff. The deep indentation between it and Bush point, with low land in the rear, is Mutiny bay,
in the northern part of which exists a narrow bank of 11 fathoms, affording
an excellent fishing ground. At the end of the course Oak bay opens to the
westward, and stretches towards the waters of port Townshend. It has bluff
shores nearly aU around it, those on the south-west face being bmestone ; but
Basalt point at the south, derives its name from its geological structure. The
depth of water is 5 to 15 fathoms, except N.N.W. of Basalt point, where it
reaches 25 and 30 fathoms. The length of the bay is 3 miles, and its
average width about l£ miles. In beating out of the inlet, with a favourable
current, vessels must not attempt to work to this bay for the sake of a long
tack.
The opening west of Foulweather bluff is Hood canal (subsequently mentioned). Vessels bound into it keep close to the western shore of the blufl,
and pass two low points lying near together. The water off them is deep.
Off the north face of Foulweather bluff, for nearly a mile, a depth of less than
15 fathoms may be found. Kelp exists.under the face of the bluff, and vessels
may pass around it in 6 and 7 fathoms. The bottom along the edge of the
kelp is rocky. On the west side of the entrance to Hood canal is port Ludlow,
which wiU be described hereafter.
The next or third course up the inlet is E.S.E. for 10 miles, passing onADMIRALTY INLET.
251
the eastward Double bluff, which stretches north-eastward for a mile, and
rises 800 or 400 feet, having its top covered with wood. The bluff running
also to the northward forms Useless bay. This has deep water over the
greater portion of it, with a large shallow bay called Deer lagoon at. its head.
The high bluff forming tbe southern point of Useless bay is Satchet head.
A similar bluff Ues 2 nules E. by S. of it. These form the southern extremity
of Whidbey island, in latitude 47° 54', and are the turning points^into
Possession sound.
The two heads are about 300 feet high, covered with wood, and separated
by a depression, which is in part overflowed at high tide, and then presents
the appearance of a small bay. From tbe eastern bead round the western,
and a mile toward Useless bay, the low-water Une makes out £ a mile, the
shore being bare where some recent maps have deep water. For nearly a
mile south of both heads a depth of 8 and 10 fathoms and smooth sandy
bottom can be found. Tbe surveyors found, when anchored for several days
off the eastern head, a strong under current running into Possession sound,
and an upper current setting to the westward, at all tides. Vancouver makes
mention of the shoal, and states that beating into the inlet he stood on the
bank until he got 5 fathoms, but want of time precluded bis examining it.
On tbe western side of the last mid-channel course is Foulweather bluff
(already noticed,) which is perpendicular on its N.N.W. face, and about
225 feet high, with heavy firs upon its summit. It slopes towards the east
to a bluff 40 feet high, but is steep on the side next to Hood canal. The
low point 4 miles eastward of it is No point, making well out, and
destitute of trees or bushes. Between it and Foulweather bluff is a deep
bight, and the distance across the neck to Hood canal is only a f of a mile
in one part, marked by the track of a recent tornado (1862) that has twisted
off and uprooted firs of 3 and 4 feet diameter. On the south side of
No point is good anchorage in 10 fathoms; and thence the western shore runs
nearly straight S.E. by S. for 10 miles.
At the end of the last course, which carried us 3 miles beyond No
point, tbe inlet expands to a width of 7 miles. A course E.N.E. for 3£ miles
carries, to the entrance of Possession sound, the first 6 mfles through which
run N. £ W., with a width of 2 miles and bluff shores; it then turns to the
north-westward to port Gardner. The water is deep in the entrance, and
affords no anchorage. The low point on the shore, 4 miles after entering, is
point Elliott, and the bay opening to the north-east receives the Sinahomis
or Scaget river.
The next, or fourth, mid-channel course up the inlet is S.S.E. for 21 miles
to Allen bank, which Ues a mile off the north end of Vashon island. Five
miles on this course, or 7 from No point, brings us to an excellent Utile
harbour on tbe western side of the inlet, called Apple Tree cove, having a
low point on tbe north side, with a soft mud flat extending several hundred
yards up the inlet. A depth of from 5 to 12 fathoms on sticky bottom are
found off it and in the cove. There is no fresh water in the vicinity, but
very good timber may be procured suitable for boats spars and booms.
On the eastern shore of the inlet, abreast of Apple Tree cove, are two low
points, a mile apart, making out from tbe bluff. The indentation between
them forms a good though small anchorage, and the chances are good for
fresh water at high tide. The southern point is named point Wells, the
northern point Edmund.    The inlet is here only 3 miles wide, and continues252
ADMIRALTY TNLET.
so to point Jefferson, 2 nules southward of Apple Tree cove. This is a
moderately low, straight bluff, with the ground rising behind it, and covered
with timber. Stretching broad off its eastern face for f of a mile is a 9-fathom
shoal, which affords capital anchorage for vessels when drifting with light
airs and adverse currents.
Ports Madison and Orchard.—Point Jefferson is the northern side
of the entrance to this port, which runs 3 miles W.S.W., with an average
width of 2 miles and a large depth of water, except under point Jefferson,
where anchorage may be had in 10 and 15 fathoms, hard sandy bottom, with
patches of kelp inshore.
The south-east point of tbe entrance is low and sandy, making out from
high wooded ground. One mile west of it is the narrow entrance to a natural
canal, upon which, in full view, are situated the port Madison saw-mflls. At
the S.W. part of the bay is the very narrow entrance to port Orchard. The
channel is somewhat crooked, but it has 3 and 4 fathoms water in it. On the
western side of this entrance are some white patches of beach, formed by
clam shells. In 1857 an Indian viUage was situated here, and an Indian
sub-agency. Both sides of the entrance are bluffs. Vessels not weU
acquainted with the channel must enter under easy sail, and keep a lead
going on each side of the vessel to ascertain where the deepest water Ues.
After getting through give the point, 1 mile off on the western side, a berth
of nearly £ a mile, to avoid a shoal which makes out east from it. Thence it
is plain sailing in 15 to 25 fathoms of water. After passing the first point
an arm opens to the N.W., and many vessels load there with spars. Ten
miles up the southern channel is, or was, a saw-miU. In coming out of this
port vessels should not trust the southern entrance, but leave as they entered.
See subsequent remarks under heading " Restoration point".
Bainbridge island lies between port Orchard, port Madison, and Admiralty
inlet. It is 8 or 9 miles long by 2£ in breadth, and its general direction is
S.E. by S. A few loggers' huts stand on the western side and the Madison
saw-mfll at tbe north end. On the S.E. part it is indented by two smaU
harbours.
Duwamish Bay.—Abreast of port Madison the eastern shore of the
inlet retreats and there receives several smaU streams of water, but it graduaUy.
makes out into a very long, low sand point, called West point, which forms
the extreme north-west part of the entrance to Duwamish bay. The bay runs
E. by S. 6£ miles and has a width of 2 miles. To the south point, called
Battery point, which is low and bare, with a curiously shaped mound rising
sharply behind it, the course is about S.E. by S., and distant 4£ miles.
Under West point there is anchorage in 10 to 15 fathoms after getting towards
the bluff, but on the north side of the point the water is very deep. Through
the centre of the bay the depth ranges from 88 to 40 fathoms. On the north
side of Battery point a vessel anchoring in 20 fathoms cannot have a greater
scope of chain than 35 fathoms without being too close to tbe shore. When
the surveyors anchored there in 13 fathoms and veered to 25 fathoms of chain
the vessel's stern was in 2£ fathoms. The beach is smooth and very regular,
being composed of sand and gravel. On this side of Battery point is the
deserted town of Alki, (the Indian phrase for " by and by.") The town has
had several names, but there is notHng about it to command trade.
The bluff head within the bay, 2 miles N.N.E. of Battery point, is
Duwamish head.    It is steep, about 150 feet high, covered with timber, andADMIRALTY INLET.
258
The
is an
the beach at low water stretches out over a f of a mile N.N.W. from it.
head of the bay receives the Duwamish river, and for 1 or 2 miles
extensive flat, bare at low water.
The town of Seattle is on a smaU point at the N.E. part of the bay, a bttle
over 5 miles inside of West point. It consists of a few houses and stores, a
church, and a small saw-mfll; and a number of university buildings are to be
erected, (1862.)   It has but Utile trade.
Seattle has been proposed as the terminus of the northern trans-continental
railroad, penetrating the Cascade mountains by the Yakima pass, and thereby
making tie line 140 miles shorter than by the Columbia river pass, which is
remarkably favourable, whilst the former is only possibly practicable.
The usual anchorage is directly off the wharf in 10 to 15 fathoms water,
witi tie large white house on tie extreme point bearing about East, or
E. by S., and at a distance from the beach of about 500 yards. This position
wiU enable a vessel to work out well by making the first tack to the southward
towards the flat. If it be high water this flat cannot be distinguished, and the
lead must be kept going. When a depth of 15 fathoms is struck go about,
for it shoals to 3 fathoms very suddenly, and keeping on would soon bring up
a vessel on the flat. H the current be ebb, vessels bound out should stand
well into the inlet; and if bound up, work close under and around Duwamish
head to Battery point. H the current be flood, vessels bound out should work
under the north shore, and close to West point; if bound up, work under the
north shore about 3^ miles to Magnolia bluff, beyond a low marshy indentation in the shore, or until they can fetch weU clear of Battery point.
There is said to be some good agricultural prairie land on the Duwamish
river. Some distance up it is connected with lake Washington, which is
reported to be 25 mfles long and several miles broad, with islands in it; it is
but a few miles in a direct line east of Seattle. Another small lake exists
about a mile back from the beach, a mile west of Seattle ; this is reached by
a trail.
Restoration Point.—From the S.E. point of port Madison to this point the
shore is bluff and somewhat irregular, and is indented first by Eagle harbour,
having a long pebbly spit making out 300 or 400 yards S.E. from its north
point; and next, at point Restoration, by Blakely harbour, having off its
entrance a large rock, 15 feet high, with deep water aU round it. The rock
bears nearly N.N.W., f of a mile from the point, and the bottom between is
irregular, the depth ranging from 20 to 40 fathoms. Blakely harbour is only
a f of a mile wide and f long, with 18 fathoms sticky bottom at its mouth,
and shoabng graduaUy inside, but most on the south side.
Eagle harbour is larger and more commodious than Blakely.
Restoration point is in some respects very pecubar; no other in these
waters, except Battery point, presenting the same formation. For 300 yards
it is flat, about 10 feet above high water, and has a foot depti of soil covered
with grass over a limestone rock, upheaved nearly on edge, the direction of the
strata pointing toward Batterye point or a little south of it. Inshore it rises up
sharply about 100 feet, its sides covered with grass and the summit with fir
trees. Around the whole S.E. face of the point these peculiarities exist.
On the upper levels of the high land adjacent are several smaU lakes of
water.
From the extremity of tbe point a ledge, bare at low tides, makes out
800 yards, but tie depti is 6 fatioms at 100 yards from its extremity, and254
ADMIRALTY INLET.
16 fathoms at a f of a mile. On tie tail of this ledge the United States
sloop-of-war Decatur struck in 1855. Anchorage may be had S.S.E. of the
point, distant a f of a mile in 15 fathoms, sticky bottom; a rule for finding
anchorage, is to bring the rock north of it to range just over and inside of tie
point.    Kelp exists along tie southern face.
The geographical position of the triangulation station of tie Coast Survey upon
this point is, lat. 47° 85' 6", long. 122° 28' 15". From this point Battery
point bears E. by N. £ N., distant 2£ miles.
Tides.—Tbe approximate corrected estabUshment at Restoration point is
4h. 4m.    The approximate mean rise and fab of tides is 7*4 feet.
South of Restoration point, Admiralty inlet opens westward for a couple of
miles into a bay, in which is situated an island about f of a mile in extent,
called Blake. From the north-west part of tie bay, a narrow crooked pass
8 miles long, leads to the southern part of port Orchard, which spreads out
into several arms. The pass is obstructed by rocks and is difficult of navigation. The winds are variable, bght, and uncertain at its narrowest part,
where it makes a sharp turn, and is only 200 yards wide, with a rushing
swirling current. The channel generally used, although narrower than the
one just mentioned, is that leading into port Madison.
Our last course brought us to Allen bank, off the north end of Vashon
island, with Blake island to tie westward, and | of a mile distant. This bank
is nearly a mile in extent, and has as Utile as 10 fathoms upon it, witi a
variable bottom, in some places mud, and in others hard sand. When the
surveyors anchored upon it in 11 fathoms the souti end of Blake island bore
N. 81° W., and the N.W. point of Vashon island S. 5° E. Between the
anchorage and Blake island the water regularly deepens to about 18 fathoms
in soft mud. This anchorage has already proved of service to vessels losing
the wind and having adverse currents. In some recent maps 25 to 80 fathoms
are marked in the position of this shoal. The eastern point of Blake island is
low and pebbly, and called by the natives Tatugh; under it is anchorage in
17 and 18 fathoms, soft mud. The north-east pomt of Vashon island is
Dolphin pomt; the norti-west point, point Vashon; the point abreast of it is
point Southworth; and the mile-wide channel, commencing between the last
two points, is Colvos passage, running west of Vashon island.
The main body of Admiralty inlet continues about S.E. for 8 miles, tien
S.S.W. 8 nules further, witi an average widti of 2 miles. In this stretch the
currents are moderately strong, the chances for anchoring few, and it is sometimes calm while a fine breeze is blowing through Colvos passage.
Brace point Ues on the east side of the inlet, N.E. from Dolphin point.
The round-topped point having two or three lone fir trees upon it, and situated
on the same side of the inlet, 4 miles above Brace point, is caUed point PuUy;
the water is very deep close to it on either side. The geographical position of
the triangulation station of the Coast Survey onthe summit of the mound at
point PuUy is, lat. 47° 27' 7", long. 122° 22'" 21".
Tiere is a small bight north of Brace point, and between it and another
low point, is an inlet called Fauntleroy cove, having good anchorage in 10 and
12 fathoms, and fresh water is easily obtained in tie vicinity. Between Brace
point and point PuUy two or three small streams of water empty, and another
from tie valley a mile east of tie high bluff at PuUy point. Off this valley a
flat makes out with deep water at its edge.PUGET  SOUND.
255
Under Dolphin point there is very deep water; but off the north end of the
island, near this point, anchorage may be obtained in 14 fathoms, hard bottom.
Colvos passage is tbe usual, we may say the invariably used ship channel
towards Puget sound. It is about a mile wide, with high bluff shores, varied
by numerous small, low, sand points making out from the face of the bluff,
and having deep water off them. The passage is 11 miles long to the soutb
end of Vashon island, called Dalco point, and it runs with a nearly straight
course S. by E. Ai l£ miles inside of point Vashon there is a small curve in
the shore line called Fern cove, with exceUent anchorage in 5 and 10 fathoms.
Abreast of Dalco point on the western shore there is a small harbour, with a
narrow and shoal entrance, called Gig harbour. Looking out of the passage
to the north, mount Baker shows distinctly in clear weather-
Commencement Bay.—When abreast of Dalco point this bay, at the
termination of Admiralty inlet, opens to the E.S.E., and over its low background shows the high snow-covered peak of mount Rainier. The general
direction of tbe bay is E. by S. £ S., with a length of 3 or 4 miles, a width of
2 mfles, and a great depth of water up to the line of the extensive flat at its
head, which is backed by marsh.    There are no settlements upon it (1862).
Vashon island, lying between the southern extremity of Admiralty inlet and
Colvos passage, is ll£ miles long, with an average width of 2£ miles. Halfway down on its eastern side lies a curiously shaped peninsula, formed by a
narrow, low, sandy neck of land, which makes out into the inlet, and then runs
towards the south point of the island. The space between this peninsula an^
the island is an excellent harbour 4 or 5 miles long, and f of a mile wide,
having a depth of 5 to 10 fathoms water in it. The south-east face of the
peninsula is high and steep, and bordered by water from 40 to 50 fathoms
deep.
The island is high, with steep shores, covered with wood and undergrowth.
Its surface is marshy in many parts that are quite elevated. The harbour
formed by it and the peninsula is known as Quartermaster harbour.
Point Defiance and the Narrows.—Tbe high, sharp yeUow bluff
facing the south entrance to Colvos passage is called point Defiance, and
between it and tbe western shore pass all the waters of Puget sound. This
passage is named the Narrows. Its average width is f of a mile, and very
uniform ; the shores are high, bold, and in some places rocky. For 2 miles
to tbe S.E. its course is a regular curve. The next turn is to the southward,
and at a distance of 2 miles in that direction the waters of the sound open
ahead, with a narrow pass between tbe main and Fox island to tbe west; and
a small indentation, backed by low ground, and formed on the south by a smaU
peninsula, on the east. In this bight is anchorage in 15 fathoms, with
swfrbng eddies. On the south face of this peninsula, and outside of the kelp,
anchorage may also be bad.
PUGET SOUND.—This collection of inlets commences after passing
" The Narrows," and covers an area of 14 miles by 22, with a general direction S.W. f S. The aggregate shore-line of this sound, and the adjacent part
of Admiralty inlet, with Colvos passage, to the north end of Vashon island, is
not less than 370 miles. Upon its shores are situated the settlements of
Steilacoom, Nisqually, Olympia, and Newmarket.
Steilacoom.—On the eastern shore of Puget sound, 9 mfles south of point
Defiance, is situated the town or village of Steilacoom, upon a rising bluff. It
consists of only a few houses.    Fort Steilacoom stands about a mile inland,256
PUGET  SOUND.
upon a piece of graveUy prairie, and roads lead from it to tie town and tie
creek.
The neighbouring country is only moderately weU adapted to agriculture
except along the bottoms of the smaU streams.
The usual anchorage is off the smaU wharf, in 15 fathoms, iard bottom,
and about 400 or 500 yards from tie store. An island lying 2f miles westward of that position is caUed McNeil, and between it and Fox (Rosario)
island, to the northward, there is a passage 1£ miles wide. The passage on
the south side of McNeil island, between it and Anderson island, is generally
known as Balch passage. It bears about S.W. by W. from the anchorage,
and is marked by a smaU wooded islet in it, called Eagle island, off which Ues
rocky bottom, and vessels keep closer to tbe north shore. This passage is tie
direct ciannel to Olympia, instead of foUowing the broad one southward of
Steilacoom.
The north end of tie island, showing to tie soutiward, and l£ nules from
the anchorage, is Kitson island.
One mile norti of the anchorage is the mouth of a smaU stream caUed the
Steflacoom river.
When approaching Steilacoom, or bound direct for Olympia, a patch of kelp,
with foul bottom and less than 3 fathoms of water upon it, must be avoided.
It bears S.S.E. 1 mile from the south end of Fox island, and N.W. by W. If
nules from Steilacoom wharf. The tide-rip upon it and abreast of the town is
very great; quite sufficient with a bttle wind to swamp a smaU boat. The
shores of the main and islands are bold, nearly uniform in height, and covered
with trees.
Tides.—The corrected estabbshment of the port is 4h. 46m. The mean
rise and fall of tides is 9*2 feet, of spring tides 11*1 feet, and of neap tides
7*2 feet.
NisquaUy, 5 miles south of Steilacoom, and on the same side of tie sound,
is, at present, a place of no trade or importance. It was one of the early
posts of the Hudson Bay Company, and is stiU occupied by them. An extensive mud flat exists off the mouth of the wide, marshy vaUey, but the depth
of water is very great close to it, and tie anchorage room very much contracted.
The river NisquaUy empties here, and we bebeve there are two smaU sawmills upon it.    The name is Indian.
Olympia.—It would be almost useless to attempt to describe the route to
Olympia from Steilacoom, as a pflot or a good chart is absolutely necessary
in making the passage. The mid-channel course is 21 miles in length, and
its width from £ a mile to l£ miles.
Olympia is situated at tie head of Budd inlet, which is 6 miles long and
f of a mile wide, and runs nearly South. Tie shores are steep and wooded,
and the head of the bay an immense mud flat behind which is tie town. It
acquires prospective importance by being the capital of the territory, but
especiaUy on account of its proximity to the Columbia river vaUey, and to the
headwaters of the ChehaUs. There is a saw-miU at Newmarket, 2 nules south,
on tie Tumwater, and three others in tie vicinity, besides one or two gristmills.
A depti of 8 fathoms can be carried on the west side of Budd inlet, within
l£ miles of the wharf; and 1 fathom within a mile on the eastern side.
Vessels are brought up to the wharf at the highest tides, and then rest in the
mud until ready to leave.HOOD   CANAL.
257
The greatest difference between the highest and lowest tides is reported
i to be about 24 feet, and is doubtless more than this when we compare its position
with that of Steilacoom. The approximate corrected estabbshment is 5h. 8m.,
and the mean rise and fall of tides 9*2 feet.
The approximate geographical position of the wharf is, lat. 47° 3' long.
122° 55'.
HOOD CANAL.—The entrance to this arm of Admiralty inlet Ues
between Basalt point and Foulweather bluff, the latter bearing E. f S., distant
8^ miles from the former.
The first mid-channel course is S.E. for 4 miles, pointing directly into port
Gamble, at the entrance to which the houses and mill are plainly visible ; and
passing a high, round, wooded peninsula on the west side of the channel, and
connected to the main by a narrow neck of low sand beach. This is frequently
mistaken for an island, and is called Hood head. Between this head and port
Gamble the canal changes its course and runs in nearly a straight line S. by W.
40 miles, with an average widtb of l£ miles. In latitude 47° '21' N. it makes
an abrupt turn, and runs for 12 or 13 miles about N.E.
Port Ludlow.—Close to Basalt point lie some rocks, with others about
£ a mile S.E., called the Colvos rocks, among which is one 25 feet high, but
of small extent. Close in shore, and abreast of this, is a rock just awash at
high tide, but between tbe two runs a channel with 15 fathoms water, having
soft, muddy bottom. Tbe bright bluff bead If miles S.E. of the Colvos rocks,
and about 2 miles S.W. by W. from Foulweather bluff, is Tala point. Halfway between the Colvos rocks and this point is the usual entrance, over a sand
bar having 4£ fathoms. The 3-fathom line stretches £ a mile S.E. of Colvos
rocks. If the wind and currents do not suit for this channel, run inside of the
Colvos rocks, carrying deep water and 8 fathoms, soft, muddy bottom, anywhere
inside of Tala point, even past the saw-mill, if necessary. The general direction
of the shore from Basalt point to the saw-mill on the low sand point inside, is
S.S.E. 21 miles. Abreast of Tala point tbe width of the bay is f of a mile,
but it gradually contracts to less than £ a mile at the saw-mill, at which
vessels load. Inside of the saW-mill point is an excellent anchorage in 7 and 8
fathoms. About a mile from tbe mill is an ample water-power, with an
available head of 80 feet, but it is not used.
We believe the Pacific Mail Steamship Company were to have established a
coal depot here for then* Puget sound steamships; but since the breaking out
of the Fraser river gold excitement other arrangements have been made.
Of all tbe small harbours in these waters this has the preference, as it is
completely land-locked, and protected from gales from every quarter by the
high land and high trees around it. The first steamboat built in these waters
was launched here in 1860.
The first rocks off Basalt point lie at the narrow mouth of a small boat
harbour, called Mats-mats. Tbe entrance to it is over £ a mile long, about
100 yards wide, and at the sharp turn obstructed by rocks, which allow a
channel of only 3 feet water. Inside, the depth ranges to 2 fathoms, and the
extent of tie harbour is about f of a mile by £ in breadth.
Port Gamble.—After passing Foulweather bluff keep closer to the eastern
shore than to the western, to avoid the strong current passing round the low
point which makes out from Hood head. Run for the saw-mill, plainly in
sight, on the western side of the entrance to the bay, and when within a mile
of it approach the eastern bluff within £~ of a mile, in about 10 or 15 fathoms,
I)*258
HOOD   CANAL.
graduaUy drawing closer in shore, and passing between the outer white and
inner black can buoys. At the lowest, tides the white one is in 15 feet, the
black in 12£, and the small spar buoy between them in mid-channel in 17 feet,
but it rarely shows above water at any tide. After passing these buoys the
miU bears almost S.S.E. £ a mile distant. Steer S.E, or half-way between
tbe mill wharf and the east point, pass to the east of the white spar buoy,-
which is in 12£ feet, and run through tbe entrance, passing the wharf at about
one-tturd of tbe distance between the points. Do not round up to the eastward,
as a shoal makes out almost parallel with the point. It may be here noticed that
these buoys were made and placed by the Puget Mill Company, for tie benefit
of vessels trading to the port.
If the wind be ahead while beating up, it will be impossible for a large
vessel to get in, as the channel is £ a mile long, and not over 100 yards
wide at the narrowest part. Anchor off the buoys, and drop in with the early
flood, or warp in with the last of the ebb. On tbe shoal forming the western
side of the passage 10 feet may. be found until up with the white spar buoy.
Inside of the points tbe bay appears to open well under the eastern one,
but the 3-fathom line makes out on a line with the end of the point. On the
western side is a crib, around which a shoal has formed—anchor just beyond
it in 5 fathoms, soft muddy bottom. The depti of water throughout the bay
is from 4 to 9 fathoms, with mud bottom. The length of the bay is 2f miles,
its widtb f of a mile, and its direction south-east. The shores are steep, but
not high, and are bordered by sand and pebble beach, offering capital chances
for laying a vessel out. A better place, however, for that purpose, is at the
end of the store wharf, especially for vessels with large dead rise.
In summer the wind generaUy blows into tbe harbour lightly; in winter the
S.E. gales draw directly out. Loaded vessels must warp out in summer, or
trust to a light southerly air in the morning, with an ebb tide. None but
small, smart working vessels can beat out, and few of those have done so
within the channel Umits.
The approximate geographical position of the eastern point of the entrance
is lat. 47° 51' 32", long. 122° 33' 56".
From this place, called Teekalet, (the Indian name of the bay), a road is
being constructed (1857) by the MiU Company to port Madison.
At about 3 miles from Hood head, on tbe western side of the canal, is
Suquamish harbour. A large sand bank occupies its centre, and extends a mile in
length N.N.W., by £ a mile in width. The approaches to the shoal, which is
in part bare, are detected in thick weather by the lead, the soundings decreasing
regularly from 20 fathoms. Keep, however, close under the northern shore,
which runs 2 miles W.S.W. from the low point caUed Termination point.
At 14 miles from Hood head the canal curves more to tie southward, and
then to tbe S.S.W. around Hazel point, on the west side of which a large arm
of the canal makes north for 10 miles, bifurcating near its bead. On its western side the eastern spurs of the Olympus range reach its waters, and form
the western shore-line of the canal to the great bend. The sharp peak named
mount Constance attains an elevation of 7777 feet.
At 2 miles south of Hazel point, and on the eastern side of tie canal, is a
fine harbour, formerly called Hahainish harbour, but the name has been
changed by settlers, who have lately built a small saw-mill there. It is
formed by Seabock island on tie west, and is about a mile long by £ a mile
wide, with good bottom in from 10 to 15 fathoms, the depth decreasing to the
head.POSSESSION SOUND AND ANCHORAGES.
Uo'J
South of Hahainish harbour Hood canal is sbghtly contracted in width, but
continues in the same general direction to about latitude 47° 21' N., (" Vancouver's farthest"), where it takes an abrupt turn, and stretches E. by N. £ N.
4 miles. The width in that part contracts to £ a mile, and the shores overlap.
From this it takes another slight bend, runs N.E, by N. 8 or 9 miles, and
reaches within 2 or 3 miles of the northern extremity of Case inlet, an arm of
Puget sound. A large lake Ues between the inlet and the canal. When
Vancouver reached tie first sharp turn he thought he saw the termination of
the canal, and has plotted it in accordance with that view on his chart, 4 mfles
beyond the point marked " Vancouver's farthest" on the Admfralty charts.
This was, in fact, tie highest point to which he carried his boats.
POSSESSION SOUND AND ANCHOEAGES.
WHIDBEY ISLAND.—This long crooked island has been already
mentioned as lying at the entrance to Admiralty inlet, and forming for a considerable extent its eastern shore. It is about 33 miles long, and so irregular
is its outline, that in some places it is not more than a mile broad. The soil
is represented to be good, and the timber to be excellent, and it is said that
there are also several open plains suitable for grazing purposes. On it are
many small villages, and the inhabitants, which are of the Scatchat tribe, are
more numerous than in any part of Juan de Fuca strait or Puget sound.
The channel between Whidbey island and the main, named Possession
sound, contains several places of excellent anchorage, of which the principal
are ports Gardner and Susan, and Penn cove. The water throughout is in
general deep, but believed to be not so deep as in Admiralty inlet.
The western shore of Whidbey island is described in our detailed account of
Admiralty inlet. We may however observe here, that a survey of it, such as
will satisfy the requirements of the increasing trade in Puget sound, has yet
to be made and also of Admiralty inlet. It is known that a 10-fathom bank,
muddy bottom, exists off point Partridge, its western extremity, but tbe extent
and position of this bank have not been ascertained; it may possibly be a spit
running off from the point. Vancouver says :—" When passing at the distance of about a mile from this point, we very suddenly came on a smaU space
of 10 fathoms water, but immediately increased our depth to 20 and 30
fathoms. After advancing a few miles along the eastern shore of the gulf, we
found no effect either from the ebb or flood tide, and tbe wind being light and
variable from the northward, at 3h. p.m. we were obliged to anchor in 20
fathoms water, sandy bottom.
FIDALGO ISLAND.—At tbe north end of Whidbey island, and
separated from it by a narrow and dangerous channel, named Deception passage,
is Fidalgo island. It has an extent of about 6 miles, and on its eastern side
is almost connected to tbe main, the land between being marshy and traversed
only by a narrow channel of no great depth. Mount Erie, in its centre, rise?
to the height of 1250 feet. On the western side of the island is Burrows bay,
which is protected from westerly winds by Allan, Burrows and Young islets.
In this bay vessels may ancnor in about 10 fathoms and wait for a suitable
wind to carry them through
Rosario strait.260
POSSESSION SOUND AND ANCHORAGES.
The country around Fidalgo island presents a very different aspect to that
further southward. The shores are composed of steep rugged rocks, whose
surface varies considerably in respect to height, and' exhibits bttle more than
the barren rock, which in some places produces a Utile herbage of a duU
colour, with a few dwarf trees.
Deception Passage communicates with Possession sound, and is a narrow intricate channel, which, for a considerable distance, is not 40 yards in
width, and abounds with rocks above and beneath the surface. These impediments, in addition to the great rapidity and irregularity of the tide, render the
passage navigable only for boats or vessels of very small burden. In front of
the western entrance is a small islet having a sunken reef off its south side.
POSSESSION SOUND.—This is the extensive sound between Whidbey island and the main, and its principal and indeed only navigable entrance
for ships is from Admiralty inlet, between the south end of the island and the
main shore, in lat. 47° 54'. On the eastern shore, near tbe entrance, is the
outlet of the Sinahomis river; off which is a smaU high island, in the middle
of the sound, having a depth of 12 to 20 fathoms close to it aU round. The
shores of the sound are in general regular, and of but moderate elevation, and
Vancouver observes:—"We found the shores of the inlet to be straight,
compact, and about 2 miles apart. In several places we attempted to land
near the upper end, but found ourselves as often repulsed by a flat sandy shoal,
which extended directly across. The land there seemed of a swampy nature,
was thinly wooded, and through it was the appearance of a shaUow rivulet
falling into tbe
sea
farther back it was more elevated, and the surrounding
country being covered with timber, made us conclude that it was fertile."
At about 9 miles within the entrance of Possession sound is Allan point, the
southern extremity of Camano island. This island is nearly 14 mfles long,
and its upper part is joined to the shore by a tract of swampy land, through
which a small stream flows; behind this the country is more elevated, and
covered with timber.
Port Susan.—On the east side of Camano island is port Susan, which
extends 11 mfles to the north-westward, and has deep soundings all over it,
excepting at its head, where is the swampy land just noticed, which is fronted
by a quantity of kelp.
On the eastern side of the entrance to this port is a smaU bay, into which
flow two excellent streams, but so nearly on a level with the sea, that Vancouver could procure water only at low tide, or at some distance up tie brook,
which latter was easily effected, as the boats could go up as far as where the
fresh water fell from the elevated land.
Port Gardner is on the west side of Camano island, and is merely a reach
of Possession sound; in it there is deep water of 30 fathoms, and good shelter
from all winds. In the western part of the port there is a deep bay, extending
into Whidbey island about 5 miles, the shores of which, with the exception of
some rocks off the eastern shore at the entrance, are bebeved to be clear of
sunken dangers. From port Gardner the trend of the sound is towards the
N.W., about 8 miles, to Penn cove.
Perm Cove is an inlet on the east side of Whidbey island. It is a very
excellent and commodious harbour, and has regular soundings of 10 to 20
fathoms, good holding-ground. The extent of the cove is about 5 miles, and
when within there is shelter from all winds. The head of the cove is not more
than a mile from Partridge point, the western extremity of the island, so thatHARO ARCHIPELAGO.
261
the island is here nearly divided. On each point of the harbour Vancouver
found, in 1792, a deserted village.
From Penn cove, Possession sound runs northward about 8 miles, and has
a very contracted channel, although deep enough for vessels. From the eastern shore an extensive flat runs out nearly over to Whidbey island, and narrows
the channel to the width of about f of a mile; on this flat there are several
islets and rocks. In the northern part of the sound is tie entrance to
Deception passage; and between Fidalgo island and the main is a narrow
tortuous channel over the marshes, leading into Belbngham bay, fit only
for boats.
Vancouver (1792) says of Penn cove:—" The surrounding country, for several
mfles, from most points of view, presented a debghtful prospect, consisting
chiefly of various meadows, elegantly adorned with clumps of trees ; amongst
which the oak bore a very considerable proportion, in size from 4 to 6 feet in
circumference. In these beautiful pastures, bordering on an expansive sheet
of water, the deer were seen playing about in great numbers. Nature bad
here provided the well-stocked park, and wanted only the assistance of art to
constitute that assemblage of surface which is so much sought in other countries,
and only to be acquired by an immoderate expense in manual labour. The
sofl principaUy consisted of a rich black vegetable mould, lying on a sandy or
clayey substratum; the grass, of an exceUent quaUty, grew to tbe height of 3
feet, and tie ferns, which, in the sandy soils, occupied the clear spots, were
nearly twice as high. The country in the vicinity of this branch of the sea is,
according to Mr. Whidbey's representation, the finest we had yet met with,
notwithstanding the very pleasing appearance of many others; its natural
productions were luxuriant in the highest degree, and it was, by no means iU
supplied with streams of fresh water. The number of its inhabitants he estimated at about 600, which I suppose would exceed the total of aU the natives
we had before seen; the other parts of the sound did not appear by any means
so populous, as we had been visited by one small canoe only, in which were
five of the natives, who civflly furnisned us. with some small fish. The
character and appearance of the several tribes here seen did not seem to
differ in any material respect from each other, or from those with which we
had already met."
In a bay westward of the north point of the entrance to Possession sound,
there is a shoal at a short dist&nce from the shore. It is generally visible,
and is easily discovered by the soundings gradually decreasing to 10, 7, and
5 fathoms, so that it cannot be considered as any material impediment to
the navigation of the bay.
HARO  ARCHIPELAGO.
Between the south-west end of Vancouver island and the main is tie extensive group of islands known as the Haro Archipelago. It would not be
consistent with the limits of the present work to furnish a fuU detafled
description of aU the islets composing this archipelago ; so numerous are they
that an inspection of the charts will alone give an adequate idea of their
configuration, and of the winding channels which separate them. We therefore refer our readers to the Admiralty ciarts (Nos. 2689, 577, 2840, 602,r#f™
262
HARO ARCHIPELAGO.
and 611,) and to tie Vancouver island Pilot, pubUcations resulting from tie
survey of these waters by Captain G. H. Richards, R.N., during the years
1859 to 1866. The latter work contains a complete description of and
directions for, every anchorage and navigable channel among the islands.*
The foUowing general remarks upon the archipelago are from the report of tie
U.S. Coast Survey 1862.. It is necessary to premise that the'islands are
separated from the Vancouver shore by a broad and very deep channel known
as Haro strait; and from the main land by a passage almost equaUy broad,
but not so deep, named Rosario strait.
HARO STRAIT.—Tbe southern entrance to this strait may be said to
be between Discovery island and the point of San Juan island, nearly northwest and 7 miles distant. Starting from this Une and about 8 miles from
Discovery island, a course N.W. by N. for 16 miles wiU run through the
first stretch of the strait; thence an abrupt turn is made towards tie eastward
and tie way out can be readily seen between the islands. The next course
is N.E. £ E. for 11 miles; finally, N.N.W. 2^ miles, and a run of 7 miles
on that course wfll carry a vessel into the middle of tie gulf of Georgia.
Commencing at the starting point, we have San Juan island to the eastward,
and pass it at the distance of l£ mfles. Its mountains rise to 1070 feet, and
some of them are only partially covered with wood. The bluffs are very
precipitous and inaccessible, and the depth of water close to them is as much
as 150 fathoms. The greater extent of the strait is to the westward, stretching off into bays and passages among the islands. Cormorant bay is the only
available anchorage about this entrance. It commences at Gordon head,
5£ mfles N.W. by W. f W. from Discovery island ; then stretches westward
for 2 miles, and graduaUy curves to tie N.N.W., witi a long iigi bluff,
broken and bright, at Cowichin head. Back of tie south-west part of the
bay rises a bold rocky-topped hill, (named mount Douglas,) which reaches
a beight of 696 feet. Fresh water is obtainable on the southern shores of tie
bay. Tbe northern limit of the bay is Darcy island, N. f W., 4 miles from
Gordon bead, and on this course and If miles from the head is Zero rock, a
small white rock, showing a few feet above water, with plenty of water around
it, but foul bottom and a patch of kelp a few hundred yards N.N.W. of it;
If mfles westward of it is a sunken rock. In the bay a depth of not over
20 fathoms is found, dereasing irregularly in advancing, but in the southern
portion affording capital iolding ground -in 10 fathoms. At l£ miles E.S.E.
from Gordon head are patches of kelp and foul bottom.\
When 8£ miles within the entrance the width of the strait decreases to
8f miles, having Darcy island (low and wooded) on the west, with a smaU
islet off its N.E. face, and very large fields of kelp stretching far off the southeast point into the strait. In one of these fields we discovered in 1854 a
sharp-pointed rock, which has been named Unit, lying S. 72° E. from the
S.E. point of Darcy island, and distant from it f of a mile. The small, sharp
apex of this rock rises about 3 feet above the very lowest tides. In recent
charts deep water is placed around it, and when the coast surveying brig
* We cannot too strongly recommend shipmasters hound to Vancouver island to
furnish themselves with these excellent works by Captain Richards, R.N. The charts of
Vancouver island and harbours with the inner waters, published by the Admiralty, are in
about forty sheets, and the surveys evidence very great care.
+ Apparently on Johnstone reef (6 feet under water) of the Admiralty chart, No. 2689.HARO ARCHIPELAGO.
268
Fauntleroy beat through the field the existence of this danger was unknown.
Since its discovery several rocks covering a space of £ a mile square, and
bearing S. 72° E. from the S.E. point of Darcy island, have been found.
They are marked by a field of kelp, and one point uncovers at the lowest
tides.    Near mid-channel a depth of 155 fathoms is found.
The island to the eastward, nearly abreast of Darcy island, with a smaU
cove at its southern end, is Henry island, having a high, rocky precipitous
front, and a swirling current around it. Further on and to the westward is
the south-east end of Sidney island, l£ mfles northward of Darcy island, with
the Dot rocks between them, but nearer Sidney island. This island is not
high Uke those on the other side of the channel, and a landing is easily made
at any point. The channel here, 10 miles from the entrance, is 2f mfles
wide ; to the eastward it opens beyond tbe north end of Henry island, with
high mountainous islands bounding tbe view; to the westward Ue a couple of
long, narrow islands a mile from Sidney islands, and between them and the
latter is good anchorage and capital fishing ground for habbut; that near the
strait is named Halibut island. The moderately low wooded islands, 3 or
4 miles ahead, and on the western side of the channel, have not been named.
Between them runs the inside channel for steamers to the Nanaimo coal mines.
The background of the view is occupied by wooded islands, overlapping each
other and appearing like a continuous shore. Tbe large high island on the
eastern side, 15 miles from the entrance,'is Stuart island, and the strait is
here contracted to a breadth of only 2 miles, this being the narrowest part.
At 2£ miles S. 67° W. from the western point of Stuart island, the British
surveying steamer Plumper found in 1858 a rock covered at a quarter flood,
and having irregular bottom around it for tbe space of £ a mile with
soundings from 5 to 20 fathoms. At a mile N.W. of Stuart island is a depth
of 190 fathoms.
Stuart island in many places is very high and precipitous, and covered
with timber, but in some parts sparsely. Near its south-west head a perpendicular wall of rock serves also to distinguish it. After passing the
western end of this island at the distance of a mile, the channel takes an
abrupt turn to the eastward, and the gulf of Georgia is seen. The course
now is N.E. £ E. for 11 miles, having on the north-west side Saturna island,
which rises into mountains. Monarch head, near the eastern extremity of
this island, stands up perpendicularly nearly 700 feet, but the extreme part of
the island, caUed East point, is a long sloping point, in many places destitute
of trees.    The small island lying off its north shore is named Tumbo.
On the east side of the strait the waters open well to the south-east, and
the islands rise in high hills and mountains. The large island opposite
Monarch head, to the south-eastward is named Waldron; it has good anchorage
off its south-west side, where tbe shore-Une curves well in. The western
point of the island is low and sandy; the southern, called point Disney, is
perpendicular, high and rocky. Off its northern face lie two islets, called
Skipjack and Penguin; the western one, about a mile from Waldron, is
moderately high, and wooded; the eastern is smaller, about 40 feet high,
destitute of trees, but covered with grass, and Ues a mile east of the former;—
between these islets bes a sunken rock, and the current rushes by with great
velocity.
When East point (Saturna island) bears N.W. by W. f W., 2 miles
distant, the west end of Patos island will bear N.N.E., 2£ miles; and tbe264
HARO ARCHIPELAGO.
J
west end of the Sucia group,* E.N.E. 8^ miles; the course out lying N.N.W.
between Pates island and East pomt, which are 2f miles apart. Seven
mfles on this course carries to the middle of the gulf of Georgia. Close off
East point is found a depth of 120 fathoms, and off Patos island 170 fathoms.
All these islands are moderately high and covered with wood. They are
rugged and irregular, composed of sandstone and conglomerate, upheaved
until the strata are nearly perpendicular in some places, and interspersed with
small veins of lignite.
Plumper reef Ues S. 66° W., 1 mile from the S.W. pomt of Sucia; it has
less then 2 fathoms upon it, and is marked by a large mass of kelp.
The approximate geographical position of two or three points wfll serve to check
the courses above given. East point of Discovery island, lat. 48° 25', long.
128° 14'; west point of Stuart island, lat. 48° 41' 17*5", long. 123° 14' 80";
and west point of Patos island, lat. 48° 47' 8", long. 122° 57' 81".
The number of islands and the intricate channels lying between Haro and
Rosario straits we shall not attempt to describe. A proper appreciation of
them can only be obtained from the chart.
ROSARIO STRAIT.—Rosario strait is tie eastern of the two principal
channels running through the Haro archipelago, between Vancouver island
and the main. Its southern entrance Ues N. by E., distant 7 miles from
Smith island, and is 4f mfles wide. The western point of tie entrance is
formed by cape Colvflle, which runs out from Walmouth hiU; •(- this bill is
450 feet high and on tie south-east part of Lopez island. Off this cape Ue
several rocky islets, with deep water among them and a rushing current. The
outer one, named Colvflle island, is about 50 feet high, rocky, flat-topped,
destitute of bush or tree, narrow, and about £ of a mile in length, east and
west; S. 88° E. from it, at a distance of £ a nule, Ues Davidson rock,
possibly bare at the lowest tides. A patch of kelp exists upon and around
this rock, but the kelp is generaUy run under the surface of tbe water by the
strength of the current.
The whole southern face of Lopez island is guarded by rocks and reefs.
The island itself is very rocky and moderately low.
On the eastern side of the entrance to Rosario strait is a smaU wooded islet
caUed Deception island, at tie mouti of Deception pass, an intricate and very
narrow 3-fathom channel, 8 miles long, running between the north end of
Whidbey island, and the south end of Fidalgo island. In 1841 the United
States brig Bainbridge passed through it from the eastward.
When at the entrance to Rosario strait, and l£ miles from the western side,
a line wfll pass clear of everything from one end of the strait to tie other. This
course is N. by W. £ W., and the distance 19^ miles to tie north entrance. It
passes between Bird and Belle rocks', and almost tangent to point Lawrence, on
Orcas island. Taking the courses through the mid-channel we should have tie
foUowing: N.W. by N. $ N. for llf miles; N. by E. f E. for 3f nules;
and N.W. £ W. for 6£ miles—making a total of 21.1 miles.
The shore for the first 2 miles on tie western side is moderately high
declining to a point (cape St. Mary,) a \ of a mile off which Ues KeUett ledge,
* Sucia signifies muddy.    The harbour on the east side of it has a soft ninthly bottom.
The Indian name of the island is Choo-sa-nung.
t The Indian name is Noo-chaad-kwum.HARO ARCHIPELAGO.
265
bare at the lowest tides, and having deep water all around it; the ledge is
marked by a mass of kelp. Thence the shore makes a deep bend for a mile
to the westward, with a low beach and marsh, over which Lopez sound can be
seen. This bend is caUed Davis bay, and has from 6 to 10 fathoms for a mile
out, with level sandy bottom. In mid-channel of the strait rise the Bird
rocks, about 40 feet high, consisting of three small rocky islets very close
together, and running in a north direction. They are somewhat pyramidal
in form, and during the summer show yeUowish, on account of the parched
grass and the colour of the rocks. Abreast of them, on the western side, is
Maury passage, a narrow opening into Lopez sound, between the two low rocky
heads of Lopez and Decatur islands. The anchorage of Davis bay continues
some distance northward of this opening, and abreast of some moderately
high white bluffs. N.N.E. f of a mile from Bird rocks lies Belle rock,
directly in mid-channel of the strait, and from its position very dangerous.
It shows 4 feet above the very lowest tides, and is covered by a patch of kelp,
which is, however, generally run under by the strength of the currents. The
rip upon it can sometimes be seen when the water is smooth, but with light
winds and high tides its existence would not be suspected. On all sides of it
the water is very deep. The extent of rock above water is about 20 feet
square. The surveyors discovered and named this danger in 1854, and while
placing a signal upon it noticed that the tide rose nearly 1^ feet while the
current was yet running ebb at the rate of 3 miles an hour. Between it and
the Bird rocks there is a submarine ridge with plenty of water, but marked
by strong eddies.
After passing Deception island on the east side of the entrance, the face of
Fidalgo island is high, precipitous, and bare for 2 or 3 mfles in a north-west
direction ; this is called Sares head. It then sweeps-to the north, changing
to the westward until abreast of and 2 miles from Belle rock. In this deep
bay, and lying well off shore, are, first, Williamson rocks, a cluster of rocky
islets about 40 feet high, with deep water close around them; from Deception
island they bear N.W. f W., 3 miles distant, and from Colvflle island off
cape Colville, N.E. 5 miles. Half a mile northward of WilUamson rocks
is Allan island, which is about f of a mile in extent, and about 200 feet high,
with its southern face partly bare; a f of a mile off its S.W. face lies the
Dennis rock, which is never bare, but its position is marked by a patch of
kelp.
North of Allan island, and separated from it by a channel a f of a mile
wide, is Burrows island, l£ miles long S.E. and N.W. by £ a mile in breadth.
The island is between 600 and 700 feet high, and has a remarkably flat top,
is wooded, and may be seen from the strait of Juan de Fuca. At the eastern
end of the passage, between the last two islands, is a small one caUed Young
island. Through all the channels formed by these islands a good depth of
water exists, and no dangers have been discovered.
The breadth of Rosario strait at Belle rock is 3^ miles; but it is soon
contracted by James island, on its western side, and in a N.N.E. direction,
opens into a channel called the Bellingham channel, * which is about 2 miles |
wide at its entrance.    A smaU channel runs from the south entrance to
Belbngbam channel, to the eastward along the north shore of Fidalgo islandfni!
Pi 111
Ui
266
HARO ARCHIPELAGO.
into Padflla bay. Upon Fidalgo island rises mount Erie to a height of
1250 feet, covered with woods, and presenting a flat appearance from certain
directions. James island consists of two heads a mile apart, and 250 feet
high, but connected by a narrow ridge ; the southern head is the higher, and
not very heavily timbered;—close to the west of the ridge lies another head,
connected with Decatur island by a low sand beach.
Immediately northward of James island is an opening on the we'st side of
the strait between Decatur island and Blakely island, witi a .depth of
25 fathoms in it, but a rock, covered at a quarter flood, Ues exactly in the
middle of the entrance. On the east side, £ a mile up the strait, appears the
S.W. point of Cypress island, off which lie rocks and foul bottom for £ a mile
on a line to Burrows island. Around this locabty extends a large body of
kelp. The southern face of Cypress island consists of alternate perpendicular
white cliffs, and sloping ground covered with fern or trees. On its western
side, and If miles from the south-west point, is found a snug bttle harbour
called Strawberry bay, * which is formed by tie retreating of the shore-Une,
and an outlying rocky islet called Strawberry or Hautboy island. In this bay
excellent anchorage is found in from 6 to 10 fathoms, muddy bottom. Good
fresh water is abundant here. A high white cliff is seen to the south of the
harbour, from the shores of which rise rapidly the Lake mountains^ (1) to an
elevation of 1525 feet, and among whose peaks are two large sheets of fresh
water. These peaks are very noticeable from the strait of Juan de Fuca, and
as they are connected by comparatively low ridges with other hills on the
island, they present a saddle-like appearance from the southward and
westward.
Abreast of Strawberry island the strait contracts to a width of l£ miles,
where tie bold rocky face of Blakely island rises to a height of between
900 and 1000 feet; the greatest elevation of the northern part of the island
is 1044 feet. Nearly £ a mile S.E. from its east face lies a very small low
sailed Black rock, and half way between it and the south end of tie
rock c
island is White rock, a f of a mile from the shore. La this narrow part
of the strait the depth of water is about 60 fathoms, and the current goes
through with a roar like the sound of a gale of wind through a forest. When
at anchor in 10 fathoms, under the low point l£ miles north of Strawberry
island, tie surveyors found the current 4 miles per hour, and swirling so much
that the vessel had to be steered to prevent her breaking her sheer. Thence
the strait widens northward, and at the north end of Blakely island, 2 miles above
Strawberry island, two channels lead to the westward around Obstruction
island, which Ues between Blakely and Orcas islands; both are narrow, and
off the entrance to the southern one be some sunken rocks, and others above
water.    Blakely island and Orcas island are f of a mile apart.
When in the narrowest part of Rosario strait, a ver^ marked perpendicular
rocky peak on the north end of Cypress island, is seen to tie norti over the
low point of Cypress island, and soon shows rising abruptly from the water's
edge to a height of 750 feet. It is called Bald peak.f Abreast of it' the
channel takes the first turn, changing its course to N. by E. f E. for 8f miles.
* The Indian name for Strawberry hay is Tutl-ke-teh-nas.
+ The Indian name is Sheh-ung-tlh, signifying the home of the Thunder-bird.HARO ARCHIPELAGO.
267
Half a mile off the north end of Cypress island is a small islet covered with
trees, and called rock island ; N.W. of it are some sunken rocks, but their
exact position is not accurately known. The comparatively low island £ a
mile N.N.E. of Cypress is Sinclair island, the highest part of which is towards
the eastern end. Off the north-east face of Sinclair island, and stretching
£ a mile, is Panama reef, visible at extreme low tides. It is covered with
kelp, which is, however, generaUy kept under the surface of the water by
strong currents. A huge erratic granite boulder is seen at ordinary tides
inside of the outer point of the reef, and bears from it S. 70° E., distant
500 yards. From the western point of the island the reef bears exactly
North, distant f of a mile. On tbe north side of the island is anchorage in
10 to 15 fathoms £ a mile off shore.
Three miles from Sinclair island bes Orcas island, on tbe north-west side
of the strait. It is a large island, with a mountain (Entrance mountain)
1120 feet high near its southern end. The point stretching furthest east and
coming down to the water is point Lawrence, and the low, treeless islets and
reef passed l£ miles before reaching this point, and lying over £ a mile off
shore, are the Peapods; deep water is found close to them. When upon this
same mid-channel course, the island ahead is Lummi island. The southern
half of this island is very much higher than the northern, and attains an
elevation of 1560 feet. The rock nearly 100 feet high off the highest part of
the ridge, and £ of a mile from shore, is tbe Lummi rock, and a capital boat
harbour is found on its north-west side. A mile off the south end of the
island are the Viti rocks, which are about 25 feet high, and have plenty of
water around them.
Abreast of point Lawrence the strait is more than 3 miles wide, and it
there changes to N.W. £ W. for 6^ miles to a line joining the Matia group
witi the north end of Lummi island. From point Lawrence, along the north
face of Orcas island, the shore is rocky and precipitous, and rises by two or
three plateaux to mount Constitution,* which is less than a mile in-shore and
2423 feet high. The geographical position of mount Constitution, as determined by tie Coast Survey in 1854, is lat. 48° 40' 37", long. 122° 49' 1".
The course out from the strait passes on the west some rocky islets called the
Sisters, marked by one or two stunted fir trees; then Clark island (with a
Utile islet named Barnes close under its western side,) leaving a channel a
mile wide between it and the north shore of Orcas island, with very deep water
and no anchorage. Abreast of Clark island, on Lummi island, is a contracted
anchorage and shelter from northerly winds under a low point called Village
point; the anchorage is in 10 to 15 fathoms, but there is no fresh water, and
the large Indian village is now deserted. After passing this point, anchorage
may be obtained at £ a mile from shore in from 8 to 15 fathoms. Close to
Clark and Barnes islands the depth is 50 and 60 fathoms, and a very strong
current runs near them. The channel between Village point and these islands
is 2 miles wide.
W.S.W. from the north end of Lummi island, and 4 miles distant, are
three islands very close together, caUed Matia. At 1^ miles westward from
them Ues the Sucia islands, consisting of one large and six small islands,
witi a reef off the north side of the group, and enclosing a beautiful harbour
a mile long and £ a mile wide, opening to the east, and carrying from 10 toif
268
HARO ARCHIPELAGO.
15 fathoms sticky, mud bottom. To the westward of this group Ues Patos
island, and a much smaller one close to its S.W. point; the eastern point of
Patos island bears W. f S., 9 miles from the north end of Lummi. At 2 or
3 miles N.N.E. from Lummi island opens a shoal bay, backed by low marshy
ground, which is covered with trees and swamp undergrowth. Into it one or
two mouths of the Lummi river empty. The main entrance of that stream
is at tbe north part of the bay, and can be reached with boats only at high
tide. The N.W. boundary of tbe bay is a low grassy point with a few bushes
upon it, called Sandy point; from tbe north point of Lummi island it bears
N. by W. £ W., distant 2f miles. Between these two points anchorage may
be bad in from 4 to 6 fathoms, but the south end of Sandy point should not
be approached within less than £ a mile. Down the east side of Lummi
island, which is about a-mile in breadth, runs Hale passage, f of a mile wide,
leading from Bellingham bay.
On tbe western shore of Hale passage, at 1£ mfles E. by S. £ S. from
the north end of Lummi island, is a low sandy point, upon which was
estabbshed in 1853 a secondary astronomical station of the United States
Coast Survey. Its geographical position is lat. 48° 44' 2", long.
122° 40' 37", which places the north end of Lummi island in lat. 48° 44' 53",
long. 122° 42' 12".
The foUowing geographical positions will serve to check the courses and
distances given for sailing through Rosario strait:—Matia island, east end,
lat. 48° 44' 37", long. 122° 48' 29"; south end of Strawberry island, lat.
48° 33' 34", long. 122° 43' 27"; and ColviUe island, off Lopez island,
lat. 48° 24' 53", long. 122° 48' 34".
Alden Bank.—From the north point of Lummi island an extensive shoal
bears W. by N. f N., distant 5£ miles, and N.W. by N. £ N. S£ miles from the
eastern of the Matia islands. It bes upon the last direct course out of tie
strait, but has not been completely sounded out. Within the 15-fathom curve
it is at least 2 miles square, and may be used when a vessel loses the wind
and has a strong adverse current; but the swirls and eddies upon and around
it will be very apt to foul the anchor.
The least water found on this bank is 2f fathoms, and this spot bears
N. 35° W., 3£ miles from the eastern islet of the Matia islands.
Tbe following bearings of prominent objects have been taken from about the
middle part of Alden bank, eastern end of Matia islands, S.E. by S. 3^ miles;
north point of Lummi island, E. by S. f S. 5£ mfles ; and the N.W. point of
Sucia islands, with the wooded island of the Shipjacks just open, S.W. f S.
4 miles. This position will bring the west side of Clark's island just open on
with point Lawrance,
The surveyors in 1857 attempted to reach this bank four or five times,
from an anchorage off Hale passage, with Ught airs, but the currents invariably
swept them away from it. Recently it has been anchored upon by the United
States Coast Surveying brig Fauntleroy.
General Remarks.—The experience of three seasons' surveying in this
immediate locabty has not increased our rebsh for navigating these channels
in safling vessels. With plenty of wind no navigation could be better, but in
a calm vessels wfll frequently be jammed close to the rocks, with only a few
fathoms inside of their positions, but 40 or 50 outside, and a swirling current
that renders towing with boats utterly impossible. Frequently, too, boats
have been nearly swamped by the tide rips that exist through them.    Off EastGULF OF GEORGIA.
269
point (Saturna island), as an instance, a five-oared whale-boat entirely failed in
trying to hold her own against the current, which the surveyors judged to be
rushing (the only term applicable) at the rate of 7 miles per hour. Throughout Haro strait the roar of the conflicting currents can be beard for miles,
and the main current runs frequently 6 miles per hour. No anchorages exist
in this channel, except at Cormorant bay; but it is free of known hidden
dangers, except Zero rock, Kelp reefs, Unit rock, and the continuation of the
reef off Darcy island.* It is lO miles longer than Rosario strait, and makes
a right angle in its course, but is a mile wider, and has much deeper water.
Rosario strait is less curved, has several anchorages and known dangerous
rocks, and a current of about If mfles less per hour. For steamers, either
channel, or even some of the intermediate channels, may be used; but for a
sailing vessel Rosario passage is preferable, although the total distance from
the middle of the strait of Juan de Fuca to the middle of the gulf of Georgia
is 5 mfles longer. The winds are apt to fail in both channels, and during
summer frequent calms prevail.
Once in the gulf of Geoogia, through either channel, the 3-mile face and
timber-covered bluffs of point Roberts (showing almost as an island) is seen to
the north-west. On tie west the mountains of Vancouver and its bordering
islands rise up precipitously, and on the eastern or main shore a series of
wooded cliffs 200 feet high. Far to the eastward the Cascade range is seen
rising above intermediate ridges, with the snow-covered summit of mount Baker,
which rears its head 10,900 feet above the level of the sea. To the W.N.W.
stretch the waters of the gulf of Georgia, 9 mfles wide abreast of point
Roberts, where it is narrowest, but spreading out to 20 miles, and having a
length of 120. A short distance above tbe 49th paraUel it receives Fraser
river, (the third great stream of the north-west coast of America), the branches
of which spread towards the Cascade range of mountains.
If bound up the gulf, vessels hold weU to the eastern shore to avoid the
rushing currents, and to take the chances of an anchorage if the wind fail.
GULF OF GEORGIA,
EASTEEN  SIDE   TO  FEASEE  RIYEE.
BELLINGHAM BAY.—After leaving Rosario strait, the course upon
entering Belbngham channel, southward and eastward of Cypress island, is
N.E. for 2 miles. The width is at first 2 miles, it tien decreases to a mile
upon turning sharp around the S.E. point of Cypress island; to the eastward
are seen the bright bluffs of Guemes island. Between these two islands the
channel runs about 3 mfles on a N. by W. £ W. course. Abreast of the
north end of Guemes island, (which is a steep bluff), and on tbe west side of
tbe channel, are several small, high, wooded islets, called the Cone islands.
The moderately low, wooded island facing the channel is named Sinclair;
vessels pass between the south-east, point of it and the north end of Guemes
island. The island 2 mfles to tie N.E. is Vendovia. Pass north of Vendovia
island, but south of the smaU islet (off Eliza island), which is 2 mfles N.E. by
For the positions of these, see the chart.i
270
GULF OF GEORGIA.
N. from the N,.W. point of Vendovia island, and the southern part of Belling-
ham bay opens to the south-east;—its northern part opens to the N.N.W.
If tie current be flood and the wind light, keep close around Guemes and
Vendovia islands, so as not to be set past Sinclair island. The low, bare,
rocky islets, If miles N.W. of Vendovia, are the Viti rocks; and the point
between- them and Eliza island is the southern extremity of Lummi island.
Fi*om the islet last passed, a point on the eastern shore Ues nearly North 5 or 6
miles distant. Run past this and follow the trend of the shore for 2 or 3 mfles
to the deepest part of that part of the bay, when houses, &c, will denote the
position of the mines and the villages of Sehome and Whatcom, Half a mile
from tie shore is capital anchorage in 4 fathoms, soft bottom, and the bay
there is very smooth.
The general direction of Bellingham bay is S.E. and N.W.; its width'
3 mfles and length 14 miles, extending from lat. 48° 33'to lat. 48° 48'. Tbe
depth of water ranges from 3 to 20 fathoms, with good sticky bottom.
We believe there are several companies mining here, but the amount of coal
obtained is not great. Its quality is not good, the furnaces producing sometimes as much clinker and ashes in bulb, and half the amount in weight, of
the coal put in. Deleterious gas is freely disengaged, and the combustion
also evolves clouds of black smoke. In some experiments in 1853, the
steamer's furnaces could not, in two attempts, be kept up so as to produce a
sufficiency of steam.
The north-west channel into Bellingham bay is between Lummi island and
tie shore. At rather more than 2 mfles from the north end of the island, in
a N. by W. direction, is Sandy point, a low point projecting from the main
land. From Sandy point to point Wbitehorn the general trend of the shore is
N.W. £ W., and the distance 7 miles. The shore is a steep bluff, about 150
feet high, and covered with wood. At Whitehorn point tie face of the point
is worn away by the action of the sea, and shows bright, witi rocks at its
base.
BIRCH BAY.—The southern point of this fine bay is point Whitehorn,
and the north-west shore is formed by a long rounding high bluff, bearing
abput N.W. from Whitehorn point, and distant 3 miles. The bay runs
N.N.E. 2£ miles, with a width of If miles. The bottom is very uniform, with
capital holding-ground of soft mud in from 4 to 10 fathoms. The immediate
shores are low, and edged with marshy patches, thick undergrowth, and heavy
wood. No directions are necessary for entering, as there is a depth of 15 to 20
fathoms a mile outside, and 10 fathoms water on the Une of the entrance.
During the heaviest south-east weather no swell is felt here in a properly
selected anchorage. Search has been made for fresh water, but none found
in the space of more than a mile along its south-eastern side. The approximate geographical position of point Whitehorn is lat. 48° 53' 7", long.
122° 46' 27".    The Indian nahie of the point is Tsan-wuch.
DRAYTON HARBOUR.—Passing the bluff N.W. of Birch bay the
shore trends about N.N.E. for nearly 3 miles, and terminates in a long, low,
sandy point, behind which Ues Drayton harbour—a small land-locked bay
having a depth of 10 fathoms just inside the entrance, but very shoal over nine-
tenths of it. It opens to the north at the extremity of tbe sand point. With
the end of the point bearing N. 60° W., £ a mile distant, the anchorage would
be in 6 fathoms. South of this position-it shoals gradually for over £ a mile
to 12 feet, with sticky bottom.
The approaches to the bay
do not show over 5 fathoms at a distance of aGULF OF GEORGIA.
271
mile from the shore, and the same depti is found on graduaUy nearing the end
of the low point. The south-east shore of the harbour is flat and marshy,
and is not separated by much more than a mile from Birch bay.
In this harbour the United States and British steamers attached to the
North-western Boundary Survey were aocustomed to anchor (1857). The
American commissioner encamped on the bluff about a mile north of the
boundary, the site having been selected on account of fresh water, but it has
an extensive flat in front.
SEMI-AH-MOO BAY.—This extensive bay stretches 3 or 4 miles to
the westward of Drayton harbour, and is bounded on the north by a bluff from
800 to 400 feet high, covered with fir. The bottom is very regular, and the
depth ranges from 10 fathoms soft, about 2 miles south of tbe bluffs, to 3
fathoms within £ a mile of them.
Tides.—The corrected estabbshment of tie port is 4b. 50m. The mean
rise and fall of tides is 5*9 feet; of spring tides, 10*9 feet.
Stretching to the north-west from this bay is a large shaUow marshy bay,
fringed with trees and bushes. From its northern shore low land extends as
far back as Fraser river. The western boundary of the bay is formed by the
eastern shore of point Roberts. It is named Mud bay on the Uuited States
Coast Survey map.
Point Roberts.—When seen from the northern entrances of Haro and
Rosario straits, this point stands out near the middle of the Gulf of Georgia as
a bold wooded island. From Rosario strait the south-western point bears
nearly N.W. by W. about 18 miles. From point Whitehorn it bears West
distant 12 miles.
On the outer or gulf of Georgia side of point Roberts the shore runs about
N.W. f W. for 9 mfles to the southern and principal mouth of Fraser river.
To the mouth of the river at the outer edge of the Sturgeon bank tbe bearing
is W. by N. and distance 9$ miles. The south face runs E.N.E. 2f miles,
and presents for nearly the entire distance a bold bluff about 150 feet high,
and covered with wood. Half a mile off this shore anchorage may be had in
from 10 to 15 fathoms, but in southerly weather it must be avoided. The
eastern shore of the point runs nearly parallel witi the western for 4 or 5
miles. Off the south-east point rocks and foul bottom stretch out S.E. for
quite a mile. The geographical position of tbe south-western point, as determined by the United States Coast Survey, is lat. 48° 58' 15", long. 123° 4' 16".
It is therefore nearly 2 miles south of the north-western boundary of the
United Sates.    Between this station and the bluff Ues a marsh.
FRASER RIVER.—Fraser river,* in point of magnitude and present
commercial importance, is second only to the Columbia on tbe north-west coast
of America. In its entire freedom from risk of life and shipwreck, it possesses infinite advantages over any other river on the coast, and the cause of
this immunity from the dangers and inconveniences to which all great rivers
emptying themselves on an exposed coast are subject, is sufficiently obvious.
A sheltered strait, scarcely 15 miles across, receives its waters; and the
neighbouring island of Vancouver serves as a natural breakwater, preventing
* These remarks are from the Vancouver island pilot, edition 1864. In 1866 a light-
vessel wa3 moored at the entrance to the river, in about 10 fathoms. The light, fixed, can
be seen.from a distance of 10 miles. A bell is sounded in foggy weather. From it, Garry
point bears N. by E. f E. easterly, distant 5TV miles; North Sand head buoy, N.N.W. \ "W.
7 cables; and the South Sand head buoy, E.N.E. 2 cables.
i272
GULF OF GEORGIA.
windings of the rrw j
the possibflity of any sea arising which would prove dangerous to vessels even
of the smallest class, unless they ground.
To the same cause may be attributed in a great measure tie fixed and
unvarying character of the shoals through which this magnificent stream
pursues its undevious course into the strait of Georgia; and there can be Utile
doubt that it is destined, at no distant period, to fulfil to the utmost, as it is
afready partially fulfilling, the purposes for which nature ordained it—the outlet for the products of a great country, whose riches in mineral and agricultural
wealth are daily being more fully discovered and developed.
The river, with its numerous tributaries, has its rise in the Rocky mountains, between 400 and 500 miles from tie coast in a northerly direction,
whence it forces its way in torrents and rapids, through one of the many great
parallel valleys which intersect this region, confined by gigantic mountains,
with- large tracts of country, rich in agricultural resources on either side of
until it reaches the town of Hope, which is about 80 miles by the
in an easterly direction from its entrance.
Above the city of Lytton, which stands at the fork or confluence of the
Fraser and Thompson rivers, 55 miles above Hope, many rich deltas occur,
or as they are termed by the miners, bars, and among these known as the wet
diggings, gold was first discovered in British Columbia.
At Hope the river assumes the character of a navigable stream ; steamers
of bght draught reach this point and even the town of Yale, 15 mfles above it,
during from 6 to 9 months of the year. In June, July, and August, the
melting of the snow causes so rapid a downward stream that vessels even of
high steam power are rarely able to stem it, and during these months numbers
of large trees are brought down from the flooded banks, which offer another
serious obstruction to navigation; Between Hope and Langley the latter
30 miles from the river's mouth, there is always a considerable strength of-
current, from 4 to 7 knots, at times more; but at Langley the river becomes
a broad, deep, and placid stream, and except during the three summer months
the influence of the flood stream is generally felt, and vessels of any draught
may conveniently anchor. The depth is 10 fathoms; the current not above
3 knots.
Midway between Langley and Hope tbe Harrison river falls into the Fraser
and by it and a long chain of lakes extending in a general N.W. direction, a
comparatively easy route has been estabbshed, by which the upper Fraser is •
reached at a point just below the Bridge river, in the heart of the gold region,
thus avoiding that difficult and at present almost impassable part of tie country
between the town of Yale and the Fountains, by the main-river a distance of
about 90 miles.
Vessels of 18 feet draught may enter the Fraser river near high water, and
proceed as high as Langley with ease, provided they have or are assisted by
steam power. The only difficulty is between the Sand heads and Garry point,
the entrance proper of the river, but while there are competent pilots and tie
huoys remain in their positions, this difficulty disappears. It must be remembered, however, that the tides of tie strait of Georgia sweep across the channel
of the entrance, and a large ship is recommended to enter or leave with the
last quarter of the flood.
The great quantity of deposit brought down by the freshets of summer has
created an extensive series of banks, which extend 5 miles outside the entrance
proper of the river.    The main stream has forced an almost straight thoughGULF OF GEORGIA.
273
somewhat narrow channel through these banks, and at its junction with the
current of the strait of Georgia, which runs at right angles to it, has caused
the waU-edged bank before aUuded to, extending to Roberts point on the south,
and Gray point on the north.
The river is at its lowest stage during the months of January, February,
and March. In April it commences to rise from the melting of the snows, and
is perhaps 2 feet above its lowest level; the flood stream is strong enough to
swing a ship at New Westminster up to the end of this month. In May the
water rises rapidly, the river is at its highest about the end of June, and remains
up with trifling fluctuations until the end of July or middle of August. During
these six weeks the banks are overflowed, and extensive plains above Langley
covered for a space of several miles; the strength of the stream between
Langley and Hope being from 4 to 7 knots, and in the narrow parts even more.
The usual rise of the river at Langley due to these floods is about 14 feet, but
from the testimony of an officer of the Hudson's Bay Company, who has resided
more than 30 years there, it has been known to reach 25 feet.
From the middle to the end of August the waters begin to subside, and in
September the stream is not inconveniently strong. September, October, and
November are favourable months for the river navigation, as the water is then
sufficiently high to reach Hope, and the strength of the current considerably
abated. The shallow stern-wheel steamers have got to Hope as late as
December; between this month and April, owing to the shoalness of the water
and the great quantity of ice formed, navigation even by these vessels (only
drawing 18 inches) is attended with great difficulty, and rarely practicable at
all. The snags or drift trees which become imbedded in tbe river, also form
a serious obstacle to navigation at this season.
In April the steamers commence again to run; in June, July, and August
the rapidity of the current is the great obstacle, but these high-pressure vessels
(commanding a speed of 11 and 12 knots) frequently accompUsh the voyage,
though at much risk.
The Harrison river route (page 272) obviates some, but not all these
difficulties.- At New Westminster the freshets raise the level of the river
about 6 feet, but the banks being high no inconvenience is felt, and the strength
of the stream is rarely 5 knots, during the winter from 2 to 3 ; for some miles
within the entrance the low banks are partiaUy flooded for a month or six
weeks. The rise and fall due to tidal causes is from 8 to 10 feet at springs,
between the Sand heads and the entrance of the river proper at Garry point;
at New Westminster it is 6 feet, and at Langley scarcely perceptible.
Directions.—There are no natural marks sufficiently weU defined, or which
are not too distant, or too Uable to be obscured in cloudy weather, to enable a
vessel by their help alone to hit tbe narrow entrance between the Sand heads
with accuracy. A large spar buoy is placed on tbe south Sand head, and the
northern edge of tbe channel within is marked by similar buoys, somewhat
smaller, for the colour of which see chart; the Sand head buoy can be seen
well at a distance of 2 miles.
To make tbe entrance of the river approximately, the foUowing bearings
will be found useful. From the eastern entrance of Active pass, which is now
the usual route for steamers from Vancouver island, the entrance bears
N. by W. f W., 11 miles; from the entrance of Portier pass, which shows as
a very distinct gap between Gabano and Valdes islands, the entrance between
E. distant llf miles; and when that gap bears
T
the Sand -heads bears N.E. f274
GULF OF GEORGIA.
IIP
S.W. f W., and the extreme of the trees on Roberts point spit E. £ S. a
vessel will be within 1 mile of the entrance, and should have from 45 to 50
fathoms water.
Mount Provost, a remarkable sharp peak on Vancouver island, kept on a
bearing S.S.W. f W., wfll also lead for tie Sand heads. In coming from tie
northward, Passage island, at tbe entrance of Howe sound, kept on or just
open of a remarkable peak on Anvil island within the sound, bearing
N. by W. f W., will clear the edge of the Sturgeon bank until the bearings
just given are brought on for entering.
When at the entrance, a remarkable solitary bushy tree wiU be seen on
Garry point, the northern entrance point of the river proper, straight for which
is the general direction of the channel; it bears from between the Sand heads
N.N.E. a Utile easterly, and is just 5 miles distant. Although to steer direct
for this tree would not clear the outer edges of either bank for the whole length
of the channel, yet it will be found an excellent guide, not only to make the
entrance, but to give almost the straight line in, should the buoys be removed.
The south Sand head dries before low water, and has frequently a ripple on
it when covered ; when the buoy which is moored off it is seen, it should be
brought to bear N.N.E. and then steer to leave it a cable's length on the star-
board side, which will lead nearly m mid-channel, the buoys then on the port
or north side of the channel should be kept from £ a cable to a cable on the
port band. The least depth in the channel is 11 or 12 feet at low water, and
this occurs about midway between the Sand heads and Garry point; at or near
high water from 18 to 20 feet, and sometimes 22 feet, may be carried in to
within 1^ miles of Garry point, when it deepens to 4 and 5 fathoms; the point
should be passed close.
There is always a great quantity of drift wood on the point, and the northern
side of the river should be kept aboard for nearly 2 miles, where from 8 to 10
fathoms will be found; it is then necessary to cross to the south side, and to
keep close along it, passing the mouth of the South or boat channel, nearly
2 miles above which, and abreast a clump of high trees, cross again to the
north bank to tbe left of two low sandy islands ; tbe channel tien leads rather
along the north side of the river, and with the assistance of the chart wiU be
found sufficiently easy for vessels of 20 feet draught until 6 or 7 miles above
Langley.
It is not, however, recommended for a stranger to enter without a pilot, and
certainly not under any circumstances unless the buoys are in their places
between the entrance shoals; any further detailed directions would be
practically useless; a pilot, tbe chart or local knowledge, are absolutely
necessary.
New Westminster, the capital of British Columbia, stands on tie norti
or right bank of the Fraser river, just above the junction of the North Fork,
and 15 miles in a general north-easterly direction from the entrance proper.
It occupies a commanding and well chosen position, being within an easy
distance of the entrance, and having great facibties for .wharfage along its
water frontage, a good depth of water, and excellent anchorage.
The river bank is somewhat precipitous in plaees, and the country at the
back is like all the lower parts of the Fraser (unless, indeed, in the immediate
neighbourhood of tbe entrance, where it is swampy grass land, subject to
inundation during the freshets of summer), densely wooded; a considerable
clearing, however, of the timber has taken place in the vicinity of the townSOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
276
which afready assumes a prominent and thriving aspect, and when the facilities
for entering the river and its capabibties are better known, wfll no doubt rise
more rapidly into importance.
The miUtary establishment or camp of tie Royal Engineers, a mile above
New Westminster, is a most picturesque spot, commanding an uninterrupted
view of the Queens reach, a broad, deep, and magnificent sheet of water.
From the camp to port Moody, an exceUent harbour at the head of Burrard
inlet is 4 miles in a north direction; a good trail exists between the two places,
and a waggon road is in course of construction to the outer harbour of the
inlet, which, when completed, wfll be an important work. At 5 miles eastward of New Westminster is the entrance to the Pitt river, wiich runs in a
general direction from N.N.E. to N.E. for 28 miles, terminating in two
remarkable lakes enclosed between almost perpendicular mountains, and
navigable to the head for vessels of 14 feet draught, the depth in places being
far too great for anchorage. A large tract of low grass land Ues on both sides
of the entrance of the Pitt, which, however, is generally overflowed, or partiaUy
so, during six weeks of summer.
Derby or New Langley is 12 miles above New Westminster in an easterly direction, on the south or opposite side of the river; the channel between
is deep, and there are no impediments to navigation. This spot was first
selected as the capital, and as a town site it is unobjectionable, having a
considerable tract of good cleared land in its neighbourhood, and all the
requirements of a commercial port; the depth of water here is 10 fathoms.
Large vessels may proceed with ease 7 mfles beyond Langley, the navigation
then becomes somewhat intricate, and the current too rapid for any vessels but
steamers of Ught draught and great power.
North Fork.—This is another entrance to the Fraser, navigable for vessels
drawing 6 or 8 feet water, and is generaUy used by the natives proceeding to
or from Burrard inlet. Its junction with the main stream occurs immediately
below New Westminster, wbence it runs in a westerly direction, and enters
tbe strait of Georgia through the Sturgeon bank, about 5 miles northward of the Sand heads; a large low partially wooded island Ues in its entrance,
and spUts the channel into two arms.
In many parts of the North Fork the water is deep, in holes, and the bottom
irregular; it can only be considered a boat channel.
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVEE ISLAND.
GENERAL REMARKS.*—Vancouver island, first made known to us
by Captain Cook, is situated between latitudes 48° 20" and 51°, longitudes 123° and 128°. It is separated on the south from Washington
territory by the strait of Juan de Fuca, and on the east from British Columbia
by the gulf of Georgia, and by Johnstone strait.    Essentially a mountain ridge,
* These interesting remarks upon Vancouver island are chiefly extracted from the
Journal of the Royal Geographical Society 1864. See also an article on the same subject
in the Mercantile Marine Magazine 1867.
2276
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
li!
its buttress-Uke walls descend for the most part abruptly to tbe shore, fringed,
however, in many places, more especiaUy on its south-eastern and eastern sides,
by the undulating country, thickly wooded in general,' but here and there containing patches of open grass-land.
The island is of an elongated oblong form, nearly 300 mfles in length,
by 30 to 50 in average breadth, attaining, at mount Victoria in lat. 50° 8f',
long. 126° 9', an elevation of 7484 feet. Its outline is boldly picturesque; its
shores are characterised by abrupt cliffs, rocky promontories, sheltered coves,
pebbly beaches, and fine harbours.
The whole western side presents a gloomy, frowning aspect. Numerous,
arms of the sea, fiord-like in character, penetrate between the walls of meta-
morphic and trappean rock, which, on either hand, rising into lofty peaks and
ranging into broken sierras, or sloping from rounded dome-shaped masses.
form the buttresses of tbe land, opposing and resisting the fury of an ocean,
for tbe greater part of the year anything but pacific. Along the eastern side
a more open and more undulating country marks the existence of underlying
sedimentary rocks, which, in the form of carboniferous sand-stones and Ume-
stones, at intervals fringe the coast.
The whole country is more or less densely wooded, excepting just where the
summit of a mountain affords no hold for plants, or where, as in the neighbourhood of Sooke, Victoria, Cowitchin, and Comux, limited ranges of open
grass-lands occur.
In the winter the tone of colouring of tbe landscape is sombre, tbe weathered
rock-surfaces mingling their purple hues with the dark green fobage of the
pine. But in the summer and autumn these heavy tones are lightened by the
bright colours of numerous flowering plants ; by tbe yellow-green Ught that
trembles in the swampy hoUows from the poplar, the alder, and the aspen ;
and, later in the season, by the rich orange and crimson tints of the maple.
The surface is beautifaUy diversified by mountain precipice, bill and dale, wide-
spreading lakes, and sobtary tarns, cut up by numerous arms and inlets of
the sea; in no case does tbe water-shed suffice to,give a navigable stream.
There are no rivers, in tbe stricter sense of tbe word, such streams as flow
through the country being simply the short watercourses, which discharge
the overflow of lakes or the surface-waters of the neigbbouring ridges—
torrents in winter, nearly dry in summer, valuable only as a power for driving
grist and saw-mills, and possibly at a future day to be rendered useful as a
means of irrigation—a process by which many parts of the country would be
much benefited.
As might be expected in a country having a clay subsoil and covered
with material through which water readily percolates, springs are numerous and
the water excellent. Where the clay, however, forms the surface-soil, some
inconvenience is experienced, as in the neighbourhood of the town of Victoria.
The remarkably low temperature which characterises, all the year round, the
ocean that washes the shores of this island, has a considerable influence on the
climate; this ocean is boreal in character, its temperature being kept low by
Arctic currents which sweep down the coast, even to below the latitude of
San ' Francisco, and by the quantity of melting snow discharged by numerous
rivers and mountain torrents on tbe British Columbian coast.
Climate.—The climate of Vancouver, in the succession of its seasons and
general thermal conditions, approximates closely to that of Great Britain, modified by special circumstances connected with its physical geography.    SituatedSOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
277
close to a continent tie mountain ranges of which are clothed or capped with perpetual snow, and surrounded by an ocean remarkable for its extremely low
temperature, certain peculiarities present themselves to the notice of the climat-
ologist; and these are well and specially marked in the south-east end of the
island, owing to its proximity to the Olympian range of mountains in Washington
territory. This range, running east and west, presents its northern aspect to
Vancouver island; and since, on this aspect, the snow remains on the mountain '
peaks all the year round, the winds which blow from this direction are necessarily cold and chilbng. Other winds, blowing over the cold sea water, also have
this chflly feeling, and give this peculiarity to the climate, as far on in the year
as the 2lst of June, of a fine clear atmosphere with a bright sun and cold
winds, like a late spring in England.
The seasons in general take the foUowing course :—After the gales with
rain, which generaUy mark the period of the equinox, fine clear weather sets
in, and continues till about the middle of November. At this period rain begins
to fall continuously for days, and gales of wind are frequent on the coast.
The barometer ranges from 29*50 to 30*10, and falls rapidly on the approach
of a southerly gale. Rising gradually to 30*20 and 30*50, a northerly wind
springs up, and 3 days of fine clear weather, with hoar-frost generaUy foUow.
After the third day, the barometer slowly falls, and again tbe gale springs
up, and the rains come down, to be succeeded, after a few days, by a rising
glass and frosty weather, which, as the season advances, occasionaUy becomes
intense, and is accompanied by hail and snow. The latter seldom Ues for any
length of time; the winters of 1852-53, 59-60, and 61-62, the last especially,
being remarkably severe exceptions. These exceptional seasons occur in aU
climates, and here prove the rule that an open, wet winter characterises
Vancouver island.
There is a great amount of rain, but it is to be regretted that there is no
register to show what the rainfall actually is.
The great quantity of uncleared and undrained land tends to make the spring
later and colder than in England. The summer is drier, with a more scorching
sun. Little or no rain faUs from the middle of April till the Equinox, or the
end of October. The prevailing winds during these summer months are from
south-west to north-west, blowing freshly during the day, the nights tranquil
and clear. Northerly winds occasionaUy prevail, and, blowing over the heated
land, are, in the southern parts of the island, hot and dry.
The autumn of the American cbmate is finer than that of the European,
and the fine weather (the Indian summer) extends further into the year. The
winter months in ordinary seasons are much the same as in the west of
England; in the severer and exceptional, more like the Midland Counties
and east coast of Scotland. There are thus, as it were, two seasons, a wet
and a dry. The rainfall, it may be noted, is greatest at night. On the whole,
the climate of Vancouver may be fairly described as very fine, healthy, and
enjoyable.
In ordinary seasons the Isothermal Une (line of equal temperatnre) of Vancouver island would- pass through tie southern counties of England. Taking
the average annual maximum temperature at London in June as 86°, the
minimum as 22° Fair, in January, the range will be 64°. In Vancouver,
the maximum temperature for the year is 84° in June, the minimum 14f °,
which gives a range of 69f ° Fahr. But this fall to 14f ° for a day or two in
December must be looked on as exceptional, and the usual minimum standard278
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER  ISLAND.
f 62° Fahr., almost the same as
of 22° Fahr. accepted ;  this gives a range o]
that of London.
The register kept on shore has been taken in preference to one kept on
board, in making the above comparison, the conditions being more equal;
for it must be borne in mind that, strictly speaking, there are two weU-marked
climates in Vancouver, viz., a littoral and an inland climate : the former, due
to the causes already mentioned, cold arctic currents, &c. &c, has a lower
range, as shown by registers kept on board ship.
The whole area of Vancouver island comprises about 12,000,000 acres, the
greater proportion of which is mountain and barren rock.
FoUowing the districts as herein set down, it will be interesting briefly to
set forth their special characteristics and capabilities.
Of the surveyed districts, beginning at the south-eastern extremity of the
island, Sooke first claims our attention, and it will be found to possess
some feature of considerable importance. Situated advantageously and conveniently on the strait of Juan de Fuca, but for difficulties connected with
the approach from seaward to its magnificent inner harbour, this district must
have long ago assumed a position commercially of high importance. There
is reason to believe that these difficulties may in time be overcome, and by the
aid of steam-tugs vessels may be safely anchored in a harbour safe and landlocked.
A carboniferous deposit in this district has been proved by "bore" to the
depth of 84 feet, and two thin seams of coal have been passed through. A
promising vein of copper has been found, and is now being worked.
Esquimalt district contains 12,426 acres. The soil, generaUy, is poor in
quaUty, covered witi scrubby timber, a great deal of rock, and many lakes
and large swamps. The great importance of this district consists in its
exceUent harbour, described on p. 287.
The village or hamlet of Esquimalt consists of a few scattered houses,
chiefly hotels, dependent for support on the mail-steamers and ships of the
royal navy there stationed.
The districts of North and South Saanich contain respectively 10,767
and 12,216 acres. These districts contain some of the best agricultural land
in Vancouver. There are indications of copper, and a coal-seam of inferior
quality crops out on the eastern coast.
The district of Nanaimo has a very important geographical position, and
possesses a very interesting, and economically valuable, geological history.
The working of the valuable coal-field of Nanaimo has been carried on very
irregularly; and only of late have any steps been taken on a scale commensurate with its importance. The value of the new seam now being worked has
been fully recognised, and the demand increases rapidly.
Rising behind the settlement of Nanaimo, is mount Benson, a trappean
mass, whioh, attaining the height of 8866 feet, sends, in a curvilinear form,
spurs running north-east and souti-west, describing the segment of a circle.
Resting on these spurs, dipping south-east and easterly, are tie upturned
edges of the sedimentary rocks, the whole much disturbed, not only by numerous faults, but by twistings laterally, heaves and slips of strata.
On Chase River, which flows along the south-eastern spur, there are
three outcrops of coal, 8 ft. 10 in., 5 ft., and 2 ft. 6 in. respectively.
The first or Douglas seam, now being worked, furnishes the best coal as
yet taken out, and is reported as most favourable, both by analytic chemistssOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER  ISLAND.
279
and practical men.* The present working is in a proved area of 600,000
square yards. A shaft, 60 fathoms deep, reaches the coal, which yields 1 ton to
the square yard, increasing in the dip, so that, at a fair computation, 800,000
to 1,000,000 tons of coal may be calculated on from this seam alone. If tiie
other underlying 5 feet and 2 feet 6 inches seams can be conveniently reached
and worked, it may be fairly assumed that in this one block 3,000,000 tons
of coal are available.
Nanaimo settlement is prettily situated. The site of a town is now being
laid out which wfll probably soon be a port of entry; tbe soil, a sandy loam,
is dry and healthy, being suitable for gardens and orchards.
Tbe Valley of the Comux, another fine agricultural district, as yet unsur-
veyed, lies north of Nanaimo. Its special characteristic is the existence of
successive terraces of open prairie-bke land, marking separate periods of slow
upheaval. But, partially explored, no further special account of its capabflities
can be given than that, in its general character, it closely resembles the
Cowitchin valley.
Proceeding north and west, passing Valdes island, and through Johnstone
strait, an exceUent route for steamers, abounding in good anchorages, the extreme north-west point of the island is reached, where fort Rupert, a trading
station of the Hudson Bay Company, is estabbshed. Here the carboniferous
formation is again met with but there have been fewer disturbances than at
Nanaimo ; the strata be almost horizontally.    The land is unsurveyed.
The western coast of the island, commencing at cape Scott, possesses a
great number of remarkable and interesting features. From this cape a
group of islands extends westerly for 26 mfles. Between the cape and the
nearest islands there is a good clear passage 10 to 30 fathoms deep.
Immediately south of cape Scott is Quatsino sound, an important inlet,
stretching across the island nearly to fort Rupert, on the eastern side. Coal
has been found here, which with other resources, copper and^fine timber, and
so forth, will make this a place of importance.
Cape Cook separates Quatsino from Kyuquot, a district which extends to
Nootka sound. This latter is a deep inlet, possessing few harbours or good
anchorages. The small harbour or cove at its entrance is famous as tbe scene
of the Spanish occupation dispute, and an anchorage nearly opposite has a
special interest as having been Cook's first.
Clayoquot sound differs from all tie other inlets of this coast, its entrance
being fuU of banks and shoals of sand and gravel, instead of a deep muddy
bottom. Here, also, is the gneisso-granitic axis of elevation already alluded
to, having associated therewith micaceous, hornblendic, and coarse-framed
quartzose rocks, intruded trappean dykes, and quartz veins, indicating a region
most probably rich in mineral wealth,
Barclay sound, situated close to the entrance of the strait of Juan de Fuca,
* The excellent quality of this coal is now indisputable. It yields a hard, lustrous,
fissured, and little swollen coffee. It contains little hydroscopic moisture, and burns
well, with a steady heat and a brilliant flame—spec. grav. 1*317. Its steaming properties
have been very favorably reported on by the engineers of H.M. ships and other vessels
on the coast.
Newcastle
ast.    In stowage, Welsh coal has the advantage over it of about 12 per cent.;
_  (English) 2 per cent.; but with most north country coal, and all Scotch, the
advantage would be in favour of the Nanaimo coal (Douglas seam) by 2 per cent.280
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER  ISLAND;
y
iii
1
.
has a very important geographical position. It is a somewhat open sound,
studded with numerous islands, it possesses several good anchorages, one
within very convenient distance of cape Beale, on which a lighthouse wfll in
aU probabibty be ultimately erected. At the upper end of the sound a very
remarkable cleft in tbe mountain-range, known as the Alberni canal, leads
to a level country of considerable extent, heavily, timbered, with the
finest specimens of pine and other woods perhaps anywhere to be seen.
Through this flows a stream, discharging the waters of a chain of lakes,
which penetrates northerly into the interior. Tbe anchorage is good, and
the whole sound, canal, and harbour, can nowhere be exceUed in the facihties
they afford for the protection and defence of commerce.
Sucb is the general character of Barclay sound. Its pobtical and commercial
importance merit a more special detail. The Alberni canal is entered through
the Devil's gap, the rocky sides of which run so sheer down into the deep
water that the largest ship could make fast alongside to the pine-trees,
the shores, on either hand, not being more than a pistol-shot apart. The
fleets of the Pacific might ride in the sound, or, for the matter of room,
inside the Devil's gap. A more secure place for an arsenal than Alberni canal,
if the Devil's gap had one or two heavy guns mounted, could not be found
on the Pacific coast. Its convenience also for refitting ships is great; timber
for masting or repairing purposes being plentiful. Plenty of fair farming
land, and fresh water in abundance. Possibly, the fact that the money of the
colony is chiefly invested at Victoria, decides the question at present in
favour of Esquimalt as the head quarters of the Royal Navy ; but in case of a
war in the Pacific, there can be bttle doubt but that Alberni canal and
Barclay sound, from the commanding position of the latter, at the mouth of
the strait of Juan de Fuca, wfll be found an invaluable base of operations for
our navy in that part of the world.
The high and rocky sides of the Alberni canal end on the right hand with
a bold outstanding rock, known from its colour as Copper mountain; and from
it the canal opens into a wide oval shaped basin, at the far end of which the
buildings of the Alberni settlement are seen. The river Somass runs into this
oval-shaped basin, and at the junction there are considerable flats of good
meadow-land.
Several good sized schooners have been built at Alberni, and others are
now building. Fish curing has been carried on to some extent; the abundance
of salmon and cod in tie neighbourhood making this a favourable place for
such operations. A coasting trade is carried on witi tie Indians for furs, oil,
fisi, and so forti.
Of San Juan it may be sufficient to say that its importance as a miUtary
post has been much exaggerated. Its position has been supposed to be such
as to confer on that mibtary power which should occupy it, the command
of both the Fraser river and of Victoria harbour. But this is a fallacy; it
commands neither; more especially since the almost exclusive introduction of
steam vessels and tbe discovery of the Rosario channel.
A great portion of the area of Vancouver island, which is neither sold, preempted, nor reserved (7,598,215 acres) is unavailable land, perhaps four-fifths
of the whole being barren rock. Heavy and very valuable timber now covers
many fine districts, which, as they become cleared, wfll become available for
cultivation. The expense of clearing is at present great, from £6 to £14 per
acre. Tbe richer alluvial soils, bearing willow, poplar, and alder, are cheaply
and readily cleared by fire.    In the agricultural districts described, there is,SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
281
however, enough for farming purposes on a small scale, into which tie farmer
can at once put his plough; the clearing of the timber from the land keeping
pace with tie wants of a farm, for outbuildings, and other purposes.
Farming operations are conducted on the same rotation four-course system
as in England. The crops generally raised are wheat, barley, oats, and peas.
The green crops are, turnips, mangel-wurzel, vetches, potatoes, and all kinds
of vegetables. Nowhere does the potato flourish more or attain a better
flavour.
In her soils, Vancouver island possesses aU tie qualifications necessary for
raising food for man and beast; and these soils are by no means so limited in
extent or inferior in quaUty, as to preclude tbe possibility of the island being a
grain producing colony. The mineral resources of Vancouver may be summed
up as coal, copper, and possibly silver and gold. The latter is widely spread
over the country in the drift clays and gravels; and of late, auriferous quartz
has been found in the neighbourhood of Victoria, leading to a great pre-emption
and occupation of land.
The foUowing wfll give some idea of the resources of Vancouver island in
woods of economic value. The bst is according to popular names. White fir,
spruce fir, balsam fir, white pine, yeUow pine, cedar, vine-leaved maple,
broad-leaved maple, alder, wfllow, poplar, yew, logwood, cotton-wood, crab-
apple, service-tree, hemlock, oak, arbutus, yellow cypress, &c. Of all these,
the white fir or Douglas pine (Abies Douglasii), is the most important; it
grows to an enormous size, and is one of the best woods for spars known.
This is the tree of the colony, and it is the commonest on the north-west coast.
In some instances this tree has been known to square 45 inches for 90 feet.
The cedars are very fine, with an average diameter of 6 to 7 feet. One has
been measured of 14 feet. They are found in great abundance both
at Sooke and Nanaimo.
The fisheries wiU one day prove a source of great wealth to the colony.
Extensive banks be off the south-western extremity of the island, and also in
Puget sound and in the gulf or strait of Georgia, off Burrard inlet. All of
them are weU stocked with fish, especially cod, the true gadus, an excellent fish
of its family, small but very good. In the neighbouring streams and lakes, and
siirrounding seas, are salmon (five species), trout (many species), herring,
haddock, smelt, habbut, sturgeon, whiting, several species of rock fish, and sea
perch, eulachon, &c,
Making the island from seaward.—When approaching Vancouver island
directly from seaward, the mountains will necessarily be tbe first part of it
that wfll come into view in clear weather, when they wfll appear as an unbroken
range; on a nearer approach it appears thickly wooded, and apparently fertile,
intersected with many deep openings and valleys, which in most cases are some
of the inlets already aUuded to. The coast is generally low and rocky, but
rises immediately to mountains of considerable height. It is fringed by
numerous rocks and hidden dangers, especially near the entrances of the sounds,
and to avoid these the exercise of great caution and vigilance is requisite;
therefore, on no account (except necessity) should a stranger attempt to enter
any of the harbours or anchorages during night or thick weather. When
about to make the coast, it cannot be too strongly impressed on the mariner
to take every opportunity of ascertaining his vessel's position by astronomical282
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
observations, as fogs and thick weather come on very suddenly at all times of
the year, more especially during the summer and autumn months.
Tidal Current.—The flood stream appears to set along the coast north-westward, and the ebb south-eastward; neither are of great strength, except in the
vicinity of Juan de Fuca strait and Scott islands. During the summer months
a set is generally found to the southward, and in winter in the opposite direction,
but as a rule the currents are irregular, and apparantly influenced by prevailing
winds.
Soundings.—At tbe entrance of Juan de Fuca strait tbe 100-fathom edge of
the bank extends upwards of 30 miles from the shore; it then runs nearly
straight in a N.W. by W. direction, gradually nearing the coast, until abreast
cape Cook the depth of 100 fathoms is within 4 mfles of the shore; northwestward of cape Cook tbe 100-fathom edge does not extend more than 10
miles off shore, and southward and westward of Scott islands even less.
The nature of the bottom, when under 100 fathoms, appears to be generaUy
of sand and gravel, and does not differ enough in one part from
another to afford any guide for ascertaining a vessel's exact position on the
coast; the bank, however, extends sufficiently far from the shore south-eastward of cape Cook to give a seaman due notice in thick weather of an approach
to the land, as the edge of 100 fathoms does not come within 18 miles of it,
and the bank shoals very gradually.
The Coast.—The south coast of Vancouver island having been fully
described in the section on Juan de Fuca strait, it remains for us to add a few
remarks upon the harbours on the south-west side of the island. For a
complete description of these harbours and tbe coast, also for the channels
separating the island from tbe main land, we must refer our readers to the
Vancouver Island Pilot and tbe charts pubbsbed by the Admiralty*
From Bonilla point to cape Beale, the eastern point of entrance to Barclay
sound, the coast trends almost due West 23 miles. At about 6 miles from
the pomt is the entrance to Nitinat lake, a narrow and shaUow channel
having a depth of less than 12 feet in it and across which the sea usually
breaks with great violence in bad weather. Tbe lake is of considerable size,
extending to the northward. The hills immediately northward of it are
estimated to be 2000 feet high. At 2 miles southward from the lake the
depth is 27 fathoms.
A remarkable waterfall, named Tsusiat, situated on the coast—in lat.
48° 41f', long. 124° 58', is an important landmark to vessels approaching
Juan de Fuca strait from southward. It can be recognised from a considerable
distance.
In long. 125° 8' is a bay named Pachena, having in front of it a smaU islet,
only 10 feet high, known as Sea-bird islet. The bay extends 2 miles in a
northerly direction, is nearly f of a mile wide, and has a depth of 6 fathoms
at the entrance shoaling gradually to 8 feet at its head, It is safe only with
winds from the land, for southerly and south-west winds send in a heavy swell,
consequently vessels very seldom enter it. At its head is a stream which wfll
admit boats.
BARCLAY SOUND.—In this extensive inlet are many places where a
vessel may be at anchor and be completely protected from the prevailing wind.
See the Note * at foot of page 262.*<•*
XT
<#
iftf^f
**    37    *      X^l^^^fe^S-1*™ ia,:il
fc(j<rf*'
.»
IS1ANDS
«Iat_.48051JS"
a^-   j*
/      16
^\£Ss^ssif¥- l-vfe*;
mm
Thcelhge Z8Z282
ft
observa
the yea
Tidaf
ward, aij|
vicinity J|
a set is J
but as £ i
winds. *
SountJ
the bai
straight?
cape Ci
westwar
miles of51-
Tbei
of sand .
another f§
coast; t
ward of I
to the Is
and the
The
describe*
remarks
completi
.separathv
VancowtA'
From
sound, ti
the poin*
having a.,
breaks w-,
extendinj
estimate',
depti is |
A ren
48° 41f'.3
Juan de J
distance.
In Ion;
only 10
northerlyj
at the en-"
winds fro.;
consequei,
admit hot
BAR(
vessel ma
*-■-%
*»
'■a*
See th
1SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
283
Scattered about it are islets of various sizes, which are separated generally by
passages of depth sufficient for ordinary vessels. The sound is 14 miles wide
at the entrance and maintains this breadth for nearly 12 miles inland, when it
separates into several narrow inlets or canals, the most extensive and deepest
of which, the Alberni canal, extends 28 miles in a northerly direction, its
head reaching within 14 mfles of the eastern or inner coast of Vancouver
island. The depth in front of the settlement at the head of this inlet is 6 to 4
fathoms. The mountains immediately on each side of the inlet are very lofty,
some of their summits reaching an altitude of 3000 feet.
The navigation of Barclay sound is too intricate to be attempted by strangers,
unless in the exercise of very great caution.    It is recommended to have the
Admiralty charts Nos. 584 and 592 at hand for reference.    It should be'
observed that generally speaking the shores are low, except in tbe northern
part and among the canals where they become high, rugged and mountainous.
Reefs.—The reefs in the entrance to Barclay sound, those most to seaward, and which may consequently be encountered by vessels sailing along
the coast and not intending to enter the sound, are named Danger, Channel,
Western, Black rock, Starbght and Humphries. In addition to these a reef
extends out from cape Beale, the east point of entrance, about £ of a mile in
a south-easterly direction.
Danger Reef.—This isolated reef is in the south-east part of the entrance to
Middle channel, tbe wide channel leading into Barclay sound between Deer
islands on the east and Village island on the west. It is o£ miles from cape
Beale in a W. £ N. direction, and from it Ship islet (95 feet high), the southernmost of the Deer islands, bears N.E. by E. £ E. distant 2£ miles. Its
extent is but smaU, and the sea breaks upon it in heavy weather. The position
of this reef makes it a very dangerous one; the sea around it is also very
deep, there being soundings of 20 to 40 fathoms almost close to it. The
marks that have been given for clearing it at tbe distance of about £ a mile,
are; on tbe east side, Swiss Boy island just open west of Entrance island,
bearing N.N.E.; on tbe west side, Mark islet open northward of Ragged island,
bearing N.E. (mount Blenheim, 2408 feet high, is on the same line of bearing);
and on the south side, Sail rock (100 feet high) in sight westward of Storm
island", N.W. by W. £ W.,—this mark also leads south of Channel reef, the
reef mentioned next.
Channel Reef.—This reef Ues nearly in the centre of tbe entrance to Middle
channel, its position bring o£ miles W. J S. from Ship islet, and l£ miles
W.N.W. from Danger reef. It is about a cable in extent, uncovers at low
water, and close to its eastern side is a depth of 27 fathoms. In the channel
between it and Danger rock is a depth of 19 to 50 .fathoms. The mark
given for clearing Danger rock on the west side clears this reef on the east
side.
Western Reef.—This reef bes in the south-west part of the entrance to
Middle channel, its position being 5£ miles W. £ S. from Ship islet, and
1 mile south of the islands composing Broken group. It is about a cable in
extent, awash at low water, and should not be approached within £ a mile.
Black Rock.—This rock is at the south-west side of the entrance to
Western channel, the wide channel into Barclay sound westward of the cluster
of islands known as Broken group. It is 10 feet above high water, of but
small extent, and some sunken rocks extend from it 2 cable's length in an
easterly direction. From it Sail rock bears N.E. by E. £ E., distant
3£ miles.284
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
f!:
Si e
ft
1
Starlight Reef.—This is a cluster of rocks above and under water about
a mile westward of Black rock, its centre being in lat. 48° 53', long.
125° 30^'. It is about £ of a mile in extent, and upon it tbe sea breaks
heavily in bad weather.
Humphries Reef.—This is a cluster of rocks 2 cables in extent, situated
about £ of a mile southward of Lookout island, an island 150 feet high on
the west side of the entrance to Ugly channel, the westernmost of the channels
into Barclay sound.
In a southerly and westerly direction from Barclay sound, is a bank of
sand and gravel which extends 20 to 25 miles from the land and has upon it
soundings of 83 to 48 fathoms. In the middle of this bank is a deep hole,
the east part of which is 5 miles south-westward from the entrance ; thence
the whole extends 19 mfles in a W.S.W. direction, with depths varying from
60 to 100 fathoms. This bank and hole are a valuable means of ascertaining
a vessel's position when approaching the sound from south-westward in thick
weather, as by attention to soundings her position can be ascertained within
a few mfles. South-eastward of tbe entrance to the sound the water is deeper,
there being at a distance of 10 miles from the shore a depth of 60 to
70 fathoms, on sand and mud.
It is high water in Barclay sound on tbe days of fuU and change at 12h.
The rise and fall of the tide is about 12 feet.
The Coast.—From Barclay sound the coast trends W. by N. £ N.,
about 11£ mfles to point Cox, the east point of entrance to Clayoquot sound.
The land- in the vicinity of the sea may be considered as rather low, and
when viewed from a distance, bears the appearance of being well wooded;
the coast consists alternately of rocky cbffs and sandy beaches, and has many
detached rocks lying at a little distance from it. The surface of this low
country is very uneven, and at a short distance from the sea meets a compact
body of rugged dreary mountains, whose summits are covered with snow
during the greater part of the year, which, says Vancouver, extended on many,
though not on all of them, a considerable way down, and impressed us with
no great opinion of the fertility of the country.
The depth at about 4 miles off this shore is 20 to 27 fathoms, and it is
recommended when coasting along to give it a berth of not less than 2£ miles.
Point Cox is a rocky projection which may be easily recognised by a hiU,
named Vargas cone, 438 feet high; this rises just within it, and is a conspicuous object when viewed from westward. The point ought not to be
approached nearer than £ a mile. Vargas cone is in lat. 49° 5' 30", long.
125° 52' 30".
When approaching Clayoquot sound from south-eastward, care is required
to avoid tie Gowlland reef, consisting chiefly of a cluster of bare rocks, from
10 to 15 feet above the surface at high tide, situated 2 miles from Vargas
cone in a S.E. £ S. direction. It is £ of a mile from the coast, and should
have a berth of at least a mile when passing. Between it and the land are
rocks above and under water.
CLAYOQUOT SOUND is comprised between point Cox, just mentioned, and Sharp point, a low rocky projection forming the west side of
entrance of Sydney islet, the most western part of the sound. Sharp point
forms with tbe main land on its western side a narrow inlet, named Refuge
cove, (subsequently described); its extremity is in lat. 49° 20' 20", long.
126® 15' 50". From Cox point to Sharp point the direct bearing and distance
are W. by N. £ N., 21 miles.SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
285
be foUowed
islands and
of it to tbe
having
Clayoquot sound is 80 miles long in a westerly direction, and 16 miles
broad. It contains may large islands, one of wbich, named Flores, is of
square form and 7 miles across. Its shores are broken into several inlets of
considerable size and depth, the most eastern of which is known as Tofino
inlet. Fronting the sound are many dangerous rocks which require" due
caution to avoid; at a mile outside these the depths vary from 20 to
80 fathoms.
Tie mountains in and about Clayoquot sound are very lofty, and visible
many miles at sea; among them, the Cat-face mountains are conspicuous.
The latter consist of a remarkable flat-top range, which rises on the main
shore of Vancouver and fronts Ship channel, tie only passage into the sound
that ought to be attempted by strangers; on its south side are some patches
of cliff and bare rock. The highest of the Cat-face mountains has an altitude
of 8870 feet, and is in lat. 49° 16' 20", long. 125° 59'. Mount Colnett, in
Meares island, is 2616 feet high; and the most lofty mountain in Flores
island has a height of 2810 feet.
As the navigation of Clayoquot sound is too intricate to
by strangers, it is useless to give a detailed description of its
channels; we therefore refer our readers for a fuUer account
Vancouver Island Pilot and the Admiralty chart No. 584, without
which no shipmaster should attempt to enter. There are several apparently
deep channels into tbe sound, but they are all, with the exception of Ship
channel, tortuous and filled witi rocks; Ship channel is consequently the
only safe passage in. The latter channel may be easily recognised in clear
weather by its position witi regard to the Cat-face mountains*, but if in
doubt, there is generally, when in its vicinity, little difficulty in obtaining the
services of a native of sufficient intelligence to pilot a vessel in. The inner
waters of the sound should only be navigated by a steamer or a handy vessel
best guide.    The following
Vancouver Island Pilot just
aUuded to.
" Ship Channel Ues westward of Vargas island, between it and a number
of smaU islands and rocks. Its entrance is nearly 11 miles westward of Cox
point, and the channel is 5 miles long in a N.N.E. direction, with a breadth
varying from £ to l£ miles. The soundings in the south part vary from
20 to 22 fathoms, decreasing to 5£ fathoms in the shoalest part near the
norti end ; the tide runs through it from 1 to 2 knots.
Bare Islet, at the south-east entrance point of the channel, is smaU, rising
to a summit 40 feet high in tie centre, and forms a good mark for identifying
Ship channel; a rock which breaks Ues 5 cables E. by S. from it, but there
are 20 fathoms within £ a mile of its south-west side.
Plover Reefs, on the east side of the channel £ a mile
Bare island, are of considerable extent, stretching 1 mile
of Blunden island, and some parts are 6 feet above high
5 fathoms at 2 cables west of them.
Hobbs and Burgess Islets be at tie norti-east part of tie channel,
2 cables from the west side of Vargas island, and nearly connected with it at
low water; they are small, and may be approached to 2 cables, where are
from 7 to 8 fathoms water.
of bght draught of water, and tie ciart is the
remarks on Ship channel are extracted from the
north-westward of
from the west side
water; there
are286
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
Sea Otter rock Ues at the south-west entrance point of Ship channel, 2 miles
W. by N. from Bare islet; it is very small, only 6 feet above high water, and
there are 5 fathoms close-to off its east side.
Shark Reefs, some of which cover, while others are 6 and 10 feet above
high water, lie on the west side, 2 miles N.E. by N. of Sea Otter rock; they
are about 8 cables in extent, and should not be approached nearer than 2 cables
on their south and east sides ; between them and Sea Otter rock there are
from 14 to 24 fathoms.
Laurence Islets, on the west side, nearly 8 miles from Sea Otter rock, are
small, low, and wooded, but steep-to on the east side.
Bartlett Island, £ a mile westward of the Lawrence islets, is low and
wooded; its shores are much broken, and a number of rocks extend from a
rj to -V a mile on all sides of it, and the island ought not to be approached
within the latter distance.
Twins Islands, at tie north-west point of Ship channel, 4 miles from Sea
Otter rock, are low, but wooded, and connected at low water; kelp extends
1 cable souti of tiem.
Entering Clayoquot sound by Ship channel, (which latter wfll easily be
recognised by Bare islet, Sea Otter rock, and a remarkable summit inland,
the Lone cone*,) round either Bare islet or Sea Otter rock at the distance
of £ a mile, and steer up the channel witi tie Twins islands in Une witi tie
north summit of tie Cat-face mountains bearing N.N.E. £ E.* Keep the
above-mentioned mark on tiU within £ a mile of the Shark reefs, when haul
more to the eastward for the west extreme of Vargas island, which may be
rounded at a distance of 3 cables. If going on through Hecate passage into
Hecate bay, to clear Half-tide rock keep Hobbs islet open west of Burgess
islet S. by W. £ W., until the Twins come in line with the west Whaler
island W. by S., when steer up tie passage witi tiat mark on astern, which
wfll lead north of Half-tide rock and south of tie North bank. When past
the latter, steer through Deep pass, and anchor in Hecate bay midway between
its entrance points in 9 or 10 fathoms.
During heavy south-westerly gales the sea is said to break right across
Ship channel, between Lawrence and Hobbs islands."
Refuge Cove is a very narrow islet which runs about l£ miles in a
N.N.W. direction. It is a convenient and easily accessible place of shelter
to a vessel embayed near this part of the coast. There is good anchorage
within it hi 4 to 5 fathoms, and protection is afforded from all winds, although
those from S.S.E. blow directly in. The entrance is narrow but clear of
danger, with the exception of a rock 7 feet under water at nearly 2 cables
length N.N.W. from the extremity of Sharp point; to clear this, it appears
from the chart to be necessary to keep over to the western side as you sail in,
after passing within the point of entrance-!
When approaching Refuge-cove from westward and south-westward it will
be necessary to look out for the Canoe reef, a ledge of rocks just south-westward
of the entrance and £ of a mile westward of tie extremity of Sharp point.
It is T% of a mile from the shore, is 2 feet above the sea at high tide, and
being steep-to on its south and west sides must be approached with great care.
Between it and tie land is no safe passage.
* See view D on Admiralty chart No. 684.
■■ See the plan of the cove in the chart No. 584.SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
287
" Entering Refuge cove from seaward, bring the entrance or Sharp point
to bear N.N.W. £ W. and steer for it, so as to pass 1 cable west of the point;
then keep close to the eastern shore and anchor in 4 \ or 5 fathoms, about
7 or 8 cables within the entrance."    Vancouver Island Pilot.
HESQUIAT HARBOUR.—From Refuge cove the coast trends 7 miles
in a W. by N. direction to Hesquiat bluff on the eastern side of Hesquiat
harbour;—which wfll be easily recognised as it is a low wooded point with a
shingle beach around it. The eastern shore of Estevan point, subsequently
mentioned, forms the western side of the bay. The bay extends into the land
about 4 miles N.N.W., and is at first upwards of 2 miles wide, it then
increases a bttle hi breadth but as its head is approached it contracts in width
to less than a mile. The soundings within are from 5 to 9 fathoms, and
across the entrance is a bar, 8 cables length wide, upon which is a depth of
4 fathoms. Depths of less than 5 fathoms throughout the bay are generally
indicated by the presence of kelp. The shores of tie harbour are low and
wooded.
When entering give the shores a berth of more than £ a mile, tiU within
the bar, when they may be approached to tie entrance of 2 cables length.
Hesquait bluff especiaUy, requires a wide offing, because a reef, dry only at
low tide, extends from it + a mile in a south-westerly direction ; this reef has
a depth of 5 fathoms close to its extremity. Having passed within the bar
anchorage may be obtained in any convenient part, but tbe best place is near
tie centre of the harbour at about £ a mile from Boat basin at its head;
here the depth is 8 to 7 fathoms, on sand.
Boat basin is a Utile creek having a depti of 4 fathoms. A stream faUs
into it from which good water may be procured if necessary.
Hesquiat harbour is of access to sailing vessels even with a foul wind.
Although during strong south and south-westerly winds the sea breaks heavily
upon the bar, tie sea within is comparatively smooth ; hence the anchorage
is always safe.    A landing is at aU times practicable in Boat basin.
The mountains on the east and north sides of the harbour are very lofty.
That named Leading mountain at tie head of tie harbour is 2726 feet high;
if this peak is brought to bear N. by W. £ W., it will lead across the bar
clear of all sunken dangers on either side, but directly over a smaU spot of
3 fathoms.
Estevan Point, on the western side of Hesquiat harbour, terminates in
a low wooded projection, bordered by a sandy beach strewn with boulders.
Its south-west point, Hole in tie Wall, is in lat. 49° 22' 7", long.
126° 82' 32" ; it is so named on account of a remarkable gap in the trees at
its extremity, which is conspicuous when viewed from the south-westward.
At l£ miles due Souti from this gap the depth is 20 to 27 fathoms, sand
stones and gravel, on an uneven bottom.
From the western side of Estevan point a ledge of rocks extends out
upwards of a mile, and outside this at a short distant is a sunken rock, named
Sunday rock; hence this side of tie point must have a wide berth, indeed,
it wfll not be prudent to approach it nearer than 2 miles. From the extremity
of Estevan point to tie entrance of Nootka sound the distance is 13 mfles.
NOOTKA SOUND.—This extensive inlet contains some of the best
sheltered and most commodious anchorages on the west coast of Vancouver
island; it has however lost the importance that once attached to it. The
inlet proper is a sheet of water of about 6 miles in extent, containing severalill ifl
li w
fu
288
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
islands, and fi*om its north and north-east sides deep narrow canals witi
precipitous shores extend into the land 7 to 18 miles. The depth over the
sound is generaUy about 80 fathoms, but there are parts where there is much
more water. In consequence of this great depth the middle of the sound is
not suitable for anchorage, and vessels are obliged to seek the Utile bays and
inlets formed by the shores and islets. The anchorages usually resorted to
are Friendly cove (just within the entrance of tie sound, on its western side);
Marvinas bay (on the same side of the sound at about 4 mfles from Friendly
cove); Plumper harbour (2 miles from Marvinas bay, and at the entrance to
Kendriek arm); Resolution cove (just within the sound, at tbe south-east end
of Bbgh island); Deserted creek (in Tlupana arm); and Head bay (at the
northern termination of Tlupana arm);—it is however seldom that vessels
enter the sound so far as to attain either Kendriek arm or Tlupana arm.
The entrance to Nootka sound Ues between Escalante and Maquinna points,
distant from each other 4 mfles in a W. by N. £ N., and E. by S. £ S.
direction. Escalante, tbe eastern point, is low and rocky, and has some
small islets and rocks off it to the distance of upwards of a mile. Maquinna
point is also low and wooded, and has at its extremity a remarkable bare-
topped conical rock 60 or 70 feet high ;—some rocks extend 3 cables from it
in an easterly direction, and as there are also rocks 'along tie coast from it
eastward nearly as far as the entrance of Friendly cove, the shore ought not
to be approached nearer than £ of a mile tfll near the latter place.
The narrowest part of tbe entrance to the sound is at Friendly cove, where
the distance to Burdwood point, on the opposite shore, is only 2 miles.
From this point to Escalante point the shore is i bordered by rocks, and when
entering the sound should have a berth of at least a mile until close to
Burdwood point, which (as it is steep and clear of rocks with the exception
of those at its base) may be rounded at l£ cable's length.
Bajo Point and Reef.—From Maquinna point the coast trends almost due
West 6£ mfles to Bajo point, a low rocky projection forming the extreme
south-west point of Nootka island ; this point is outside the entrance to the
sound, and is mentioned here because it, with its surrounding reef, is a
prominent danger to vessels approaching the sound from westward. A ledge,
named the Inner Bajo reef, bes l£ miles from the point in a southerly
direction ; the outer edge of this reef has a depth of 12 fathoms close to it,
and it is believed that there is no safe passage between it and the shore. In
addition to the rocks surrounding Bajo point, there is a very dangerous reef
at about 3 miles S.S.E. from the point, upon which the sea breaks in heavy
weather; it is named Bajo reef, is about 2 cables in extent, and from it
Maquinna point bears N.E. by E. £ E., distant 6 mfles.
Bajo reef has deep water of 8 to 10 fathoms at a very moderate distance
from it, and as the sea does not always break over it, the greatest care is
required when in its vicinity. The mark to clear it at the distance of
l£ miles on its south-east side is Yuquot point, the east extreme of Nootka
island, kept open eastward of Maquinna point, N.E. £ E. ± and at l£ miles
on its west side, Bight cone (a remarkable summit on the souti side of
Nootka island) kept well open west of Bajo point, N. by W.
Friendly Cove is about 2 cables in extent and sheltered from the sea
by a small rocky high-water island on its east side. The entrance to it is
from the north-eastward, and only a cable's length wide. The anchorage
within is in from 9 to 5 fathoms, and of such limited extent that there is onlySOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
289
room for one vessel of moderate size to be moored in the middle, though
several very small ones would find shelter. The shores on both sides of the
cove are rocky and about 60 feet high on the north side; at its head is a
smaU space of clear cultivated flat land, around which during summer the
natives build an extensive vfllage.
If intending to anchor in this cove, round Observatory islet*, the east
entrance point, close-to. A large vessel should moor with anchors S.S.W.
and N.N.E., letting go the first immediately on entering the cove. Sailing
vessels, unless with a fair wind, would find some difficulty in entering; if
unable to shoot in, it would be preferable to warp or proceed further up the
sound to Plumper harbour.
This place was visited in 1837 by Sir E. Belcher, R.N., who says, " We
anchored in Friendly cove, Nootka sound, the very interesting point of Cook
and Vancouver's operations. At first I doubted my senses, that so small a,
space could have oocupied so much type, and until I had examined it myself
in my boat, did not think that it could afford shelter to two vessels. However,
by plaeing one anchor outside, one well in, and the stream cable to the
rocks, the Sulphur became well secure, with the Starling within us. The
greatest distance between any two points does not exceed a £ of a mile, and
mostly rocky."
Marvinas Bay.—From Friendly cove the distance to Marvinas bay is
4 miles in a N.N.W. direction. The coast between is rocky, and in its south
part has some islets at a short distance off and parallel to it. There are two
small creeks with entrances too narrow for a vessel to enter; the northernmost of them, the Boca del Infierno, lies abreast the north part of the
above-mentioned islands, and l£ miles from Friendly cove.
Marvinas bay is open to southward, and only large enough to admit a
coaster; there is a large fresh-water stream at the head and just south of it,
convenient for watering. In former times this bay was in considerable repute,
for although further from the sea than Friendly cove, it possesses over it
several advantages in point of security and accommodation. The land in its
vicinity continues to be low to a greater distance than about Friendly cove,
and is apparently composed of less rocky materials. The harbour being well
protected against all winds, and its distance from the ocean preventing it being
much affected by the swell, a vessel can ride in it in perfect security; and as
there is a fair navigable channel from it in a southerly direction, a vessel can
leave whenever the land wind prevails sufficiently to enable it to clear the
sound, with infinitely more ease than from Friendly cove ; out of which it is
frequently necessary to first warp a considerable distance, and where there is
anchorage not only in an inconvenient depth of water, but on an uneven rocky
bottom, in addition to which, in the event of the wind suddenly setting
strongly in from the sea, the situation becomes by no means pleasant. The
departure from Friendly cove, although not difficult in summer, is said to be
subject in winter to great inconvenience, and indeed danger, from the heavy
sea that rolls in stormy weather into the sound, especially during the S.E.
gales, against which, from its vicinity to the ocean, it is not sufficiently
protected.
[11II
* The geographical position of this rock is lat. 49° 35' 31",
Nootka sound, see the Admiralty charts Nos. 569 and 1916.
u
long. 126° 37' 32°.   For290
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
in a westerly direction,  and at its
named Island bay (from the cireum-
Plumper Harbour, a small bay on the east side of Nootka island, is about
3 cables in extent and affords good anchorage in 12 fatioms. It is protected
on the east side by two small wooded islets from 30 to 40 feet high ; on the
west side the shore is rather swampy, and there are several fresh-water streams.
The passage between the two islets is clear ; vessels may also pass northward of the northern one, passing it at a cable's length, and being careful to
avoid a 10-feet reef which extends from the shore. When inside, there is
room for a vessel to ride at single anchor. This is the best anchorage in the
sound, its only drawback being its distance from the sea.
Resolution Cove is only a sbght bend in the coast, and is a very
inconvenient anchorage for large vessels, being exposed to south-westward.
The bottom is deep and rocky. It is named after one of Captain Cook's
vessels .which was refitted here in 1778.
Deserted Creek is 2 miles long
entrance, on the north shore, is a cove,
stance that there is an islet in its centre). The best anchorage in the creek
is in 12 to 14 fathoms, at about £ of a mile from the stream which falls into
its head ; vessels may also anchor in Island cove, in 12 fathoms, on tie west
side of the islet.    At both places there is good shelter from all winds.
Head Bay is nearly a mile long in a -westerly direction and T% of a mile
wide. At its entrance on the northern side are three small islets just above
the surface at high tide, the inner one of which is connected to the shore by a
sandy flat dry at low water. The anchorage is in 14 to 16 fatioms at about
£ of a mile from the head of the bay, and.is well protected from aU winds.
In the bay eastward of Head bay, formed by Perpendicular head and tie
coast northward of it, vessels may anchor in 16 to 18 fatioms. Perpendicular
head is very lofty, its summit being 2600 feet high.
Directions.—-The land surrounding Nootka sound presents to the seaman
in fine weather many striking features, which render it almost impossible for
him to mistake the sound for any of the numerous islets on the west coast of
Vancouver island. Estevan and Maquinna points are both low and have
breakers off them; the peculiar shaped hiU, Nootka cove, 1619 feet high,
situated almost immediately behind Friendly cove, is a remarkable object,
and when N.N.E. (the bearing upon which it would be seen when making the
sound from seaward) is very conspicuous. Mount Lombard, behind Burdwood
point is 3000 feet high; and E.N.E. from this is mount Albermarle,
3756 feet high. Conuma peak, in the interior behind the sound, in lat.
49° 49i', long. 126° 18', has an altitude of 4889 feet and can be seen from a.
considerable distance ; its summit is steeple-shaped.
The soundings at the entrance to the sound vary from 60 to 40 fathoms.
Southward of tbe entrance, and extending 6 miles westward of Estevan and
Escalante points, is a bank of 22 to 30 fathoms, deepening graduaUy in a
south-westerly dfrection. In the vicinity of Bajoireef, and westward of it, are
from 20 to 27 fathoms ; but at the distance of 7 mfles southward from Nootka
island is a depth of 40 to 60 fathoms. In fine weather, the natives wfll be
met with in canoes in considerable numbers on these banks fishing for hahbufc,
which are very plentiful along this coast.
Approaching the sound from southward, after rounding Estevan point steer
about N.N.W. for the entrance, which wfll be easily distinguished by tie
rocks off Escalante and Maquinna points; keep about 2 miles from tie
eastern shore till past Escalante point, and then steer up in mid-channel into
the sound.SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
291
If bound to Friendly cove haul over to the west side of entrance for Yuquot
point, which may be approached to a cable's length; round the islets sharply,
and anchor or moor in the cove, as most convenient, in from 9 to 5 fathoms.
If bound te Plumper harbour, after passing Yuquot point keep about £ a
mile from the north-east side" of Nootka island, on a N.N.W. or N. by W.
course for a distance of 5 miles to the entrance of Kendriek arm; steer up
the latter in mid-channel tfll abreast Plumper harbour, which may be entered
by passing between Bold and Pass islets (the islets fronting it on its east side)
or by going northward of the former. Anchor in 11 to 12 fathoms near the
centre of the harbour.
Should it be desired to anchor in any of the anchorages within Tlupana
arm, steer as before directed till within £ a mile of the entrance to Kendriek
arm ; haul then to tbe north-eastward, pass westward of Junction and Bligh
islands, and steer up Tlupana arm in mid-channel, or close-to on either shore.
Deserted creek and Head bay are clear of danger and may be entered without
difficulty ; if provided with the chart no directions whatever are necessary.
; Entering Nootka sound from westward, on nearing Bajo point do not
approach the south shore of Nootka island within 4 miles, nor shut in Bight
cone with Bajo point N. by W. until Yuquot point comes open eastward of
Maquinna point N.E. £ E., which will clear the Bajo reef; a vessel may then
steer for the entrance of the sound, about N.E. by E., not approaching the
shore between Maquinna and Yuquot points nearer than a mile, until abreast
the latter, which may be rounded close-to; proceed then up the sound as
before directed.
If beating into Nootka sound, when standing to the westward, keep Yuquot
point open eastward of Maquinna point N.E. £ E., as this will keep a vessel
well clear eastward of Bajo reef. In standing to the eastward do not approach
Escalante point within 1^- mfles, nor bring Burdwood point northward of
N. by E. until abreast it, when the shore may be approached close to. When
standing towards Maquinna and Yuquot points on the west side, avoid bringing tbe latter to bear eastward of N.N.E. until abreast it, when it may be
approached close-to.
Nootka sound is the easiest place of access on the whole of the west coast
of Vancouver island, the entrance being nearly 2 miles wide in the narrowest
part j and by attending to the above directions any sailing vessel may beat in
or out of the sound. Provided with a chart, if the night be clear, it may
be entered without risk by bringing the entrance to bear N.N.E., and in a
steamer but bttle difficulty would be experienced in picking up the anchorages
of Friendly cove and Plumper harbour.
NUCHATLITZ INLET.—Point Ferrer, the west point of Nootka
island, is a low and rocky projection, which may be readily recognised when
viewed from westward by a remarkable hill 350 feet high immediately eastward of it; this hiU has a conical summit, is known as the North-west cone,
and is situated in lat. 49° 44' 50", long. 126° 58' 50'. The depth at about
2 cable's length south-westward from the extremity of the point is 14 fathoms.
Nuchatlitz inlet runs into the shore of Nootka island north of Ferrer point,
about 10 miles in a N.E. £ E. direction. It is 3 miles wide at the entrance
and graduaUy narrows towards its head. Its shores are high and rocky and
much broken into creeks and smaU bays, in some of which there is doubtless
shelter for smaU vessels. The depth is 17 to 5 fathoms, the latter being in
Mary basin at 6£ miles from point Ferrer; in Inner basin, eastward of Mary
basin, the depth is 40 to 18 fathoms,
u 2
II292
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
The only place that can be recommended as an anchorage in the inlet is a
small bay on its north side, named port Langford. The depti here is 8 to
5 fathoms. Vessels anchor at about £ a mile from its bead in 6 fathoms,
mud, and are weU protected from almost all winds.
In the entrance to tbe inlet are several rocks and detached reefs ; hence
strangers should not attempt to enter without a pilot. There is generaUy
a heavy sea over and about these reefs*.
ESPERANZA INLET.—This inlet lies between the north-west side
of Nootka island and tbe main of Vancouver ; it is about 16 miles long in a
winding north-easterly direction, and its average breadth is about 1 mile,
narrowing at the head, which is connected by a narrow pass, Tah-sis narrows,
to the Tah-sis canal in Nootka sound.
The shores are nearly everywhere steep-to, rising on both sides to mountains of considerable height. The southern shore is indended by three bays
of moderate extent, which however afford no anchorage; and from the northern
one three arms of considerable length penetrate tbe Vancouver shore for
several mfles in a N.N.W. direction. In tbe western arm, named port EUza,
is the only anchorage within the inlet.
The soundings in tbe entrance vary from 12 to 20 fathoms, deepening
within to upwards of 100 fathoms in many parts. Scattered about the
entrance to this and Nucbatiitz inlet are tbe following dangers, Danger rock,
Nuchatlitz reef, South reef, Blind reef, Needle rock, Middle reef, Low rock,
Black rock, besides others between Catala island and Tat-chu point, the western
Unfit of Esperanza inlet.
Danger Rock, situated upwards of a mile N.W. £ W. from Ferrer point,
is the worst danger in the entrance to NuchatUtz inlet, as it is of very smaU
extent, and only breaks in heavy weather. It is steep-to on all sides, there
being 11 fathoms close to it. Mark bill, at the head of the inlet, on with tbe
north part of Fitz island bearing N.E. + E. leads south of this rock, also
midway between it and Ferrer point, and through the fairway into the inlet.
Nuchatlitz Reef, in the centre of the entrance to Nuchatlitz inlet and £ of
a mile north of the Danger rock, is about £ of a mile long in an E.N.E. and
W.S.W. direction, and a cable wide. This reef generally breaks, and' at its
inner extremity is a smaU rock awash at high water. There is a clear deep
passage between it and Danger rock, and also one apparentlynorthward of it, but
neither should be attempted by a stranger, as no leading marks can be given
for going through them.
South Reef.—This reef Ues just within the entrance to NuchatUtz inlet on
the south side, at 1 mile N.E. by N. from Ferrer point and «d
off shore ; it is nearly 2
aoout 3 cables
cables in extent, and covers at half flood. Mark
summit of Fitz island bearing N.E. £ E. leads
hill,  on with the north
2 cables north of it.
Blind Reef Ues at the south-east extreme of Middle channel, the principal
entrance to Esperanza inlet. It is 3 miles N.W. £ W. from Ferrer point, is
about 2 cables in extent, and only breaks in bad weather. At a cable's length
northward of it is a small rock, and at the distance of 2 cables from its south
and west sides is a depth of from 13 to 19 fathoms.
Needle Rock.—This small rock Ues f of a mile North of the Middle reef;
See the Admiralty charts Nos. 589 and 669 for Nuchatlitz and Esperanza inlets.SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
298
at the distance of 2 cables length westward from it is a depth of from 14 to
16 fathoms.
Middle Reef, bes at the south-west entrance point of Middle channel and
separates it from the North channel; it is about 3 cables long in a northerly
direction, and a cable wide. This reef generaUy breaks, and at its south
extremity is a small rock 4 feet above high water; this part of the reef lies
4 mfles N.W. by W. £ W. from Ferrer point. The depth at about a cable's
length from the reef on all sides is 5 to 20 fathoms.
Leading hill in line with Black rock N. by W. leads f of a mile west of
Blind reef, 1 mile west of Needle rock, £ a mile east of Middle reef, and
through the fairway of Middle channel.
Low Rock.—This rock is distant nearly a mile due West from Middle
reef, and the depth between is about 20 fathoms. It is 6 feet above water at
high tide, and is steep-to. It is the outermost of the dangers off the southwest side of Catala island, and consequently most to seaward. From it the
Twins islets bear N. by E. £ E., l£ miles; the space between is all foul
ground,—among the rocks is the outer Black rock, 10 feet high.
Black Rock is a rock 20 feet above tbe surface at high tide, situated f of
a mile eastward of the east point of Catala island; between is no safe channel,
and there is also foul ground at a cable's length south of it. The eastern side
of this rock should not be approached nearer than 2 cable's length, nor should
an attempt be made to go westward of it.
Half-tide and Obstruction Reefs, Sc.—Tbe space between Catala island
and Tat-chu point, distant from each other 3£ miles, is occupied by numerous
reefs of which Half-tide and Obstruction are furthest from the land; hence it
should always have a wide berth. Tat-chu point is in lat. 49°. 5l£', long.
127° 10'; it is a cliffy projection of coast and has a reef at its base extending
nearly £ a mile out. At l£ miles inland from tbe point is Eliza dome, a
remarkable mountain 2819 feet high, which is a very conspicuous object from
seaward.
Directions.—The reefs fronting Esperanza inlet form two channels, each
having sufficient depth and breadth for the largest vessels ; Middle channel is
however the widest. It is only in tbe western arm of the inlet, port Eliza,
that anchorage can be obtained, and here vessels may lie in perfect security
from all winds. The usual and best place to ride in is at about £ a mile
from its head, in 14 to 15 fathoms ; but anchorage may also be obtained in
Queen cove, a small inlet on tbe east side of tbe port at rather more than a
mile from the entrance. Tbe following sailing directions are from the
Vancouver Island Pilot, and should be used in connection with the Admiralty
charts already referred to.
" A stranger entering Esperanza inlet from the southward, through the
Middle channel, and intending to anchor in port Eliza, should pass Ferrer
point at a distance of about 8 miles, and keep on a northerly course till
nearing the entrance of Middle channel, when steer to bring Leading bill in
Une with Black rock N. by W., which will lead through the fairway, and clear
of the dangers on both sides of the channel. When tbe south point of Catala
island bears W.N.W., tbe vessel wfll be inside tbe dangers at entrance, and
should keep about N.N.E. for the entrance of port Eliza, passing from 2 to
8 cables east of Double island. In entering the port steer through Birthday
channel, passing a cable east of Harbour island ; when past the east point of
the latter, keep about N.W. by N. for the entrance of Queens cove, or further294
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
Li. I;
llh-
m i
over to the eastern shore, to avoid Channel reef; in entering the cove, pass
to the west of the island at its entrance, and moor immediately the vessel is
inside, anchors N.W. and S.E.
If going to the head of port Eliza, keep on as before directed till within a
cable of Queens cove, when haul sharply to the westward, keeping about
1 cable off the east shore, till Fairway island comes on with the east point of
Harbour island S.E. by E., when the vessel wiU be west of Channel reef, and
may steer up the port in mid-channel, anchoring near the centre, about 4 or
5 cables from tbe head, in 15 or 16 fathoms.
No sailing vessel of any size should attempt to enter port Ebza unless with
a steady fair wind.
If bound to RolUng roadstead, enter the Middle channel as before directed,
but instead of steering for the entrance of port Ebza, keep on a N. by W. or
N. £ W. course, (passing about a £ of a mile east of Black rock,) until the
outer extreme of the islets off the north-west part of Catala island comes open
north of the low grassy point on its north side bearing W. by S., when haul
in for the roadstead on that mark, which will lead midway between Arnold
and Entrance reefs ; anchor in 6 fathoms, with the extremes of Catala island
bearing W.S.W. and S.E. by S.
Entering Esperanza inlet from the westward, keep an offing of 2£ or
3 miles from Catala island (if Kyuquot hill be made out, by keeping it open
west of Tat-chu point N.W. by W., a vessel will be weU clear of any dangers
off Catala island), till Double island comes in line with Black rock* N. by
E. £ E., and entering tbe inlet through the North channel with this mark on,
which lead in clear of Danger. When the Twins island bear W. by N., haul
more to the eastward, passing a £ of a mile outside the Mid and Black rocks,
■ and steer for Rolling roadstead or port Eliza as before directed.
If the weather be clear and the marks can be made out, both North and
Middle channels are equally good, the latter being wide enough for a vessel
to beat through, though it would be a hazardous thing for a stranger to
attempt, as no turning marks can be given.
Generally a heavy swell prevails off the entrance of the NuchatUtz and
Esperanza islets, and no sailing vessel should attempt to enter, or leave either
of them, unless with a steady fair or leading wind.
Soundings from 20 to 40 fathoms wfll be found extending for nearly
20 miles westward from the entrances of NuchatUtz and Esperanza inlets;
to the S.S.W., at a distance of 10 miles off shore, are from 70 to 80 fathoms."
KYUQUOT SOUND.—From Tat-chu point the coast trends 7 miles
in a W.N.W. direction to Rugged point on the eastern side of the entrance to
Kyuquot sound. It is indented by several small bays, in some of which boats
may find shelter; and, fronting it are some islets and reefs, so that it should
always have a wide berth. The danger furthest to seaward, East Entrance
reef, is 2£ miles from the. land, and has a depth of about 20 fathoms close to
it; it is 4 feet above the surface at high tide.
The sound is a large broken sheet of water extending 14 or 15 miles inland
in two large arms, and several smaUer ones. The large island at the entrance,
named Union, is 1484 feet high; it divides the entrance into two channels,
of which the eastern one only is fit for large vessels ; there are also several
islands of smaller size within. The shores are generaUy rocky, and very
much broken, rising to mountains 2000 and 4000 feet high.SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
295
The soundings outside the sound vary from 40 to 20 fathoms, generally on
sand; at the entrance the depth is from 40 to 60 fathoms, but within tie
depths increase in many places to upwards of a 100 fathoms. There are
three anchorages, Narrowgut and Easy creeks, and Fair harbour, the two
latter being of considerable size but at a distance of 13 and 10 miles from the
sea; the former is very small, and only 5 miles within the sound, on its
eastern side.
The eastern (Kyuquot) channel leads into the sound eastward of Union island.
It is nearly straight, about 5 mfles long in a N.N.E. direction, and its breadth
is bttle less than a mile. The soundings within it vary from 80 to upwards of
40 fathoms, increasing gradually to the inner part. When running through,
keep in mid-channel and all danger will be avoided. It is however to be
remarked that no sailing vessel should attempt the channel unless with a
steady fair or leading wind, as generally a heavy swell prevails outside, which
in a light wind would render her position critical; and no stranger should
attempt to enter unless provided with the Admiralty charts (Nos. 583 and
717), the weather clear, and the leading mark for tbe channel well made out.
This mark is tbe summit of Leading island midway between Rugged and
Chat-channel points, bearing N. by E. £ E.
BARRIER ISLANDS.—Facing this part of the shore of Vancouver
is a multitude of islets and rocks, which extend in some parts as much as
5 miles from the land. They commence at 2 miles westward from Tat-chu
point, and continue for nearly 20 mfles along the land in a W.N.W. direction,
or as far as the inlets on tbe east side of Brooks peninsula. Through them are
two known navigable channels, the Kyuquot (into Kyuquot sound) and HaUbut
(leading to Clan-ninick harbour) but as a rule no stranger should venture into
them, or among the islands, unless the weather be clear, and there is a pilot
on board.
Highest island, one of the Barrier group, lying 2 miles south of Union
island, is a remarkable bare rock 98 feet high, and useful in identifying the
Kyuquot channel.    It is in lat. 49° 57' 45", long. 127° 21' 30".
Table island, on the east side of HaUbut channel, is the largest of the
Barrier islands, being nearly £ a mile in extent, and about 150 feet high;
some rocks, mostly above water, extend £ a mile from its south side, the
outer one being 50 feet high, with 15 fathoms 2 cables west of it. Trap bluff
on the west side of the island is conspicuous
Half a mile eastward of Table island
having a depth of from 4 to 6 fathoms.    It is tolerably sheltered by some
islands, and much used by coasters in summer months;  the entrance to it
being rather intricate, no stranger should attempt to enter.
In thick weather it is imprudent to stand nearer the Barrier islands than
the depth of 40 fathoms.
OU-OU-KINSH and NASPARTI INLETS.—These inlets are in
the bay eastward ef and under the broad and lofty promontory of which cape
Cook is the south-west extremity; Nasparti is the westernmost inlet. In
neither is there anchorage except with winds from the land, and access to both
is too difficult to be attempted by a stranger. Facing the approach to them
are many rocks and detached reefs, causing heavy breakers when the wind
blows strongly on shore. The outermost of these dangers, Sulivan reef, is a
patch of rocks situated in lat. 50° 4' 30", long. 127° 41'; it is nearly 3 miles
outside the entrance of Ou-ou-kinsh inlet, 2£ miles W. by S. from Clara islet,
is an anchorage for small vessels
(.;;,;?
I296
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
and nearly 4 miles S.S.E. of Hat island in Nasparti inlet. This patch is
about £ a mile in extent East and West, and steep-to—there being a depth of
from 10 to 11 fathoms close around it.
The entrance to Ou-ou-kinsh inlet open N.N.E. leads l£ miles eastward of
SuUvan reef; Solander island off cape Cook just open or shut in by the land
east of the cape bearing West, leads l£ miles southward of it; Hat island,
in the entrance of Nasparti inlet, in Une with a summit on the west side of
the latter bearing North, leads 1 £ miles westward of it; and Hat island Seen
between tie Haystacks N.W. by N., leads £ of a mile north-east of it. The
reef is extremely dangerous as it is only occasionaUy that the sea breaks
over it.
BROOKS PENINSULA.—Westward of Nasparti inlet is Brooks
peninsula, a lofty promontory of an oblong shape, which projects into the sea
in a S.S.W. direction about 9 miles ; its breadth is 5 miles. The shores are
generaUy very rocky, and rise almost abruptly to upwards of 2000 feet, while
its mountains are from 2500 to 3000 feet high. Off it are several dangers,
some of which extend upwards of a mile from shore ; of these, Banks reef at
£, of a mile from its south coast, is dry until £ flood.
Cape Cook, the south-west extremity of Brooks peninsula, and the most
projecting point of the outer coast of Vancouver island, rises abruptly from
the sea to a summit 1200 feet high. At nearly a mile westward from it, Ues
Solander island, which is bare, 580 feet high, and has two sharp summits;
between it and the cape the channel is filled with rocks, hence no attempt
should be made to go eastward of the island. Solander island is in bit.
50° 6' 81", long. 127° 57' 20".
The depth at about 2 miles off cape Cook and at the same distance off the
souti side of the peninsula, is 20 to 90 fathoms; as a. rule no vessel should
approach nearer.
Brooks Bay.—The bay on the north-west side of Brooks peninsula is
about 12 miles wide, and 6 miles deep. In it are several rocks above and
under water, upon which account it should not be entered. In its two inlets,
Klaskish and Klaskino, vessels may anchor but as these anchorages are
difficult of access, no shipmaster should attempt to enter either unless
embayed and unable to get out of the bay. Brooks bay is quite open to aU
winds from westward, and when these prevail with any strength a tremendous
sea is sent in.
Gierke Reefs.—At about 5 mfles northward of cape Cook are two islets,
Single and Double, of which the latter is distant from the shore about a mile.
Outside these are Clerke reefs, a cluster partly above the surface, extending
2 miles from the land and occupying an extent of fully 2 miles; these reefs
are extremely dangerous, and should always have a wide berth,—to clear
them at the distance of a mile on tie west side, do not approaci them nearer
than wien tie extremity of cape Cook bears S.S.E. £ E ; and at the distance
of l£ miles on the north side, Small islet, on the north side of the entrance
to Klaskisi inlet, should be brought in one with Leading cone, a hill 500 feet
high situated at tie iead of the inlet, N.E. by E. £ E.
Ship Rock.—This is a rock of very limited extent situated about 3 miles
N.N.W. from Clerke reefs, and in nearly the centre, of Brooks bay; it is
consequently 2 miles from shore, and from its position a very dangerous reef
to vessels bound into either Klaskino or Klaskish inlets. The depth close to
its southern and eastern sides is 17 to 20 fathoms, and upon it tie seaSOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
297
generally breaks heavily. To clear it at nearly £ of a mile on its south side,
bring Small islet in Une with Leading cone (already mentioned) N.E. by
E. J E. ; and at nearly 2 miles on its north-west side, Twenty-feet rock (at
the entrance of Klaskino inlet) in Une witi the lower part of the stripe on
Red Stripe mountain (on the north shore of that inlet) N.N.E. £ E.
QUATSINO SOUND is at about 8 nules north-westward from
Klaskino inlet, round a projecting point of land, of which Lawn point (a low
shore, having rocks extending from it about £ a mile in an easterly direction)
is the extremity. Immediately within Lawn point the land is very lofty,
being about 19(JO feet high; the depth at a short distance outside the rocks
is 10 to 20 fathoms.
Quatsino sound is an extensive and very deep inlet, containing in many
parts good weU-sieltered anciorages. Tie shores are generaUy, lofty, and
near the sea very irregular; Gap mountain, on the east side of entrance rises
in two peaks, of the respective heights of 2204 and 2088 feet; the mountain
over the west point of entrance is not less than 1275 feet high; and Nose
peak, on the north side of the entrance is 1780 feet high, and easily recognised
by its sharp roeky summit. These lofty mountains render it by no means
difficult to distinguish tie entrance, especiaUy when viewed directly from
southward.
The extent of Quatsino sound is upwards of 25 miles in a north-easterly
direction. The breadth is at first nearly 6 miles, narrowing to less than a
mile at a distance of 5 miles within; it then runs in a north-easterly direction
18 miles, when it branches off in two arms, one extending to the south-eastward for 12 miles, and ten rating in low land. The other Ues northward of,
and is connected with, the sound by a straight narrow pass about 2 miles
long ; its lengti is 22 miles hi an east and west direction, and the eastern
extreme, Rupert arm, is only 6 miles distant from Hardy bay on the northeast side of Vancouver island; the western part terminates within 12 miles
of San Josef bay on the outer coast. Just within the entrance of the sound
on the north side is Forward inlet, a much smaller arm, about 6 miles long
in a northerly direction, and containing the best anchorages of tie sound.
Tie soundings in the entrance, and from 3 to 5 miles outside, vary from
80 to 70 fathoms, but within they deepen in many places to upwards of
100 fathoms. There are several dangers along the souti shore at the entrance;
the fairway are two very dangerous rocks, which only break in heavy
in
part of the
navigator
to avoid
weather, and it requires great caution on tie
tiem wien entering or leaving tie sound.
Tides.—It is high water, full and change, in Quatsino sound at llh.; the
rise and fall of tide is about 11 feet.
The islands and reefs at tie entrance to Quatsino sound are the foUowing;—
Danger rocks, Entrance island, Pinnacle island, Surf islets, Bare islet, and
PiUey shoal. Within Forward inlet on tie western side are Low islets and
Robson island.
Danger Rocks.—These smaU rocks are at about a mile within the entrance,
nearly in the fairway, and consist of two very dangerous pinnacles steep-to on
all sides. North Danger Ues 7 cables E.N.E. from Entrance island, and
breaks at low water. South Danger is £ a mile S.E. of the norti rook,
and is awash at low water spring tides;—there is deep water between tiem.
Pinnacle islet in one with the east point of Low islands (in Forward islet),
bearing N.N.W. \ W., leads nearly 4 cables length westward of Danger rocks,298
.SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
and midway between the north rock and Entrance island. Robson island in
Forward inlet, open north of Entrance Mount point N.W. by W. £ W., leads
3 to 4 cables eastward of the rocks. Village islet, on the east side of Forward
inlet, just touching Brown point, N.W., leads about £ of a mile eastward of
them, and midway between them and the Surf islands. Bedwell islets,
within the sound on the north side, open north of Bold bluff bearing N.E.,
leads a £ of a mile northward of North Danger rock ; and Bold bluff in line
with the gap in the centre of Surf islands, bearing N. by E. £ E., leads
nearly a mile south-eastward of South Danger.
As the sea very seldom breaks over Danger rocks, great caution is required
when entering or leaving Quatsino sound, to avoid them. Between the rocks
and Surf islands the passage is l£ miles wide, and clear of danger.
Entrance Island is a smaU rocky islet, about 140 feet high and covered
with a few stunted trees, situated on the north-west side of the entrance to the
sound at about a cable's length from the shore. It is steep-to on its southeast side, there being a depth of 16 to 22 fathoms at a very short distance
from it. The narrow channel between it and the shore is filled with rocks,
but it is sufficiently deep to permit the passage of boats. The geographical
position of the island is lat. 50° 26' 30", long. 128° 3'.
Pinnacle Island.—This is a little islet £ of a mile northward of Entrance
island, and on the same side (the western) of the entrance to the sound. It
is a smaU jagged rock about 40 feet high, having a few trees on its summit.
Its distance from the shore is 2 cables, and at a cable's length from its east
side is a depth of 15 fathoms. When off this islet Forward inlet appears
open.
At rather more than £ a mile from Pinnacle islet in an E.N.E. direction,
is a rock having 8 fatboms over it, close to which is a depth of 18 to
30 fathoms. It lies in the fairway to Forward inlet, and being so much
below the surface is not dangerous.
Surf Islets.—These consist of a chain of smaU islands about 1 mile long
in a N.W. and S.E. direction, situated upwards of a mile S.S.W. from Bold
bluff, and 3 miles within the entrance to the sound; they are consequently
nearly in mid-channel. Some of them are covered with a few stunted trees,
and are about 40 feet above the surface at high tide; a short distance from
them are a number of breaking rocks, and at only 3 cables from their south
and west sides is a depth of from 10 to 30 fathoms. Although there appears
to be deep water between these islands and the east side of the sound, it is
not advisable to go through that passage, as it has not been sufficiently
examined.
Bare Islet.ties off the north shore of the entrance to the sound, at a little
eastward of the entrance to Forward inlet. It is a very small bare rock, only
12 feet above the surface at nigh tide, and almost close to it is a depth of 24
fathoms. The passage between it and the shore is not more than l£ cables'
length wide, and too shallow for anything larger than boats.
Pilley Shoal is a small patch of 3 fathoms, situated off the north shore of
the entrance to the sound. at about a mile north-eastward from Bare islet;
from it Bold bluff bears almost due East, distant 1 mile. It is l£ cables'
length from the shore, has a depth of 10 to 12 fathoms almost close to it, and
is marked by kelp.
Low Islets.—These are smaU wooded islets situated nearly a mile within
the entrance to Forward inlet, on its south-western side. They are steep, and
close to them on all sides is a depth of 17 to 20 fatioms.SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
299
Robson Island is about £ a mile north-westward from Low islets, on the
same side of the inlet. It is about £ a mile in extent, 885 feet high, and is
separated from the western shore by a narrow channel of 12 to 27 and 30 feet.
Its shores are rocky, and on its north and east sides free from danger beyond
tie distance of a cable's length. On the western side of this island is North
harbour, in which is exceUent anchorage.
Forward Inlet.—On the north side of Quatsino sound at a mile within
the entrance, is the arm known as Forward inlet. This inlet is about 6 mfles
long, first taking a north-westerly direction for 2 mfles from its outer part,
then turning to the N.N.E. for 4 miles and contracting in breadth as it
approaches its head, where it terminates in large salt-water lagoons. The
breadti at tie entrance is about a mile, but in the upper part it contracts to
less than a J of a mile in some places. Within it are two anchorages, named
North and Winter harbours, in which vessels may ride in perfect security and
be sheltered from almost aU winds.
North Harbour, as already mentioned, is on the west side of Robson island,
and its position makes it tbe most convenient of the anchorages is Forward
inlet. Its extent is nearly £ a mile, and within it is a depth of from 4 to 6
fathoms. The entrance is 3 cables wide, and easy of access to sailing vessels.
The western part of the harbour takes the name of Browning creek; this part
is J£ mfles long, but very narrow, with from 2 to 5 fathoms water, and terminates in a shaUow basin, dry at low water.
On tbe north side of the entrance to North harbour, is Observatory islet, a
small bare rock connected at low water to the main; its geographical position
is lat. 50° 29' 25", long. 128° 3' 39".
Winter Harbour comprises the N.N.E. part of Forward inlet and is a"
capacious anchorage having a depth of from 8 to 11 fathoms.    Its shores are
low and bordered by a sandy beach, and the harbour becomes shoal at a distance of a mile from tbe head; its breadth varies from 2 to 6 cables.
Log point, just outside the entrance on the east side, is low, and bordered
by a sandy beach. Southward of this point, and extending 4 cables from
shore, is New bank, with o£ fathoms on tbe shoalest part, which contracts
the breadth of the entrance passage to the harbour to less than a cable; when
running in keep a bttle over to the west side as soon as abreast North harbour,
by which means this bank may be avoided and Winter harbour entered without
danger.
At the narrowest part of the entrance to Winter harbour, on the west side,
is a low grassy point bordered by a sandy beach and steep-to, there being 16
fathoms within £ a cable of it.
Koprino Harbour.—At about 8 miles within the entrance of Quatsino
sound, in the centre of a bay on the north side of the sound, is Koprino harbour, a perfectly land-locked but small anchorage, sufficiently capacious to
accommodate one or two ships. It lies northward of Plumper island, which is
about £ a mile in extent, low, wooded, and steep-to on all sides, there being a
good passage on either side of it into the harbour.
Dockyard Island, in the west part of the harbour, midway between Plumper
island and the north shore, is small, but may be closely approached. The
least water between it and Plumper island is 4 fathoms;—at about l£ cables
north-eastward of it, in tie middle of the harbour, is a smaU patch of 15 feet,
known as tie mud bank. There is good anchorage at a cables' length southward of Dockyard island, in 14 fathoms.
Wedge Island Ues at the eastern limit of the anchorage at about a cables'800
SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
length northward of Plumper island.    It is very smaU, covered with a few
bushes, and there is a deep passage into the harbour close to it on either side.
Observatory Islet.—At the north-east extremity of the harbour, is a bare
rock about 12 feet high named Observatory islet.    It is 2 cables northward of'
Plumper island, and 3 cables from the north siore to which it is connected by
a bank dry at low water.    The geographical position of this islet is lat.
50° 30', long. 127° 52' 16".
East Passage leads into Koprino harbour, eastward of Plumper island. It
is £ a mile wide at tbe entrance, narrowing to 2 cables at its termination, is
clear of danger, and the soundings in it vary from 15 to 30 fathoms. East
cove, in its north-east part, appears to afford a good anchorage in 6 to 10
fathoms; but the entrance to it has hardly been sufficienly examined to
recommend its being used by a large vessel. Prideaux point, the east entrance
point of East passage, is low, bordered by a sandy beach, and may be
approached to a cable's distance.
Directions.—The following instructions for Quatsino sound are from the
Vancouver Island Pilot. For a full detailed description of the sound and its
inlets, reference should be made to that work, and also to the Admiralty
charts Nos. 582 and 570.
" Entering Quatsino sound from southward, give Reef point, its south-eastern
entrance point, an offing of about 2 miles, and steer North till Bold bhiff
comes in line with the gap in tbe centre of the Surf islands, N. by E. £ E.,
which mark kept on will lead south-eastward of Danger rocks; when the west
side of Robson island comes open north of Entrance Mount point in Forward
inlet, N.W. by W. £ W., or Village islet (on the east side of that inlet) is just j
touching Brown point, bearing N.W., a vessel wfll be well east of these rocks.
If bound up the sound, round the north end of Surf islands at a distance of
about £ a mile. If going to Forward inlet, steer about N.W. by W., taking
care not to shut in the south side of Robson island with Entrance Mount point,
until Bedwell islets come open north of Bold bluff, bearing N.E., when she
will be well north of the Danger rocks. Pass from 1 to 2 cables off the east
sides of Low and Robson islands, and rounding the north point of the latter,
at the same distance, enter North harbour, and anchor in from 4 to 6 fathoms
near its centre.
If intending to anchor in-Winter harbour, when abreast the north part of
Robson island, steer N.N.W., keeping well over to the west shore to avoid
New bank, and when past it enter the harbour in mid-channel, anchoring in
11 fathoms at about £ a mile north of Grass point.
Winter and North harbours are the best anchorages in Quatsino sound, and
easily available for sailing vessels, which could beat into the latter harbour.
As they are situated near the entrance to the sound their position is very
advantageous.
Bound to Koprino harbour, which can only be entered by steamers or
safling vessels with a fair wind, round the north-west point of Surf islands at
about £ a mile distance, and steer up the sound in mid-channel until abreast
the harbour. If in a large vessel, go through the East passage, keeping from
1 to 2 cables off Plumper island; enter the anchorage close-to on either side
of Wedge island, and moor immediately the vessel is west of it,—anchors
north and south. A vessel may also enter by West passage, and anchor in
14 fathoms south of Dockyard island.
When navigating the sound eastward of Koprino harbour tie chart is theSOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
801
best guide, and a mid-channel course is everywhere free of danger; sailing
vessels of any size should not, however, go eastward of that harbour, as the
anchorages beyond are rather difficult of access for tiem. If wishing to anchor
in Hecate cove, enter it in mid-channel, passing north of Limestone island,
and moor immediately the vessel is inside the entrance points ; the tide runs
from 1 to 8 knots abreast tbe entrance, and should be guarded against.
Going through Quatsino narrows, keep weU over to tie north shore, pass
north of Round island, round Turn point close-to, and guarding against the
tide, steer up tbe narrows in mid-channel. These narrows ought not to be
attempted except at slack water or with a favourable tide, unless in a full-
powered steamer.
The best anchorage north of the narrows is Coal harbour in West arm. If
wishing to go there, a N.W. course for 2 mfles from the narrows will lead to
its entrance; a vessel may. anchor near its centre in from 12 to 14 fathoms.
In navigating West arm keep weU over to the south shore, when in the
vicinity of the Pot rock and Straggling islands.
Entering Quatsino sound from westward, give the coast an offing of about
2 miles, tfll Entrance island bears N.E. or N.E. by N., when steer to pass
about 2 cables eastward of it, but not further off. When abreast it haul to
the northward, bringing Pinnacle islet in line with the east side of Low islets,
bearing N.N.W. j W., and steer up with that mark on till Bedwell islets come
well open northward of Bold bluff, bearing N.E., when Forward inlet may be
entered, or you may proceed further up the sound, as before directed.
If, when coming from southward, Pinnacle and Low islets can be weU made
out, a vessel by keeping tbe former in line with the east part of the latter,
bearing N.N.W. £ W., wfll pass 3 cables westward of Danger rocks ; but as
a rule it would be more prudent to go eastward of them.
If the weather be so thick that the marks for clearing Danger rocks cannot
well be made out, a vessel, if able to distinguish Entrance island, may enter
the sound by steering for it on a N. by E. or north-easterly bearing; pass
close to its east side, and haul to the northward when abreast it; by keeping
£ a mile on that course, she wfll be weU clear north-west of Danger rocks,
and may proceed anywhere up. the sound. On a clear night in fine weather a
vessel may also enter in the above manner.
There is room, with a steady breeze, for a smart working vessel to beat into
tie sound southward and eastward of Danger rocks, though without previous
knowledge of the place it would be rather hazardous to attempt it. H obliged
to do so, when standing northward towards Danger rocks, tack when Bold bluff
comes in Une witi the centre of the northernmost (wooded) Surf island, bearing
N.N.E. £ E.; and when standing to the south shore, tack when Bold bluff
comes in Une with tie souti-eaBt extreme of the Surf islands bearing N. £ E.
or N. by E. When the south side of Robson island comes open north of
Entrance Mount point, N.W. by W. £ W., she will be eastward of Danger
rocks, and may stand further to the northward.
Beating between Surf islands and Danger rocks, tack at about 3 cables off
the former: and in standing towards the latter, keep Robson island open as
before directed, tfll BedweU islets come open northward of Bold bluff, N.E.
If going to North harbour, when inside Forward inlet, guard against New
bank."
The Coast.—From Quatsino sound to cape Scott, the north-west extremity
of Vancouver island, the coast trends W.N.W. about 26 miles.    It is inI
302 SOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
general rocky and iron-bound, and from its projecting points sunken ledges
extend a considerable distance, hence it is always prudent to give this coast a
wide berth,—an offing of at least 2 mfles is recommended. The mountains
over the cliffs are occasionally more than 1000 feet high ; of the headlands
cape Palmerston, in lat. 50° 36' 45", rises to the height of 1422 feet and has
rocks at its base to about £ a mile out, immediately beyond which is a depth
of 6 to 10 fathoms.
SAN JOSEF BAY.—This inlet is on the north-west side of cape
Palmerston, and should only be used as an anchorage when the wind is from
the land. It extends 3 miles in a north-easterly direction, and has a breadth
at tie entrance of nearly 2 miles, narrowing gradually "towards its head. Its
shores are high, and off the south side are several isolated rocks. Although
tbe depth of the bay is 11 to 4 fathoms, it affords shelter only with northerly
winds, and should not therefore be used as a stopping place unless the weather
be fine ; generally a heavy sea sets into it, and *a vessel caught there with a
south-westerly gale would inevitably go on shore. At its head, on the south
side, is a stream of considerable size, which boats can enter at high tide.
The best place of anchorage in the bay is near the middle in 7 or 9 fathoms
with the entrance points bearing South and West.
SEA OTTER COVE.—Outside the entrance to San Josef bay, on its
north-west side, is a cluster of islands about 40 feet high, bare and yeUow-
topped, which with the coast northward of them form a bttle bay, known as
Sea Otter cove. This bay extends into tbe land about a mile in a northerly
direction, and is not more than £ of a mile wide. It has a depth of 5 to 1£
fathoms, and is exposed to southerly winds. There are several sunken rocks
within it, and the shelter is very indifferent; it should be entered only by those
well acquainted with its dangers.
Sea Otter cove is formed on its west side by cape RusseU, a remarkable
headland 810 feet high, which is very conspicuous, especiaUy when viewed
from north-westward as it stands out from the general Une of coast. This
cape must be rounded with very great care, on account of some sunken rocks
which run off from it about a mile in a southerly direction. From this headland to cape Scott, there is no place of shelter, and tie bold coast frequently
rises to the height of 600 feet.
The soundings off shore between Quatsino sound and cape Scott are deep,
as might be inferred from the mountainous character of the adjoining land.
At the distance of 2 miles the depth is 20 to 30 fathoms, sand and rock, and
this deepens to 100 fathoms at 10 to 11 miles out; southward of Scott
islands the depth of 100 fathoms is probably not more than 6 miles from
them.
CAPE SCOTT is a bold headland 500 feet high, which wfll be recognised
at once from whatever direction it may be viewed; for when bearing due East
the sea will be observed to wash its north and south sides, and when bearing
either North or South, the low sandy neck immediately behind it, (only a
cables' length wide, and which connects it to the shore of Vancouver) makes
it appear almost isolated. Its geographical position is lat 50° 46' 41", long.
128° 26' 45". The country in the vicinity of the cape is not so lofty as that
along the coast we have been describing south-eastward of it.
Cape Scott should always have a wide berth given to it because of the rocks
at its base, which extend out nearly £ of a mile ; as these are steep, with aSOUTH-WEST COAST OF VANCOUVER ISLAND.
808
depth of 15 to 20 fatioms almost close to tiem, more than ordinary care is
required when in their neighbourhood. The flood here comes from the southward, and rounding the cape sets into Goletas channel, its strength varying
from 1 to 3 knots.
There is anchorage for boats and small craft in each bay on the north and
south sides of tie cape, formed by the sandy isthmus, but in neither is it safe
to remain when there is a prospect of bad weather. The souti bay has a
depth of 5 to 2 fatioms, is exposed to South winds, and facing it is a cluster
of rocks, some of which are 10 feet high. There is also shelter for boats in a
bttle creek among the rocks immediately west of the south bay ; it is difficult
of access, but affords protection when within even against southerly gales.
SCOTT ISLANDS.—The highest part of Cox, the easternmost island, is
5£ mfles W. by S. £ S. from cape Scott. The channel between this island
and the shore of Vancouver is safe and bebeved to be free from sunken
dangers, with the exception of those afready mentioned as surrounding cape
Scott; its depth is from 19 to 40 fathoms. The tide runs through it at the
rate of 1 to 3 knots, and there are some strong tide rips on its east and west
sides. When beating through do not approach the shore of Cox island nearer
than £ a mile, nor that of cape Scott nearer than l£ miles.
The islands extend from Cox island about 20 miles in a westerly direction,
the west point of Triangle island (the furthest to seaward) being in lat.
50° 51' 53", long. 129° 6' 32", and 25£ miles W. by S. £ S. .from cape
Scott. They are five in number, and rekoning from eastward are named Cox,
Lanz, East Haycock, West Haycock, and Triangle; but adjacent to them
are some smaUer islets or rocks. The depth along their north sides, at the
distance of 2 miles, is 30 to 50 fathoms; at 2 miles westward of Triangle
island it is 45 fathoms, and at 5 or 6 miles southward from them 80 to
100 fatioms.
Cox Island has an extent of about 2£ mfles. It is the largest of the islands,
and rises to the height of 1047 feet. Its shores are very bold, and should
not be closely approached because of detached rocks and sunken reefs.
Vessels in fine weather occasionaUy anchor off the north shore in 14 fathoms;
but it is safe to do so only when the wind is from southward. ■
Lanz.—This island is distant from Cox island about £ a mile; the channel
between is 17 fathoms deep in the middle, but should be used only on an
emergency, as the shores on each side is rocky. Lanz is 2 miles long in a
westerly direction, 1 mile broad, and is the highest of the Scott islands,—
its summit being 1177 feet above the sea.
East Haycock is 2£ mfles south-westward from Lanz island; it is very
small, has a rugged outline, and is covered witi a few stunted trees. Some
islets or rocks extend a short distance N.W. from it.
West Haycock is distant 5 miles W. £ S. from East Haycock. It is small
and rocky, and about 180 feet high ; some small inlets extend upwards of a
mile south-westward from it, foul ground existing around them for £ a mile.
Triangle, the westernmost of the Scott islands, is 26 miles W. by S. from
cape Scott. It is 680 feet high, about a mile in extent, and differs from the
other islands in being very precipitous, and bare of trees, and has a remark-
ble gap in its summit. A ledge or reef extends 1 mile north-west from it;
eastward of it are three low islets, the outermost of which, 40 feet high, is
l£ miles from the island; there are also two islets at a short distance from
its south side.W'
804
QUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS.
The Scott islands have not been closely examined, but it is known that
strong tide ripples and overfalls prevail in the channels separating them.
Upon this account, and also because these channels have not been sounded,
vessels should abstain from venturing near or among them. The flood sets
northward and the ebb southward through tie islands, and at times witi
considerable strength.
QUEEN   CHAELOTTE   ISLANDS.
These islands although among the British Possessions are but Utile known,
and the few shipmasters who have visited them have scarcely increased our
acquaintance with them. The foUowing remarks are almost entirely from a
hydrographic notice by Mr. George H. Inskip, R.N., of H.M. steamer
Virago, 1853.*
GENERAL REMARKS.—The Queen Charlotte islands, so named in
1787 from the vessel commanded by Captain Dixon, one of the earber
explorers of the group, extend 160 miles in a N.N.W. and S.S.E; direction.
The greatest breadth of the islands at their extremity, is about 60 miles,
whence it gradually diminishes to cape St. James, their southern extremity,
where it terminates in a point,—giving the whole chain of islands a wedge
shape form. The group, consisting of three principal islands and several smaller
ones, is situated between latitudes 51° 57' and 54° 21', longitudes 131° 11'
and 133° 0'. The channels separating the larger islands are named Houston
Stewart and Skidegate; the former channels run between Prevost and Moresby
islands, and the latter between Moresby and Graham islands.
The natives are probably not numerous. It is reported that they hold
slaves, and frequently treat them very cruelly. They are fond of traveUing,
and make voyages of several hundred miles in their canoes, visiting Sitka to
the north, and Victoria harbour (Vancouver) to the south.
Halibut, salmon, herrings, and several other descriptions offish abound among
the islands, and off their coasts; and immense flocks of wild geese and duck at
times visit them. Potatoes grow in abundance in most parts, and thrive
exceedingly well, forming an important article of food. These are aU to be
bought either for money, strong cotton shirts, cotton dresses, plain cotton,
knives, tobacco, mother of pearl jaeket buttonsfor ornamenting their blankets,
or any of the articles commonly bartered among savages.
Bears are very numerous, and with martens, sea and land otters, are caught
for their firs, which are taken to the H.B. Co.'s establishment at fort Simpson
(port Macblocblm), or to Rupert fort (Beaver harbour) in Vancouver island.
CAPE ST. JAMES, so named by Mr. Dixon from the saint's day upon
which it was first seen, is the southern extremity of Prevost island; its
approximate geographical position is lat. 51° 57', long. 181° 2'. The land
about it has very moderate elevation; but, similar to that in the northern part
* The variation allowed is 26° E.   Keference should be made to the Admiralty charts
Nos. 2430 and 2168.
See also the interesting remarks upon the islands by Mr. Inskip in the Nautical
Magazine, 1855, and those by the officers of BT.M.S. Virago in the Nautical Magazine
1854.QUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS.
805
fathoms, over a series
which
Within Forsyth point,
of the islands, it rises graduaUy to the rugged and uneven mountains, whioh
occupy the centre of the group. When approaching the islands from southward, it is the high land behind the cape that wfll be first seen. The'cape
is formed by several islets and rocks, and until tbe sea in its vicinity is
examined, must be approached witi extreme caution, for it is said that a
sunken ledge extends from it 8 to 5 miles between the directions of S.S.E.
and 8.E., the edges of which are probably steep.* With the cape bearing
W. by S. £ S. about S£ miles, and the outermost rock above water S.W. £ S.,
a cast of 90 fathoms has been obtained.
HOUSTON STEWART CHANNEL.—From cape St. James tie
eastern coast of Prevost island is muoi broken, with one round thickly wooded
and conspicuous island and several little islets and rocks along it, and trends
nearly N.W. to a well defined headland, which after rounding tie eastern
entrance to Houston Stewart channel and Rose harbour wfll open out. At
about 4 miles from the entrance there are 90 fathoms water, and the depth
graduaUy shoals to 20 fathoms to within a mile of it; from this distance off,
the soundings are very irregular, varying from 30 to 7
of ridges or bars of rock, sand, shell, and mud.
Entering from Eastward.—In the eastern entrance to this channel,
is about £ of a mile wide, there are 20 fatioms water.
on tie north side of the entrance, is a snug bay, bordered by a sandy beach,
in which, at nearly £ of a mile from Forsyth point, and at £ of a mile from
tie beach, is a very secure and convenient anchorage in 16 fathoms.
At a £ of a mile inside Forsyth point, and a little to the northward of the
Une of direction of the channel, is a rocky patch with kelp, having only
1 fathom on it; a vessel therefore should not haul to the northward too soon
after entering. On the southern side of tie channel are some small wooded
islands, here and there fringed with outlying patches of kelp, which latter
should always be avoided. W.S.W. l£ mfles from Forsytb point is the
Trevan rock, lying nearly mid-channel, and contracting tbe passage on its
northern side to rather less than £ a mile; patches of kelp and the largest of
the islands before mentioned render the other side impassable, excepting for
boats ; close to tie north side of this rock tie depti is 7 fathoms. At a mile
farther in, the channel branches off both to the northward and southward.
Entering from Westward.—The southern arm of Houston Stewart channel
is about 3 miles long, and £ of a mile wide, with several small islands at its
southern end or entrance from the Pacific. The shores of both sides are bold
and densely wooded. A vessel coming from tie soutiward and wisiing to go
in by this entrance, when abreast cape St. James, should close the land to
l£ miles, and after coasting it for about 12 miles, the entrance wfll open out.
After passing a convenient distance southward of the largest and outer island
at tie entrance, named Antiony island (off the southern end of which an
extensive ledge of rocks projects in a south-west direction) the channel wfll
show itself; the other islands are all wooded; a bare flat rock which Ues
much nearer the western than the eastern side, and which should be kept on
the port hand, wfll be a good guide.    There is an Indian vfllage of the
* Mr. Gray of the Columbia informed Vancouver that he had struok and received
material damage upon a sunken rock at a much greater distance from the cape than a
league, though in the same direction as that mentioned, between S.8.E. and S.E.806
QUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS.
Shangoi tribe on St. Anthony island; the natives are very wild, and persons
visiting or trading witi tiem siould be on their guard.
Rose Harbour.—This secure and capacious harbour forms the northern
arm of Houston Stewart channel. It runs up in a northerly direction for
8 mfles from its junction with the channel, and is a continuation in nearly
a straight line with the last-mentioned portion of it. For the first 2 miles the
average breadth of the harbour is £ of a mile ; the western shore rises boldly
with deep water close-to ; the eastern shore although high, has kelp along it,
with shoal water. The harbour then contracts to £ a mile, between two low
points forming its head. Beyond these points is a basin, about 2 miles in
circumference, filled with rocks and woody islets; tie land on its north and
west sides is high and mountainous, whilst that on its eastern side is low.
The country around this locabty is mountainous, and thickly wooded; but
the timber is smaUer and less valuable than that in the magnificent forests of
Vancouver island. The soil is poor, but there are indications of copper in
different places. The sea otter, the fur of which fetches very high prices in
China, are numerous.
The Coast.—About 3 mfles northward of tie eastern entrance to Houston
Stewart channel, and at about 2 miles off the coast, is a ledge of rocks, lying
a bttle above water; the sea breaks violently over them, and for a considerable distance around;—other rocks encircle these, but they are under water.
From Houston Stewart channel to Cumshewas harbour on tie eastern side of
Moresby island, a distance of about 50 mfles, the coast is high, and broken
into numerous inlets, with many islets along it, probably affording good
harbours.    Cumshewas harbour is in about lat. 53°
CUMSHEWAS HARBOUR trends nearly E.S.E. and W.N.W., and
is reported to be both large and safe. A spit, on which tie sea breaks heavily,
runs off its southern point of entrance nearly two-thirds of the way across to
the northern side. The channel in is over a bar witi 8 fathoms water on it;
this bar connects the end of tie spit with the northern shore, inside the north
point of entrance, and off which bes a small island.
SKIDEGATE HARBOUR and CHANNEL.—About 20 miles
north-westward of Cumshewas harbour is the entrance to Skidegate harbour
and channel. The intermediate coast is lower and more level than that to the
southward, with an extensive bank along it for some mfles before coming to
Skidegate, the depti being as Utile as 7 fatioms, at 3 to 4 miles off shore.
Skidegate harbour is very spacious, and communicates with the Pacific at
Cartwright sound, near Buck point; the channel, however, is intricate, and
only navigable for canoes a portion of tie way through. The southern point
of the eastern entrance is low and woody, and a spit, with only from 1 to
2 fatioms on it at low water, extends in a N.W. direction for about 4 miles,
to within 1 mile of Dead Tree point, which is the northern point of entrance,
and receives its name from the number of dead trees upon it. A rock, just
awash at low water springs, bes near the outer extreme of the spit, about
1 mile from this point, but the available passage between is not more than
£ a mile wide, as the spit extends beyond tie rock, and tie siore near the
point is not bold.
Directions.-—When bound into Skidegate harbour," first get weU to tie
northward of its entrance, and run along the shore keeping about £ a mile
distant from it, in about 7 to 8 fathoms water, and paying strict attention to
the soundings, until Dead Tree point bears W.N.W., when the water wUlQUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS.
807
deepen to 15 fatioms; then steer more to the eastward, and the water wfll
shoal again, and if the weather is clear, a remarkable promontory (looking like
an island) wfll be seen at the head of the harbour, also the two village islands,
unless it be very thick, can always be recognised.
Keep tie promontory just touching the eastern side of the village islands
(when in one), bearing South, and it wfll lead in over the bar in 5 fathoms;
after passing the bar, the water will deepen to 15 or 16 fathoms, and the
village islands can be passed on either side. If the inside passage (which is
about a £ of a mile wide) is used, keep in mid-channel, and follow the shore
for about 2 miles, round two smaU points to the anchorage, which is in a
capacious and pleasant looking bay, in 13 fathoms water, over muddy bottom,
at £ of a mile from tbe beach ; tbe surrounding land is moderately high and
thickly wooded.
The village of Skidegate is situated in the bay, off which are the village
islands, and consists of many houses fronting the beach, all of which are dirty
and smell strongly of fish. The Indians are a finer race than the Vancouver
islanders, and although very dirty, are much cleaner in their personal
appearance. A space of ground near the village is cleared of brushwood for
potatoes, which thrive exceedingly well. Plenty, of wood and water can be
obtained, and the natives will gladly assist if paid with tobacco, &e. for their
labour. Some distance from the anchorage, and on the side of a mountain,
are large quantities of coal, of a description very similar to that discovered at
Nanaimo in Vancouver island; it is however in too inconvenient a position to
be worked.
The Coast.—The coast between Skidegate and Rose point, the north-east
extreme of Graham island, being rather low, with dangerous flats running off
it, should be given a berth of at least 6 or 7 miles, and the lead kept constantly going whilst running along it; tbe soundings were from 9 to 11 fathoms.
Cape Ball, nearly 20 miles from Skidegate bar, is very conspicuous, having a
remarkable white cliff on it, with lower cliffs on either side; it cannot be
mistaken, for there is no land like it between Skidegate and Rose point.
Captain McNeil, of the Hudson Bay Company's service, found a rock with
only 2 fathoms on it lying East about 6 miles from cape Ball.
Rose point is low, and has a dangerous spit running off it in a N.E.
direction for nearly 5 miles. With the point bearing W.S.W. about 6 miles,
a round shaped hill, named Macroon, will open out clear of the land off which
this spit runs; the hfll is about 300 or 400 feet high, but shows out so
distinctly as to look almost an island. This part of Dixon channel, between
the land near Rose spit and Stephens island on the continental side, is about
20 mfles wide, with soundings quite across. When the centre of Zayaz island
bore N. by W. £ W., and the north extreme of Stephens island E. by N. £ N.,
which is about half way between Rose spit and Brown passage, tbe depti was
15 fathoms.
The bank of soundings between Rose point and Stephens island was found
very useful on one occasion, during a strong breeze from the S.E., with thick
weather, when the Virago anchored on it and remained until it cleared up,
and the land became visible.
The coast from Rose point to Virago sound is low, and thickly wooded for
some miles from the shore, which has a bank running off it, and should be
approached with  caution,  with  the  lead  constantly  going.     At  8  miles
N.N.E. £ E. from the east point of Virago sound, the depth was 52 fathoms
x 2
illa
808
QUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS.
over sand (there are soundings outside this for several miles); at 5 miles off,
the soundings were about the same; at 2 miles there were 28 fathoms, sand,
and the water then gradually shoaled in to the shore. From Virago sound to
North island, the coast is tolerably bold, excepting in one or two places,
where there are some rocks, but they do not extend far off, and are above
water.
MASSET HARBOUR.—Rather more than 20 miles S.W. £ S. from
Rose point is Masset harbour, the entrance to which is formed between a low
point, with a ledge of rocks £ a mile off it covered with kelp, on the western
side, and the point of a long spit partly dry (the surf usually breaking the
whole length of it), on the eastern, the passage between having an extensive
bar. With the outer western point bearing W. by N., 1 mile, the depth is
5 fathoms at low water; from this position the course in is about S. by E. £ E.,
the soundings over the bar varying from 5 to 3 fathoms, for about
3 miles, to abreast a village on the western shore, a Utile more than a mile
from what may be termed the inner or proper entrance to the harbour; the
water then suddenly deepens to 9 and 11 fathoms, the channel lying in the
direction of the eastern point of what has been called tie inner entrance, and
the depti, at about 2 cables lengths from the beach that forms it, being from
10 to 13 fathoms. Just inside, and round this point, is a pretty bay, with a
beach, containing the principal village, off the centre of which there is anchorage in 10 fathoms. The ebb tide runs very strong, making this by no means
a good anchorage.
At this part the width of the harbour is nearly 2 miles, a large sand bank
filling up its western side. The natives describe the harbour as running in
a southerly direction for many miles, and widening out considerably, witi
deep water, and that several years ago, ships (some having three masts) used
to anchor in it. Edensaw, the chief of the neighbouring tribe, and wbo is a
very intelligent and (when it suits him) valuable person to a stranger
navigating this coast, says, that when the Indians wish to go to Skidegate,
they pass on to the head of the harbour in their canoes, and walk across a
mountainous neck of land, from the summit of which both harbours can be
seen, the distance between them being inconsiderable.
In 1852 the Indians belonging to this place seized, plundered, and burnt
an American schooner, the master and crew being spared through the influence
of the chief, Edensaw; this should place any one who may happen to visit
these people on their guard.
VIRAGO SOUND.—Between Masset harbour and Virago sound, which
Ues about 10 miles to the westward, there is good anchorage in some places,
in which a vessel might remain a night instead of keeping under-way, or
cruising about with a S.E. wind, and thick weather.
Tbe outer anchorage of Virago sound is sheltered from all winds to the
southward of East and West. With two smaU wooded islets on the west side
of the entrance, bearing W. £ S. 1 mile, the east point N.E. £ E. 2 miles,
and the opening to the inner harbour South about 2 miles, the depth is
7 fathoms water, over sand and shells; the shores are low and fringed with
kelp, but the lead will be a safe guide, as the water shoals gradually towards
tie land.
Tie inner iarbour of Virago sound (the native name of which is Naden,)
is capacious, and sheltered from every wind. For about 1 mile outside tie
entrance there are several banks, formed probably by the sand, &c., washedQUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS.
809
down by the ebb stream, which -runs with considerable strength. The rise
and faU of tie tide is about 18 feet. The narrowest part of the entrance is
about £ a mile wide, with a deep water channel, which for the first 2 miles
is intricate and should not be attempted until properly sounded. The western
side of one part of the channel, which may be called the narrows, is completely
blocked up by rocks, which show towards low Water ; within these the channel
is much clearer, and runs up in a southerly direction for 2 miles further, and
then widens out into an extensive and magnificent harbour, several miles in
circumference, having, according to Edensaw's report, sufficient water for any
vessel. Two streams, navigable for boats, empty themselves at the head of
the harbour, and some smaller ones exist in other parts of it.
The vfllage is to be built inside a point on the western side the narrowest
part of entrance. Some ground near it is cleared for potatoes, which are
much used by the natives, and form one of their principal articles of food.
PARRY PASSAGE, named after the late Sir E. Parry, separates
North island (which forms the north-western extremity of the Queen Charlotte
islands,) from Graham island. Rocky ledges run off its southern side for
about a mile, but tiere is a good and clear channel between them and North
island. The tidal streams rush through the passage, and form a perfect race.
On the south side is Edensaw's vfllage, from which he intends removing to
Virago sound.
Just without tie eastern entrance of Parry passage, and on tie south side,
is a bay with anchorage in it. A line of kelp fringes the shore, which is
studded witi rocky patcies and stones. This is not a good anchorage, as the
flood sets into it from the passage, forming a number of eddies, and rendering
it almost impossible to lie at single anchor without fouling it. The country
at the back is low and covered with trees, with here and there grassy spots.
On the south side of North island, in Parry passage, is a snug cove named
Henslung, in which whalers occasionaUy anchor. The Virago anchored in it
-in 30 fathoms water, and had but just room to swing clear of tie precipitous
rocks which form its western side. At the head of the cove is a sandy beach,
witi a stream of water running through it. The whole island is thickly
wooded.
On the eastern side of North island there is said to be a good anchorage in
a bay which was formerly often used by the vessels belonging to the old North
West company.
Directions.—When leaving the western entrance to Parry passage, get a
good offing before hauling to tie southward, as a rocky ledge runs off cape
Knox for about 8 mfles in a westerly direction, tbe sea breaking with great
violence on several parts of it. When well out, Frederick point will show
like a low projecting point of an island, (which it is,) about 18 miles to the
southward. At 2 or 3 miles southward of Parry passage is an indentation of
the shore, which might be taken as its entrance by a vessel coming from
southward,—a mistake that might lead to serious consequences, as the whole
coast, as far as Frederick point, appears to contain several open bays, with
outlying rocks off each of them. The Indians, in their sketches of this part
of the coast, do not draw any harbours, but merely exposed bays.
HIPPA ISLAND, lying 25 mfles southward of Frederick point, is high
and bold to seaward. This portion of the coast is higher and more broken
than the former, the openings appearing deeper, neither does it seem to have
so many rocks lying off it.    The Indians show some good harbours towards310
QUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS.
:11
Hippa. When abreast Hippa island, Buck point, 30 miles distant, and also
cape Henry, 10 or 12 mfles farther to tbe southward, can be seen, the coast
presenting the same high and broken appearance as the preceding 25 miles.
All the points along this part much resemble Buck point, which is rather low
and rugged, jutting out from the high land at the back.
BUCK POINT is on the southern side of Skidegate channel, which
leads through to Skidegate. It has a large high island just northward of it,
and there is another, much smaUer and peaked, standing out clear of tbe bind,
at about 3 or 4 miles farther northward, and lying in the entrance of Cart-
wright sound, which is formed between Buck point on the souti, and Hunter
point on tbe north. Just southward of Buck point, in Englefield bay, is an
opening, probably leading into a harbour.
INSKIP CHANNEL.—Englefield bay has Buck point on the north,
and- cape Henry on the south, with Kuper or Kennedy island in its southern
part. This island has a channel on either side leading into Mitchell harbour,
known also as Gold harbour. The northern, or Inskip channel, which leads
round the north side of Kuper island, was first used by the Virago in 1853,
its entrance being a few miles south of Back point. It is about 8£ mfles
long, and £ a mile wide. A little without it, there are some small islands on
either side, but there wfll be no difficulty in discovering the passage in. In
the channel there was no bottom at 60 fathoms, but at the entrance a cast of
35 fathoms was obtained on a halibut bank. At a short distance inside the
islands, on the port side of the entrance, is a viUage belonging to tbe Kilkite
tribe. Farther in, on the same side, and about 3^ miles up, is a deep
opening, and where this and Moore channel meet are two other openings to
harbours, with some small islands lying near them. This channel is no doubt
equally as safe as the other.
MOORS CHANNEL, on tbe south side of Kuper island, is named
after Mr. Moore, late Master of H.M.S. Thetis. This officer made a survey
of both it and Mitchell harbour whilst in that ship, which was sent to protect
British interests in 1852, during the time that a large number of adventurers
from Cabfornia bad collected here to dig and search for gold, some of that
metal having been discovered by the Indians. This channel is 5 mfles long
in an E.N.E. and W.S.W. direction, and £ a mile wide, the shore on each
side being bold of approach, high, and covered with trees nearly down to the
water's edge. In mid-channel there is no bottom at 70 fathoms. On the
north side, just without tbe entrance, are some smaU rocky islets, named
Moresby islands, and on tbe south side a few rocks close in shore.
Mitchell, or Gold Harbour, about 2£ miles deep and £ a mile wide, is
surrounded by precipitous and densely wooded hflls, from 700 to 800 feet in
height, and at its head in Thetis cove is a sandy beach and a stream of water.
At 1£ miles up the harbour is Sansum island, a small spot covered with trees,
and the ruins of a number of huts. The anchorage lies inside this, in Thetis
cove, keeping Sansum island on the port hand; the passage being a cable
wide, with deep water. This cove is completely land-locked, but squaUs,
frequently accompanied by ram, come over the hiUs with considerable violence.
At a good half mile from the mouth of the harbour, on the starboard side going
in, is the Thorn rock, with only 3 feet on it at low water; it lies about a
cable's length from the shore, and on the opposite side, not quite at so great
a distance from the land, but a little further out, is another rock.    These areQUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS.
811
dangerous, to vessels working in or out; but there is nothing to fear if tie
wind be fair, and the ship kept mid-channel.
Douglas Harbour.—At 1 mile to the westward of MitcieU harbour,
and on the same side of Moore channel, is tie entrance to Douglas harbour,
apparently very similar to the former, from which it is separated by Josbng
peninsula.
Directions.—The land being very high on both sides of the channels leading
into the above harbours, influences the direction of the wind, which is either
right in or out. Winds with any westing blow in, and those with easting the
contrary. A sailing vessel leaving Moore channel with a S.E. wind should
keep weU over towards Hewlett bay, to enable her to fetch clear of the
Moresby islands, as the wind wfll be very unsteady until weU clear of the
high land to windward.
TASSO HARBOUR.—Cape Henry lies 3 mfles southward from the
entrance to Moore ciannel, and terminates in a steep slope witi a hummock
at tie extremity; 18 miles southward of this is the entrance to Tasso harbour,
the intermediate coast being high, and rising abruptly from the sea. The
entrance is short and narrow, but the harbour itself is extensive, with deep
water in many places ; the anchorage in it is near some smaU islands on the
port hand going in ; it has only been visited by a few of the Hudson Bay
Co's. officers.
The Coast.—Between Tasso harbour and cape St. James are other
openings, which, according to Indian report, lead into good harbours, the
southernmost of which is that leading into Houston Stewart channel and Rose
harbour. Inside Anthony island, and close to Houston Stewart channel, is an
opening, called by the natives Louscoone, and reported to be a good harbour,
not unlike Rose harbour. This coast is also apparently very bold, excepting
off Anthony island, and bke the previous 18 miles. The land near cape
St. James has fewer trees on it tian that to the northward.
Winds.—S.E. winds are prevalent, and are almost invariably accompanied
with thick rain ; tiose from the opposite quarter generally bring fine weather.
The weather is very uncertain, and cannot be depended on for 24 hours
at a time.
Tides.—The following brief account of the tides along the north and northeast coasts of the Queen Charlotte islands is given by a Hudson Bay
Company's officer.
The course and rate of the tide streams are not regular, being greatly
influenced by the winds. At fifll and change they run with great strength.
Time of higb water, about 12h. 30m.
The flood, coming from the westward round North island, sets along the
Masset shore for Brown passage, spreading about 15 miles round Rose point,
towards Cape Ibbetson, where it meets the flood from the sonthward, from
Skidegate, Banks island, and the Principe channel; consequently between
Rose point, Cape Ball, Cape Ibbetson, and thence S.E. 4 or 5 leagues, the
tides are very irregular.
The tides between Cape Murray, Percy point, and Zayas island are the
strongest and most irregular, causing a heavy and confused sea, so much so,
that in bad weather it has the appearance of breakers.
Geographical Positions.—The geographical positions of the principal
points and headlands of the islands as given in aU charts at present existing,
should be considered as only approximate to the truth.    There has not as yet
^fslil812
ISLANDS AND ROCKS OFF THE COASTS OF
been even a running survey of the group.    Tie foUowing determinations are
from observations made by an officer in tie Hudson Bay Co. servioe.
Cape St. James	
Cumshewas island (north-east point} .
Skidegate harbour      	
,, „      Bar rock
Cape Ball	
Rose spit point	
,, ,.     point of reef
North island (north point)	
Devil's ridge       ,
Rose spit to Masset harbour
„       to Cumshewas
,,       to Skidegate
.    lat. 51    57 long. 180 52
58      1 181 22
58    17 181 51
58   22 131 89
58   42 181 86
54    13 181 22
54    15 181 11
54    21 188 0
54    40 181 28
S.W. £ S. 20 miles.
S.S.E. 70 miles.
S. by E. £ E. 50 miles.
ISLANDS AND BOCKS OFF THE COASTS OF CEN-
TEAL AMEBICA AND CALIFORNIA.
in extent, and its
5° 82' 57", long. 86° 58' 22", according
COCOS ISLAND.—This island is about 4 mfles
northern part, Chatham bay, Ues in lat
to the determination of Sir Edward Belcher in 1838. It is of considerable
height, particularly the western part, and wien viewed from a distance of
18 or 20 mfles, on a bearing of N. 78° E. to N. 81° E., its south-west extremity appears to rise abruptly from the sea, in steep rugged cliffs, to a
considerable height, and tien in a more moderate ascent to its most elevated
partj which is a bill of no great size, whence it descends more uniformly
to its nortiern extremity, wiici appears like a detached islet. When viewed
from the northward, opposite the bays, the shores appear to be composed of
broken, perpendicular, rooky precipices, beyond whioh the surface rises
unevenly to the summit of the island, tie wiole covered with a thicket of smaU
trees near the shore,—but on the more elevated land in the interior, with large
spreading trees. This island can be seen more than 20 leagues off; but of its
interior bttle is known, except that it is rocky and mountainous, and probably
contains a large lake or sheet of water, such having been seen by some of the
party under Sir E. Belcher. Its shores have only partiaUy been examined,
and principally at the northern part of the island, where there are two bays
containing moderately good anchorage. Off tie coasts are several detacied
islets and rocks, which extend some distance, and particularly from tie S.W.
part of the island, wiere they run off fully 2 miles, and would be dangerous,
if it were not that they are sufficiently high to be seen and avoided. The
lower parts of these detached islets consist of a belt of white barren rock to
the water's edge, and their tops are generally covered with trees. The coasts
of the island are generaUy steep perpendicular cUffs, against which the sea
breaks witi so much violence as to preclude an attempt to land in any part
except in the bays on its northern side.    In many parts of these cliffs are faUsCENTRAL AMERICA AND CALIFORNIA.
818
of exceUent water, a supply of which, it is said, can easily be procured, as weU
as cocoa nuts, and plenty of wood for fuel.*
Captain Colnett, who visited the island in 1793, says:—" The western side
of the island is the highest, and presents itself in the form of a round hiU.
The eastern side appears to be much broken, the land sloping in most parts
abruptly to the sea, but in others presenting bold and perpendicular cliffs.
The island does not appear to possess a spot where trees can grow that is not
covered with them or some kind of bushy plant, which, when blended with
the barrenness of uitervening rocks, produces a picturesque effect; while the
streams pouring down from tieir various fountains to the sea greatly heighten
the beauty of the scene. It is Tahiti on a small scale, but without the
advantage of its climate, or the iospitabty of its inhabitants."
Vancouver appears not to have had so favourable an impression of tie island,
as Captain Colnett. " This island cannot be considered as having a pleasant
appearance in any one point of view, for although its inland surface is much
diversified by bills and valleys, yet the only low land of any extent that we
were certain it possesses is in the bottoms of the two bays, each of which
forms the extremity of one of these vaUeys, bounded by craggy precipices,
from the foot of which extends a narrow strip of low flat land that terminates
in a beach at the water side, resembling more the dreary prospect exhibited
at tie heads of the several branches of the sea we had so recently explored on
the coast of North-West America, than anything else I could compare them to.
Every other part of the shore seemed to be composed of steep, broken
precipices of rock, of which substance tbe interior of the island was apparantly
composed, as the naked cliffs were frequently seen protruding their barren
sides through the thicket, which otherwise covered the surface of the island.
This • thicket, so far as we were able to ascertain, was chiefly composed of a
great variety of trees -of a moderate size, witi an impenetrable underwood of
the vine or supplejack kind, which opposed any excursion into the country;
some attempts were, I bebeve, made to penetrate there by the water course,
but this, from rocky precipices and other obstructions, was found to be equally
impracticable ; our knowledge of its productions must consequently be confined
to our observations on the smaU margin between tie woods and the sea shore,
the only part tiat was accessible to us."
The primary advantage of Cocos island is the abundant supply of water
which it affords. This abounds in every part, and is to be easily procured at
tie stations to which vessels can resort. From its purity and limpid appearance, and from its being destitute of any colour or unpleasant taste, either
from dead leaves or other decayed matter, Vancouver was led to infer, although
heavy rains bad fallen during bis stay in January, 1795, that the larger streams
of water have a more remote and permanent source than accidental showers.
The soil in tie immediate vicinity of the streams falling into tbe bays is of a
poor, loose, sandy nature ; but at a bttle distance behind the beach, and in the
fissures of the rocks, there is a rich black mould, apparantly of great fertflity,
and this is probably the case in other parts of the island. AU the vegetable
productions of the island grow luxuriantly. On the rocky cbffs near the sea,
where the uneven surface wiU permit anything to grow, tbere is a coarse kind
of  grass which affords an exceUent retreat for the sea-fowl, and also a par-
* This is according to Vancouver;
been cut down.
but it has since been stated that all the trees have814
ISLANDS AND ROCKS OFF THE COASTS OF
IliM'
ticular kind of tree, something bke the cloth plant of the South Sea islands,
but much larger. Some of these trees grow to tie ieight of 80 feet, and have
a brightish coloured bark, free from branches to the top, where the leaves fall
over, giving the trees the appearance of umbrellas. Besides these trees there
are others in the interior, occasionaUy of a considerable size.
Chatham Bay.—The north-easternmost anchorage of the island is named
Chatham bay, from the armed tender accompanying Vancouver. It is not
very large, and off its east and west points are two islets, the western and
larger named Nuez, and the eastern Conic; these afford protection from
the sea, especiaUy the western islet. The width of the bay from point to point
of the islets is about a mile, in a direction of S. 52°E., and N. 52° W.: and from
this line of direction its extent to the bottom of the bay is also about a mile.
The soundings are regular, of from 12 to 50 fathoms, and vessels may ride
very snugly within less than £ a mile of tie beach, in about 20 fathoms water,
but in a less depth the bottom does not appear to be so free from rocks.
Here Vancouver anchored, in January 1794, in 88 fathoms, on a sandy and
graveUy bottom, apparantly good holding ground and free from rocks. The
east point of the bay, which is a smaU conical islet lying close to the north-
east extremity of the island, bore S. 51° E.. £ a mile; the west point of tie
bay S. 75° W.; a steep rocky islet lying off it, from S. 87° W. to N. 66° W.;
and tie watering place at the mouth of a very jfine stream, emptying itself
over a sandy beach S. 13° W., about £ of a mile. Within this the Chatham
also anchored, in 26 fathoms, similar bottom.
Sir Edward Belcher says, that in Chatham bay a vessel may anchor in 6
fathoms, within a £ of a mile of the beach, but the best anchorage is in 12
fathoms. There a constant draught wfll be experienced between the openings
of the islets, and a vessel can generally enjoy the refreshing sea-breezes, and
fetch out at once, clear of the dangers, which are but few.
From the depth of 20 fathoms, tie soundings outside of Ciatham bay soon
deepen to 40 and 50 fathoms, the latter at only l£ miles from the shore.
Both this and Wafer bay afford good protection from the winds prevailing
during the early months of the year; and from the abundance of the vegetation
growing close to high water mark, it would seem that neither of them are
subject to violent storms, or heavy seas.
Wafer Bay.—At about a mile westward of Chatham bay is Wafer bay,
which is more extensive and exposed than it, and its soundings are neither so
regular, nor is the bottom so good. Into this bay a large stream of fresh
water flows, and the sea breaks heavily. Captain Colnett appears to have
preferred this bay to Chatham bay ; he says :—" It may be easily known by
a small rugged barren rock, about the size of a large boat, bearing West,
of the body of the bay about 5 or 6 miles. It Ues East and West, and
its greatest depti is not 2 miles, nor is it one in breadth; but I would not
venture into it in a vessel of more than 200 tons. Its anchorage is in from
7 to 50 fatioms, and is nearly sieltered from aU winds. This bay is also
preferable to that at tie norti point, because tie shore of the first is steep;
while that of the latter consists of a beautiful vaUey and sandy beach, where
cocoa trees appear in greater numbers than I have seen in any other place.
There is also a rivulet of water 18 or 20 feet in breadth, which is suppUed
from a basin a mile inland, in which our crew, to avoid the sharks, went and
batied. Although this bay is so small, it is very convenient, and as secure
as the anchoring places generaUy are which are not entirely sheltered. Its
principal inconvenience arises from the constant rains as out of the four daysCENTRAL AMERICA AND CALIFORNIA.
31;
we were beating off it, it rained during three of them, and sometimes with
heavy storms of lightning and thunder. Those on shore experienced an equal
amount of wet weather; and so thick was the rain, that, for eight hours
together, we were not able to see twice tie length of the ship; but this may
not be the case at all seasons."
Of Wafer bay it may be said that one of its principal inconveniences is the
heavy rollers, particularly at low water, at which time the flat extends out a
considerable distance. It is also more subject to calms than Chatham bay,
and consequently not so easy of ingress and egress; and being exposed to
westerly winds, watering at all times is difficult, and at low tide quite
impracticable.
The climate at Cocos was considered by Vancouver to be temperate and salubrious. The thermometer, in January 1795, was usuaUy between 78° and 80°,
yet the heat was not so oppressive as was experienced further to the northward,
and no inconvenience was experienced from the heavy rains.
The rise and fell of the tides by the shore are very considerable and regular,
twice in the 24 hours, without any apparent stream, and are not influenced
by currents. The night tides appear to be the highest, and probably rise
10 feet perpendicularly ; but at the time of the observations, the surf was too
high to permit a very correct measurement. The time of high water is about
2h. 10m. after the moon passes the meridian.
Cocos island appears to be weU provided with sea-fowls: pigs, also, were
left there by Captain Colnett, which appear to have increased and multipUed
considerably. Fish are abundant, but difficult to catch; eels are large and
numerous, as also are the turtles, but they appear shy of coming to the land.
It is said that there are a large number of rats of the white and brown kinds
on the island, also land crabs of a prodigious size, and that goats are in the
interior, but keep to the heights.
MALPELO ISLAND.—The actual geographical position of this island
has not been ascertained, but approximately it is lat. 4° 0', and long. 81° 32'.
It is a high, barren, and perpendicular rock, visible about 20 leagues. A
small quantity of green moss, and a few dwarf bushes grow in its cracks or
gullies, and are the only signs of vegetation it possesses. It is surrounded
witi islets, and the whole may extend about 9 or 10 miles in a north and
souti direction. The centre of the island bears a resemblance from several
points of view to the crown of a head; and its being barren accounts
naturaUy enough for the name Malpelo, which tie. Spaniards have bestowed
on it, which signifies bald head.
In the vicinity of this island the currents are strong, and iave muci tie
appearance of breakers ; the set appears probably to be to the N.E. by E., at
tie rate of 2£ miles an iour.
CLIPPERTON ROCK.—This rock is in lat. 10° 17', long. 109° 10',
it is sufficiently lofty to be seen from a distance of 12 or 15 miles. When
first in sight it appears not unlike a sail, but on a nearer approach it presents
the appearance of an immense castle. Tie colour is very dark, in fact nearly
black. This most dangerous rock and shoal is but bttle known, and thought
by many not to exist. Its vicinity is generaUy indicated by the presence of
numerous sea-birds—the white gannet, wide awake, and booby, which are
often found as much as 50 or 60 miles from the rock.
The above position of CUpperton rock is from tie determination of Sir
Edward Belcier, but it has recently been stated that its more correct position816
ISLANDS AND ROCKS OFF THE COASTS OF
|
is lat. 10° 18' 24", long. 109° 7' 80". The island is between 7 and 8 miles
long, and is almost an even height from one end to the other, being only 6 or 8
feet above the sea-level. The rock in its highest point is about 150 or 170
feet; and the width of the island is about 1700 or 1800 yards. The island is
composed of the whitest sand, and the only appearance of vegetation is one
continuous fine brown Une, supposed to be of glass or rushes. The rock is
conical, unequal, and jagged, and at the northern end has a circular hole right
through, about 50 feet from tie top. Tie sea breaks over the whole extent
of the island to windward, and at the north-east, and south-west ends, at
different distances from tie sand-bank. It has been observed that, " as tie
calms are sudden in these latitudes, and the winds variable (CUpperton being
.on the edge of the south-east trade-wind), if a ship is anxious to sight the
rock, she should pass to the eastward of it, as the western side is evidently
the windward side ; if it becomes calm when they are in the neighbourhood,
there is less danger when they are to leeward, and the sweU wfll throw them off.
CUpperton is tbe most naked, sobtary danger that imagination can picture.
The sand bank seems fll able to support the weight of the huge rock, and the
rock itself appears to be sinking from its treacherous foundation. The sight
of this tremendous and distressing danger, and the reflection it calls up of the
awful calamities it has been the cause of, reminds one of tie sublime truth of
M. de Lamartine's remark, when he was surveying some of the ruins of the
bib of Baalbec, that • Silence is the only language of man, when what he feels
outstrips the ordinary measure of his impressions.' There is an association
with the ruins in the midst of a desert, and this solitary rock standing in the
midst of the pathless ocean."
In May, 1889, CUpperton rock was visited by Sir Edward Belcher, and
after mentioning that for a distance of about 15 miles, it presented tie appearance of a brig close hauled, owing to the son's rays playing on its nearest face,
he proceeds to say : " The name, CUpperton rock, certainly misled us, and had
we made the point at night, with a fair wind, would, almost inevitably, have
severely damaged or destroyed both vessels. I certainly should have steered
to pass it to the northward ; merely assuming it to be a sobtary rock.
Nothing in this name would lead a seaman to imagine a high rock, placed
on the southern edge of a coral lagoon island, three mfles long north and
south, by the same east and west.
Its description should stand thus:—A very dangerous low lagoon island,
destitute of trees, witi a high rock on its southern edge, which may be
mistaken for a sail.
This rock can be seen 15 miles. In thick weather the low coral belt, which
appears like sand, will not be distinguished until close to it. The breakers
on the eastern side of it do not afford sufficient warning for a vessel to trim
or change course. On tie northern part of tie belt, tie land is a little raised,
and appears to be clad with something like grass.
There are two entrances, which at high water may be safe; but at the
moment we passed, the surf was too heavy, and the reflux showed tie rocks
bare. The dangers from the rock, northerly, extend two miles easterly, and
the same north-westerly. On the beach several large trees were observed,
and an object which was thought to be part of a vessel, near the western
opening.
In tie centre of tie lagoon, as viewed from the mast-head, there is one
large hole of blue water, and a second belt is connected witi rock, attaciing itCENTRAL AMERICA AND CALIFORNIA.
817
to tie eastern side of tie island. This UteraUy constitutes two islands,
formed by its two openings ; both are on the weather side of the island.
No Uving trees were seen, but the whole island was covered with gannett,
boobies, frigate, peUcans, and several kinds of tern, which had also been
noticed in great numbers during the previous week, at least 500 miles to the
eastward. From this, an easterly current may be inferred, as these birds
generally keep in its stream or tail course.*
No bottom was obtained by the Sulphur, with 100 fathoms of line, but the
Starling had soundings with less than 100, on the northern side of the island.
Sharks, porpoises, and turtle were observed together. The former annoyed
us much by biting at our patent logs, for which one was taken, and made an
example of. They were very large, and UteraUy swarmed. In aU probability,
they were attracted by a shoal of file (balistes) and other "small fish which
had been feeding off our copper since quitting the island of Cocos."
REVILLAGIGEDO ISLANDS.—This is a group of islands in lat.
18° 43', the largest of which, Socorro, is stated to be nearly 30 miles in
extent. They are evidently of volcanic origin, and are said to supply neither
wood nor water. The name Revella Gigeda, or Revillagigedo as the islands
are more generaUy caUed, was given by Colnett in 1793, in compliment to the
Viceroy of Mexico, from whom he had received much kindness and civility.
Socorro.—This island is lofty, making in several peaks, the highest of
which is probably 2000 feet above the sea level. Its northern and western
shores have, as yet, only partially been examined, the principal anchoring-
places being on tbe south-eastern coast, which is represented to have a dreary
and forbidding aspect. Tbe general direction of tbe island is W.N.W. and
E.S.E., and its average breadth is about 3 leagues. It may be said to consist
of one mountain, which can be seen at tbe distance of about 20 leagues in
clear weather, falling in a gradual descent on the souti side. It is in a great
measure covered with brush-wood, intermixed with the low prickly pear-trees,
and occasionally shaded with other trees of a larger growth. Some few
patches of the soil are black and barren, as if fire had lately issued near it;
and tie top of the high land has the appearance, from a distance, of being an
extinct volcano ; the surface is of a whitish colour, like that of pumice-stone.
Although Sorocco has not recently given evidence of volcanic action, there
is bttle doubt that the whole of this group of islets originated from that source.
Off the north and west coast of Sorocco there are some detached rocks ; and
some rocks extend also off the south shore, which is a high bold coast. On
this side of the island are two bays, Cornwallisf and Braithwaite, in
which there is moderately good anchorage, under shelter of the land. Captain
Colnett says :—" The seasons of the year being considered, I think the safest
anchorage, from June to December, is between tbe south-west points, opposite
to two white coral beaches, which are the first two in succession from the
souti point of the island towards the west. It is the place where we first
anchored, and remarkable from the pinnacle rocks which lay close off the west
* It does not therefore follow, as a matter of course, as noticed by some writers, that
the appearance of birds denotes land to windward; they are more likely guided by tide.
{ In this bay there are soundings of 30 to 20 fathoms, sandy bottom. Colnett anchored
here in 1793, in 25 fathoms, at about two miles from the shore, with the extremes of the
island bearing from W.N.W. to E.S.E.; and two small sandy beaches N. by E. to N.N.E.818
ISLANDS AND ROCKS OFF THE COASTS OF
point of the bay. I prefer this place in tie bad season, as the wind seldom
blows more than two points to the southward of East. ' In the good season,
however, that is from the latter end of December to the beginning of June,
I prefer the south-east bay, being better anchorage and nearer to the cove,
which was the only good landing-place we discovered, and is easily known,
being a stony beach at the first inlet in tie shore to the eastward of the souti
point:—aU otier parts of the coast on the south side of the island are iron-
bound, which makes it extremely difficult, if not impossible, to land, except
in very fine weather."
Braithwaite bay is an open roadstead, exposed to the eastward and southward ; in it tbe soundings are 17 to 10 fathoms, sand and coral. Its position
is lat. 18° 43' 14" and long. 110° 54' 15"., according to Sir Edward Belcher,
who observes :—" The binding is rocky, with shores of lava coule, and nothing
like a beach. Neither wood nor water was visible, although from the constant
clouds which hang over the high peaks, there must be a supply in some other
point. Lieut. Wood was despatched to examine the westward bay for wood or
water. His report (not having landed) was, ' that goats were observed, the
bay spacious, but no indications of wood or water visible.' It is probable
that the goats find water.
I found it difficult to penetrate into the interior of the island, even for a few
hundred feet, owing to the prevalence of the cactus opuntia; aU who attempted
to do so suffered for their curiosity. One of my boat's crew made himself fll
by eating a large bean which grew abundantly ; but as I partook of them
cooked without injury, I suspect him to have indulged too freely." Some of
Captain Cobiett's people also suffered severely from the same cause.
San Benedicto Island.—This island to the north-eastward of Socorro,
is in lat. 19° 20', long. 110° 45', and when viewed from southward, ias a
barren appearance, with Utile or no vegetation. It is about 6 miles long, in
a N.E. and S.E. direction, and 2 or 3 in breadth, and has a few rocks, just
above the water, off several parts of it. Its surface is uneven, and its aspect
is described as romantic, it having the appearance of two distinct islets, when
seen from a distance of 9 or 10 miles. On its western side is a smaU bay,
which has not been examined.
Roca Partida.—This is a dangerous barren rock, 50 or 60 fathoms long,
in a N.N.W. and S.S.E. direction, lying in lat. 19° 9', long. 112° 2'. Its
breadth is only 25 or 30 fathoms, and both ends are 100 or 120 feet in height,
the north-west end appearing forked, and the south-east end like a ragged
hay-cock. The two heights are separated by a ragged saddle, which rises
18 or 20 feet above the surface of tie sea, and is nearly perpendicular.    At a
there
are
35 fathoms; and at £
a mile off, 50
The rock
boat's length from the rock
fathoms;   and afterwards no bottom with 100 fathoms of Une.
appears from every direction like a sail under a jury-mast.
Clarion.—Westward of Socorro and Roca Partida islands is Clarion, a
small island of considerable height, and very similar in its natural features to
Socorro island. The bibs are lofty, the highest peak being estimated to be
1500 feet high, and when bearing to the N.E. they make in three hummocks,
which give the island, from a distance, the appearance of three distinct islets.
It is probable that it contains but little fresh water, although there must be
a great deal precipitated from the clouds, which almost constantly hang over
the high land. Neither wood nor other necessaries can be obtained, stfll a
vessel in great distress might have her wants to some extent rebeved.CENTRAL AMERICA AND CALIFORNIA.
819
The island is about 5£ miles long, and 2 miles broad, and has been but
Utile examined, particularly the north store. On its southern side is a small
bay named Sulphur, the east side of which is in lat. 18° 20' 36", long.
114° 40' 19" ; in this Sir Edward Belcher attempted to moor, but was prevented by the breaking of his anchor. The east end of the island^appearsjto
be steep and precipitous.
In the vicinity of Clarion, several islands have been reported, and Sir
Edward Belcher sought for them for a considerable time, without success. It
may therefore be concluded that as the position of the island was not till lately
accurately ascertained, it has been seen by various parties, and reported by
each as a distinct discovery.
ALIJOS ROCKS.—This is a very dangerous group of rocks, lying off
the coast of California, in lat. 24° 57' 25", long. 115° 45' 20". The southernmost and largest rock is about 110 feet high, and there are many above
and under water close to it.
GUADALOUPE.—This island is northward of the Alijos rocks, and its
north point is represented to be in lat. 29° 10' 50", long. 118° 18' 30". It is
about 15 mfles long by 5 mfles broad, and is very lofty in the interior, a chain
of hills extending through the whole length of the island. The highest of
these hills is over 2000 feet high, and one near the north point of tbe island
is estimated to be even 3412 feet in elevation. The island can be seen a
distance of about 60 miles, and will appear, when bearing either east or west,
lower at its southern extremity than at its northern.
Off tie south end of the island are two rocky islets at some distance from
the shore, the outermost of which is 500 feet high. The shores are in general
bold, but have not been closely examined; although it is said that a small
cove exists on the south-east shore, which is formed by some rocky islets, and
contains the only anchorage in tbe island, the riding being in 7 fathoms, and
the shelter from aU winds except those between S.E. and E.N.E.
But few supplies of any description can be obtained here, the island being
quite barren and rocky, and affording very little sustenance for any thing
except goats. It is said that wood and water may be obtained from a cove on
the north-east side of the island.
Vancouver says that the Spaniards were accustomed to make this island
when bound southward from Monterey, or from their other northern settlements ; in which route they passed westward and out of sight of the Cabfornia
islands, for the advantage of continuing in the strength of the N.W. winds ;
they thus reached this island, and afterwards steered a course for cape San
Lucas.820
TABLE OF POSITIONS &c.
TABLE OF POSITIONS &c.
I Latitude, N. ILonjritude, W.IVari. E.
Cape Corrientes, south-west extremity   ... 5 28 46
Alusea point, N. extremity       5 86 20
Port Utria, centre of south islet       5 58 80
Solano point, north extremity  6 17 55
Cupica bay, entrance of Cupica river      ... 6 41 19
Cape Marzo, south-east extremity  6 49 45
Port Pinas, north-east bight      7 84 87
Garachine point, north-east extremity    ... 8    6 0
Patena pomt, centre of islet      8 16 20
Darien harbour, Graham point         8 28 50
Galera island (Centre of)  8 1120
San Jose bank, TroUope rock  8    6 40
Isla del Rey (Souti end of)—extremity of
Cocos point        8 12 80
„          . church of San Miguel      ... 8 27 0
Saboga island, church       8 87 10
Gonzales island, Havannah head      8 25 0
San Jose island, Iguana point  8 18 25
Brava point, west extremity      8 20 86
Pajaros islands, north-west island     8 32 20
Pelado island (Centre of)  8 37 35
Chepillo island, the tree ...      8 56 82
Panama, north-east bastion       8 56 56
Flamenco island (North point of)     8 54 80 '
Bona island, peak     8 33 85
Point Chame, extremity  8 39 0
Parita bay, Liso point       7 58 10
Iguana island (Centre of)  7 87 5
Cape Mala, extremity       7 27 40
South Frafle (Centre of)  7 19 80
Morro Puercos, south extremity       7 18 45
Point Mariato, extremity  7 12 0
Naranj as island         7 15 15
Cebaco island, west extremity  7 29 0
Gobernador island (Centre of)  7 83 0
Hicarita island, south extremity       7 12 45
Coiba island,  extremity of Negada point 7 20 0
77
77
77
77
77
77
78
78
78
78
78
78 87
82
29
20
27
29
40
9
21
17
4
45
78
78
79
79
79
78
78
78
79
79
79
79
79
80
79
79
80
80
80
80
81
81
81
81
53
55
8
5
6
24
82
41
7
81
33
25
20
80
86
0
50
15
10
40
45
40
45
85
10
50
80
30
10
40
0
9
80
20
84
5
40
50
20
40
59
0
58
80
7
10
25
10
51
80
55
45
18
80
11
0
45
80
34
0
7 0
7 80
* These geographical positions as far as Coronados islets off port San Diego, California,
in lat. 32° 24', are chiefly from the Admiralty charts. The longitudes from the gulf of
Panama to port San Jose in about 90° 44' W., differ so considerably from the determinations
of French surveyors, being generally about 12 miles eastward of the latter, that we
have also added a table of the results of the French observations, for which see subsequent
pages.   A mean of the two may perhaps be correct.TABLE OF POSITIONS &c.
821
| Latitude, N. |Longitude, W.| Var., E.
Coiba island, extremity of Hermosa point
7 81    0
81 51    0
Montuosa island      	
7 28   0
82 13    0
Bahia Honda, extremity of cape Jabali  ...
7 42-80
81 80    0
Port Nuevo, Sflva de Afuera island	
8   4 50
81 47    0
Secas islands, south-western islet  	
7 57    0
82    1 30
Viuda rock      	
8    6 15
82    9    0
Parida island, south-west extremity
8    5 50
82 20 40
Ladrones	
7 52    0
I 82 25   0
Ciudad de David     	
8 27   0
82 26   0
Burrica island	
8    10
82 54 40
Gulf of Dulce, extremity of cape Matapalo
8 16    0
83 17 10
„         Arenitas point	
8 32   0
83 16 40
,,         Golfito point     <
8 39 30
83    6 30
„         Banco point     	
8 18    0
83    1 30
Sal-si-puedes point, extremity of    	
8 23    0
83 84   0
Cano island, centre of    	
8 40 15
88 51    0
Llorena point, extremity	
8 34    0
83 42 80
Mala or Judas point, mount Judas	
9 31    0
84 28 30
Gulf of Nicoya, Herradura point    	
9 38 80
84 37 15
„           Calderas bluff       	
9 53 20
84 39 30
„           Sail rock       	
9 49 10
84 45 30
„           Pan de Azucar      	
9 55 48
84 50   2
,,           Punta Arenas light
9 58 40
84 46   0
,,           Blanco island	
9 33   0
85    4    0
Morro Hermoso, extremity of	
9 55   0
85 36 40
Cape Velas, islet off       	
10 19   0
85 50 20
Culebra bay, Gorda point       	
10 32    0
85 42 40
Cape Elena, extremity of       	
10 53 10
85 46 30
Salinas bay, Salinas islet	
11    3    0
85 39    0
San Juan del Sur, south point of bay
11 15 10
85 49   0
Mount Miravelles or Miravaya       	
10 39 40'
85    0    0
Mount Orosi	
10 59    0
85 25    0
Mount Madera	
11 27    0
85 27 80
Mount Ometepe      	
11 32    0
85 34   0
Mount Mombacho    	
11 48 30
85 54 30
Cape Desolado, extremity       	
11 58    0
86 36 15
Mount Momotombo	
12 25    0
86 27 80
Mount Axusco	
12 26 45
86 36   0
Mount Orota   	
12 33    0
86 41    0
Mount TeUca	
12 35 30
86 46 80
Mount Viejo    	
12 42    0
86 56 30
Realejo, north-west end of Cardon island
12 27 55
87    7 47
Gulf of Fonseca, extremity of Coseguina
point	
12 53 80
87 37 80
,,       extremity of Monypeny point
13    3 30
87 30 30
„        Amapala pomt, extremity ...
13    8 40
87 50 15
,,        Chicarene point	
18 17    5
87 42 89
,,       La Union	
13 20    0
87 47   0
Mount San Miguel	
18 24 80 1
88    5    0
7    80
7   40
7   85
7 25322
TABLE OF POSITIONS, &c.
Port Jiquilisco	
Libertad, the beach	
Mount San Salvador
Acajutla, Remedios point
Istapa, the beach     	
San Jose, the beach	
Mount Agua    	
Ventosa bay    	
Morro Ayuca, the point   ...
Guatulco, port        	
Sacrificios, the islet
Acapulco, San Diego fort gate
Sihuatanejo
Mangrove bluff
Lizard point
Black head
Mount Colima
Manzanflla bay, west end of village...
Piedra blanca, islet of
Navidad bay, cape Graham
Perula bay, Rivas point ..,
Cape Corrientes, extreme point of .
Corvetena rock        	
Maria islands, south-east island
,, San Juanito, the north-west
island
San Bias, arsenal    ...
,,       Piedra de Mer .
Isabel island    	
Chamatla river
Mazatlan, south bluff of Creston island
Piastla river, entrance     	
Culiacan (Altata) river, entrance
Ignacio point, (see page 109)
Ignacio island, (    ,,        ,,   )
Jiabampa harbour 	
Lobos point, extremity    	
Guaymas, cape Haro
,,        Almagrft° island   ...
Angeles island, north end       	
River Colorado, Montague island at entrance
San Marcos island, centre
Mulege bay, entrance      	
Loreto village 	
Pulpito anchorage, point
Mangles anchorage, point
Carmen island, shore of Salinas bay
Montserrate island, centre      ...
Catalina island, north end
Latitude, >'.
Longitude, W.
Var., E.
13 10 0
o        r        b
88 16 0
O     1
7 80
13 30 0
89 15 80
13 49 80
89 11 0
13 34 0
89 43 0
7 80
13 55 0
90 88 0
13 56 85
90 44 20
14 9 0
90 42 0
16 10 30
95 9 0
15 51 56
95 43 56
8 10
15 44 24
96 8 0
15 44 0
96 19 7
16 50 56
99 52 15
8 23
17 38 3
101 30 52
17 54 5
102 12 41
18 11 0
103 5 0
18 86 18
103 41 51
19 24 42
103 88 1
19 3 13
104 17 41
19 6 0
104 27 80
19 10 30
104 40 30
19 34 31
105 6 33
20 25 0
105 39 21
20 44 0
105 46 30
21 20 0
106 18 0
21 45 0
106 38 0
21 32 24
105 15 27
21 34 45
105 27 30
21 51 15
105 51 45
22 50 0
105 58 0
23 11 40
106 22 24
9 30
24 10 0
107 15 0
10 0
24 40 0
107 55 0
25 41 0
109 25 0
25 27 0
109 27 0
26 16 0
109 18 0
27 17 0
110 39 0
27 50 30
110 51 40
11 5
27 53 50
110 49 26
29 85 0?
113 10 0?
31 40 0?
114 24 0?
27 12 0
Ill 57 0
26 53 0
111 49 0
11 0
26 1 0
111 20 0
26 30 50
111 25 15
26 16 30
111 22 15
25 59 34
111 5 45
10 80
25 41 0
111 8 0
25 42 0
110 47 0TABLE OF POSITIONS &c.
828
1 Latitude
>, N.
ILongitnde, W.l
San Josef island, nortiend of Amortajada bay
0
24
54
n              o          i         tt
80  110 85 28
Animas rocks           	
25
6
0 J110 27   0
Espirito Santo island, west end of Gallo
islet (port Ballena)
24
28
0   110 21    0
,,                  south point of San
Gabriel bay	
24
25
0  110 19    0
San Juan Nepomezcino, south end of
24
16
5
110 16 15
Ceralbo island, south end        	
24
9
0  109 50   0
,,           north end        	
24
22
0  109 56    0
San Jose del Cabo bay, Salatea village  ...
28
3
15
109 37 52
Cape San Lucas, west end of Frayles rocks
(San Lucas bay)          	
22
52
14
109 52    8
Magdalena bay, east side of cape Corso ...
24
88
18
112    6 21
Cape San Lazaro     	
24
48
20
112 16 28
Ballenas bay, Abrejos point    	
26
43
0
113 36   0
Asuncion island       	
27
8
0
114 24    0
San Bartolome bay, north-west point
27
89
53
114 54 10
Morro Hermoso      	
27
52
0
115    7    0
Natividad island, east end      	
27
52
80
115 11 45
Cerros island, north end          	
28
19
0
115 14    0
San Benito island, westernmost      	
28
15
80
115 33 15
Playa Maria bay, west point   	
28
55
87
114 81 20
Geronimo island      	
29
40
0
115 44 * 0
San Quentin, west side of entrance	
80
21
53
115 56 83
Colnett bay     	
30
59
45
116 16 22
Coronados islets,* highest and largest    ...
32
23
46
117 18 21
San Diego, U.S. boundary obelisk	
32
31
59
117    6 11
,,        lighthouse on point Loma
32
40
15
117 13 30
San Clemente, north-west extremity of the
island           	
38
2
0
118 84    0
Cortez shoal, the Bishop rock        	
32
25
45
119    5    0
San Nicolas,  south-east end of the island
83
14
12
119 25    0
Santa Catalina, tie great transverse break
of tie island, (north side)   	
83
26
85
118 28 45
Santa Barbara island       	
83
80
0
119    2    0
San Pedro bay, edge of bluff at the landing
83
43
20
118 16    8
Anacapa, eastern point of the island
83
1
0
119 19   0
Point Hueneme        	
34
8
0
119    9    0
Prisoner's harbour, north side of the island
of Santa Cruz      	
34
1
10
119 40    0
Cuyler's harbour     	
84
8
0
120 20 27
Santa Barbara, Ughthouse     	
34
28
35
119 42    5
,,            town, at the landing
34
24
25
119 40 18
Point Concepcion, Ughthouse	
84
26
47
120.27    0
10 0
9 8£
9 57
11 80
12 0
12 45
13 44
14 8
* The positions from Coronados islets northward to the north point of Lummi island
in Haro archipelago, are from the observations of the U.S. coast surveyors.824
TABLE OF POSITIONS &o.
1 Latitude
,N.
1 Longitude, W.
Var.,
E.
Point ArgueUo        	
o
84
84
0
120
88
0
O
*
San Luis Obispo bay, the small guUy wes
t
of the creek         	
.    85
10
38
120
48
81
14
38
San Simeon bay, near the landing	
85
38
24
121
10
22
Piedras Blancas, outer one     	
85
89
0
121
15
0
Point Sur        	
86
19
0
121
52
0
Point Pinos, Ughthouse   	
86
87
52
121
55
0
15
6
Santa Cruz harbour, the landing place   ..
86
67
27
122
0
10
Point Ano Nuevo    	
87
7
0
122
19
0
Point San Pedro      	
.    87
85
45
122
30
84
FarraUon, lighthouse       	
87
41
49
122
59
5
San Francisco, Point Lobos, S. head of en
trance to San Francisco ba;
r   87
46
51
122
29
40
„       Rincon point, N.W. of Souti
i
park, San Francisco bay ..
.    87
47
7
122
22
82
„       Telegraph hiU, near the " Sai
i
Francisco Observatory"  ..
87
47
58
122
28
19
„        Fort point Ughthouse	
37
48
81
122
27
88
,,        Point Bonita Ughthouse
87
49
4
122
80
50
15
38
,,       Alcatraz island Ught	
87
49
27
122
24
19
Punta de los Reyes, landing in Drake's bay
'    87
59
85
122
57
36
„               Ughthouse   site,    the
.
western    iead    o
F
the  point    	
87
59
89
128
0
13
Bodega bay, west end of Sandy point
38
18
20
123
2
17
Haven's anchorage, tie bluff at the landing
'    88
47
58
128
84
1
Mendocino bay, the bluff near tie landing
:   89
18
6
123
47
26
Punta de Arena, N.W. extremity of the poin
;    38
57
0
128
45
0
Sielter cove, (point Delgado), tie bluf
I
near the landing	
40
1
14
124
8
8
Cape Mendocino, extremity of cape	
40
25
0
124
22
0
Humboldt bay, Red bluff       	
40
44
40
124
10
80
„          Ughthouse
40
46
4
124
12
10
17
18
Bucksport, town     	
40
46
37
124
10
44
17
22
Trinidad, town     	
41
8
20
124
8
8
■Crescent City, Ughthouse        	
41
44
84
124
11
22
Port Orford, the bluff W. of the town    ...
42
44
22
124
28
47
Cape Orford, extremity of the cape	
42
50
0
124
80
0
18
45
Cape Arago, bghthouse	
43
20
88
124
22
20
Umpquah,  a mile from entrance to tin
>
river, (W. side)       	
48
41
45
124
9
57
Cape Perpetua, middle part of the headlanc
.    44
19
0
124
6
0
Cape Foulweather, southern part of tie cape
44
45
0
124
4
0
Cape Lookout, point furthest west	
45
20
o
124
0
0
Cape Meares, N.W. part        	
45
80
0
128
58
0
Cape Falcon, or False Tillamook, northerr
part   	
45
47
0
128
58
0
TiUamook iead       	
45
58
0
128
59
0
Aster point, near Astoria, Columbia rivei
•    46
11
28
128
49
82TABLE OF POSITIONS &c.
825
Latitude, N. [Longitude, W.lYar., E.
Point Adams   	
Cape Hancock, lighthouse      	
Leadbetter point     	
Cape Shoalwater, Ughthouse   ...
Point Hanson	
Point GrenviUe, point of tie bluff at the
anchorage    	
Destruction island, north point      	
Flattery rocks, north-western rocky islet
Tatoosb island, Ughthouse      	
Nee-ah bay, near tie creek    	
Port Angelos, iead of the bay        	
New Dungeness, Ughthouse    	
Smith island, Ughthouse 	
Point Wilson   	
Port Townshend, extremity of point Hudson
Admiralty head, Ughthouse     	
Port Gamble, East point	
Restoration point, Admiralty inlet ...
Point PuUy, opposite Vashon island
Lummi, Sand point on tie N.E. side of
tie island     	
ii   North, N. point of the island
Vancouver Island and Coast adjoining.*
Discovery island, east point     .'
Trial islands, south point       	
Victoria harbour, Laurel point       	
Esquimalt harbour, Duntze head   	
Albert head, extremity    	
Race islands, Ughthouse	
Beechey head, extremity	
Sooke inlet, Secretary island	
Sherringham point, extremity	
Port San Juan, Pinnacle rock on north
side of bay	
BoniUa point, extremity	
Tsusiat waterfall      	
Barclay sound, extremity of cape Beale ...
„          Observatory islet, in Island
harbour        	
„ Observatory islet, hi Stamp
harbour, Alberni canal...
Portland point, GowUand rocks      	
46 12 80
46 16 35
46 86 45
46 44 11
124 2 13
124 0 45
124 2 24
46 63 49 124 6 42
47 20 0
47 41 0
48 12 0
48 23 16
48 21 49
124 14 0
124 25 0
124 48 0
124 43 48
124 87 12
48 7 52 128 27 21
48 10 59
48 19 1
8 43
7 8
48
48
48 9 22
47 51 32
47 35 6
47 27 7
123 6 7
122 50 1
1122 44 49
124 44 47
122 40 8
122 38 66
122 28 0
122 22 22
48 44 2 122 40 87
48 44 53 122 42 12
7
45
48 25 20
48 23 30
48 25 22
48 25 49
48 23
48 17
48 18 80
48 19 85
48 22 80
48 88 80
48 35 80
48 41 30
48 47 48
48 54 41
123 18 40
|123 18 45
123 23 2
128 26 45
123 29 0
123 82 15
123 89 30
123 42 40
123 55 50
124 27 37
124 44 30
124 58 0
125 12 52
125 16 54
49 18 46 124 50 7
49 8 80 125 51 80
21 3
21 47
22 8
21 56
21 50
22 16
22 40
m
• These longitudes, from the Admiralty charts, are dependent upon Duntze head,
Esquimalt harbour, being 123° 26' 46" W.326
TABLE OF POSITIONS &c.
Point Cox, Vargas cone ..
Clayoquot sound,   Observatory island in
Hecate bay
Refuge cove, vfllage on west side    	
Hesquiat harbour, Boat cove	
Estevan point, souti extremity       	
Nootka sound, Observatory islet in Friendly
cove	
NuchatUtz inlet, North-west cone on Ferrer point	
„            Colwood islet in port Lang-
ford 	
Esperanza inlet, Observatory rock in Queen
cove   	
„ Tat-chu point	
Kyuquot sound, tbe shingle point at entrance
of Narrowgut creek	
Barrier islands, Highest island       	
Nasparti inlet, SuUvan reef    	
,, beach at its head    	
Cape Cook, Salander islet       	
Klaskino inlet, Nob point       	
Quatsino inlet, Observatory rock in North
harbour        	
„ Observatory islet in Koprino
harbour       ...    	
,, Kitten islet in Hecate cove
Cape Scott, summit of cape    	
Scott islands, west point of Triangle island
Hope island, north point of Indian island
in BuU harbour       	
Goletas channel,  islet  in centre of port
Alexander	
Beaver harbour, Shell islet     	
Cormorant island, YeUow bluff in Alert bay
Port Harvey (British Columbia), Tide pole
islet     	
Port Nevflle (British Columbia) Robbers
nob      	
Thurlow island, stream at head of Knox
bay            ...     	
Quatniasky cove, South point of island of
Valdes island      	
Baynes sound, Beak point in Henry bay...
Nanoose harbour, Entrance rock    	
Howe sound (British Columbia), Plumper
cove	
Burrard inlet (British Columbia), English
bay, Government reserve	
Latitude, N. (Longitude, W
49 5 30 125 52 80
49 15 22
49 20 50
49 27 31
49 22 7
49 85 81
49 44 50
49 47 20
49 52 45
49 51 80
49 59 55
49 57 45
50 4 30
50 11 21
50 6 81
50 17 15
50 29 25
50 80 0
50 32 26
50 46 41
50 51 53
50 54 47
50 50 49
50 42 86
50 85 2
50 83 58
50 81 9
50 24 15
50 2 42
49 86 29
49 15 43
49 24 89
49 16 18
Var., E.
125 56 17
|126 16 40 23 i'">
126 25 27
126 82 32
126 87 82
126 58 50
126 57 5
126 59 55
127 10 0
127 9 80
127 21 30
127 41 0
127 37 58
127 57 20
127 52 0
128 8 89
127 52 16
127 36 18
128 26 45
129 6 32
127 56 8
127 89 57
127 25 7
126 57 80
126 16 40
1126 4 21
|125 89 0
125 14 38
124 51 18
|124 8 6
123 29 20
123 12 0
23 80
28 50
24 84TABLE OP POSITIONS &c. 827
■ Latitude, N. Longitude, W. Yar., K.
Fraser river entrance (British Columbia),
Military barracks at New Westminster    	
Fraser river entrance (British Columbia),
Garry point     	
Point Roberts (British Columbia), Parallel
station, west side     	
Semiahmoo bay (British Columbia), Parallel station     	
Nanaimo harbour, Dr. Benson's house   ...
The Islands off the Coast.
Cocos island, Chatham bay
Malpelo island	
CUpperton rock       	
Socorro island, Braithwaite bay
San Benedicto island       	
Roca Partida   	
Clarion island, east side of Sulphur bay ...
Abjos rocks     	
Guadaloupe, north point	
Queen Charlotte islands, extremity of cape
St. James	
,, ,,        Forsyth   point. in
Stewart channel
,, ,, Cumshewas island
on the north side of
entrance to Cumshewas harbour
„ „ Rock on bar of Skidegate bay	
,,                .,        Rose spit point   ...
„                i,        Bar of Masset harbour	
„ ,,        Cape   Edensaw in
Virago sound   ...
„ „        North point of North
island      	
„ ,,        Cape Knox	
,, ,,        Sansum   island   in
port Kuper
49 18   1  122 54 26
49   7   4   128 12    1
49   0   0 128   5 26
49    0    0 122 45 80
49 10 15   128 56 86
5 82 67 86 68 22
4    0    0?  81 82    0
10 17    0 109 10    0
18 43 14 110 54 15
19 20 0 110 45 0
19 9 0 112 2 0
18 20 86 114 40 19
24 57 25 115 45 20
29 10 50 118 18 80
51 57   0?181    4    0?
22 52
28    9
52    9    7
58    1 0
53 22 0
54 18 0?
54    2 0
54    4 0
54 20 0?
181    9 0
181 22 0
131 89 0
131 22 0?
182 0 0
182 14 0
133    0 0?
54 15    0  138    8    0
62 56 81 Il82    9 40 I 2'..   Hi
9   0
10    0
12    0
24 57
26    1
28    0
28    0
27 80828
APPENDIX.
APPENDIX.
WINDS  ON THE  WESTERN  COAST  OF AMERICA
AND IN THE PACIFIC.
The following remarks on the winds which prevail in some parts of the
Pacific, and on the North-western coast of America, are by Lieutenant James
Wood, H. M. S. Pandora.* ;—
" The prevailing winds of the Pacific, witi the exception of those on the
coasts of Chile and Peru, are bttle known. A few remarks, therefore, on
those that obtain along the western coast of America, from the river Guayaquil
to Vancouver island, as well as on the more regular and extended aerial currents
which traverse the vast expanse of tie open ocean, condensed from observations
and information coUected during a four years' cruize over the greater part of
it, may not be destitute of interest and utflity, especiaUy as the northern
portion is but Utile known, and promises, ere long, to become the theatre of
an important trade between the coasts of China and tie new and rich countries
which American enterprise and energy are now so rapidly peopling and raising
from obscurity on the coast of California.
The whole of this extensive line may be divided into three portions or
zones:—
1.—The intertropical, which is more or less affected by the fine and rainy
seasons.
2.—The dry and arid portion which extends from 23° to 82° north, where
the winds blow with almost the regularity of a trade wind.
8.—Tbe more variable northern coast, which is subject to greater vicissitudes of cbmate.
I. The Intertropical—.Guayaquil River to Guascama Point.—Along the
whole of the coast from the river Guayaquil, in lat. 3° S., to Guascama point in
lat. 2° N., the wind is mostly from south to west all tie year round; the exceptions are few, and generally occur in the fine season. Both in beating up this
coast to the southward, and in running down it, the former in the months of
May and June, the latter in those of October, November, and January, we had
the wind from S.S.E. to W. (by the south), with a constant current to tie
north-eastward,, the only difference being that the winds were Ughter, and the
weather finer in May and June as we got to the southward; whilst the contrary
took place in October and November; and in January the weather was generally fine, with moderate breezes.
See the Nautical Magazine 1850.APPENDK.
829
Choco Bay.—After entering the bay of Choco, of which point Guascama
forms the southern horn, the winds become more variable; but during tie
time we were in the bay (from the end of January to the middle of March) it
never blew very fresh, though the weather was often unsettled and heavy rains
frequent. The prevailing wind was from south-west, but north-westerly winds
were not uncommon.
Chirambira Point to the Gulf of San Miguel.—When past Chirambira point
(the northern horn of Choco bay) we had the wind more from the northward,
and in the latter end of March had to beat up to Panama bay against northwesterly and north-easterly breezes, blowing a fresh breeze at times, especiaUy
as we approached the bay.
In surveying this last named part, in January 1848, we found the winds
more variable, heavy rains almost always accompanying a change to south-west,
from which quarter we once or twice had a stiff breeze.
Gulf of San Miguel to the Gulf of Dulce, including the Bay of Panama.—
Between the southern point of the Gulf of San Miguel and the gulf of
Dulce, including Panama bay and the coast of Veragua, the winds are
regulated by the seasons. Towards the end of December the "northers"
begin to blow. These are fine, dry breezes which generally come on in the
afternoon, and blow .very fresh from N.N.E. to N.N.W. till near midnight,
with a perfectly clear and cloudless sky, and the air so dry and rarefied,
that objects on a level with the horizon are distorted and flattened, and tbe
same effects are caused as are seen during an easterly breeze off our own coast.
Though generaUy a double-reefed top-sail breeze, they occasionally blow much
harder, especially off the coast of Veragua, where, in the months of January
and February, even a close-reefed top-sail breeze is not uncommon. During
even the strongest of these, a dead calm often prevails 10 or 15 miles off the
land, the only evidence of the gale that is blowing within a few hundred yards
of you being the agitation of the water, which is raised into short hollow waves,
which break on board of and tumble you about awfully.
Towards tbe end of March up to tho middle of April, the " northers" begin to
cease, and are succeeded by calms and bght sea and land breezes, with
occasional squalls from the south-westward. As April advances the squaUs get
stronger and more frequent, and by the early part of May the rainy season
generaUy sets in, during the greater part of which south and south-westerly
winds prevail: these are not very violent within the bay of Panama ; but from
cape Mala, westward, gales from the above quarters are frequent, and sometimes severe, bringing a very heavy sea with them.
Gulf of Dulce to the Gulf of Fonseca.—From the Gulf of Dulce, proceeding
westward along the shores of Costa Rica, Guatemala, and Mexico, we find the
winds stiU foUow the changes of the seasons, modified, however, by locabty.
For instance, wienever the " northers" prevail, we find them blowing off tbe
shore at nearly right angles to the run of the coast; thus, as soon as the coast
of Nicaragua is approached (which takes a more northerly direction than that
before mentioned), we find, during the fine season, the "northers" exchanged
for breezes caUed ' papagayos.' These blow from N.N.E. to E.N.E- or E., and
are accompanied by the same clear fine weather as the " northers^; the prevailing wind, however, during this season (from January to April) is from southeast to north-east. From May to November, which is the rainy season, the
weather is mostly bad, gales from tbe west and gouth-west with thunder,
lightning, &c, being frequent and at times violent.830
APPENDIX.
Gulf of Fonseca to the Gulf of Tehuantepeo.—After passing the gulf of
Fonseca, where tie land again trends nearly due west, the nortierly winds are
lost, tiU on reaching the gulf of Tehuantepec we meet them once more, but
under a different name, and assuming a more violent character. Along this
portion where the mountains approach, and even in some places form the coast
Une, the winds during the fine season are the usual tropical land and sea
breezes; the former from N.W., tie latter from S. to W.S.W. and W. The
remaining months are marked by even worse weather from the same quarters
as is found ou tie Nicaragua coast.
Gulf of Tehuantepec to Tejupan Point.—Tie ieavy blasts which
blow over the isthmus of Teiuantepec, derive their source from the
country they cross. They seem to be caused by the "northers "in the
gulf of Mexico, which here find a vent through tie opening formed
between tie Mexican and Guatemaban mountains. They blow with great
force from North to N.N.E., and raise a very high short sea; their force is.
felt several hundred miles off the coast. During the season when they prevail
(December to April) every preparation should be made to meet and carry sail
through them: if this can be done they are soon crossed, and 200 to 250
miles of westing (or easting) made; otherwise, if you are obUged to heave to,
86 to 118 hours of heavy weather may be expected, exposed all the while to a
very high and short sea. In the rainy season these cease; but the weather
here, as along the whole coast of Mexico, is then very bad, gales and strong
breezes from S.E. to S.W. constantly occur, whilst squaUs accompanied by
thunder and lightning, with heavy, and almost incessant rain, characterise the
season throughout. These gales are at tunes very severe, rendering the navigation of such a coast very unpleasant, as, with one exception, there is scarcely
any shelter from them to be found. During the fine season, however, nothing
can be more regular or quiet than the weather on the Mexican coast; a regular
sea breeze sets in about noon, beginning from S.S.W. to W.S.W., and getting
more westerly as the sun goes down, decreasing with it, and graduaUy sinking
into a calm as the night closes in. This is -succeeded by the land wind off the
shore, which is more irregular in its direction and force, but these winds, and
the method of making a passage to tie westward, along tie coast, have been
so weU, and so truly described by Dampier and Basil HaU, that nothing
remains but to add my testimony to the correctness of tie accounts they give,
as far as the phenomena feU under my own observation.
As soon as the coast begins to trend nortierly again, which it does about
Tejupan point, we meet the northerly winds which blow down the gulf of
Cabfornia, and which are found pretty steady during the fine season a few
miles off the coast; by taking advantage of these, and the daily variations
caused by the land and sea breezes, the passage is made from this point to
San Bias and Mazatlan; but it is always a tedious beat, owing to a contrary
current and frequent calms.
IE.—Second Portion or Division.—Cape San Lucas to San Diego.—From
cape San Lucas to San Diego, or from 28° to 82° N., the general direction of the
wind is from west to north, but during the winter months, or from November
to April, this coast is subject to violent gales from the S.E., which, as most'
of the bays and anchorages are open towards that quarter, are muci dreaded.
This is especiaUy the case along the northern portion of this division, as
towards cape San Lucas they are less frequent; however, they always give
ample warning of their approach.    The only way, therefore, of making aAPPENDIX.
881
passage up tiis coast, is by standing off upon the starboard tack (—as you get
out, tie wind draws to the eastward—) tfll either the variables are reaehed, or
you can fetch your port on the other tack. In the summer season the only
alteration is that the wind is more westerly in the mornings, and draws round
with the sun as the day advances.
ni. Third Division.—San Diego to San Francisco—From San Diego to San
Francisco tbe wind prevails from tbe north-westward nearly all the year round.
This coast is subject to the same south-easterly gales as the coast of Lower
Cabfornia, but they are more frequent here, and blow with greater force. AU
the bays and roadsteads are similarly exposed with the exception of the above
named ports, which are perfectly secure and defended from all winds. During
the winter, therefore, vessels always anchor in a convenient berth for slipping,
with springs and buoys on their cables, so that on the first appearance of heavy
clouds approaching from the south-east, with a heavy swell rolling up from
the same quarter (the invariable signs of the coming gale), they may be able
to sbp and go to sea without loss of time. These gales last from 12 hours to
two days, and are accompanied by heavy rain, which lasts tfll the wind changes,
which it often does very suddenly, and blows as hard for a few hours from the
north-west, when tbe clouds clear off and fine weather again succeeds. Off
point Concepcion gales and strong breezes are so frequent as to obtain for it
the appellation of the cape Horn of California. They are mostly from north
to west, and frequently blow with great force, especially in the winter, when
they sometimes last for three days together, without a cloud to be seen, till
they begin to moderate. But here one of the most remarkable features of this
coast first shows itself, viz., the frequent and dense fogs, which, during more
than half the year, render the navigation from San Diego northward most
unpleasant. In making the land, the only way to deal with them, is to feel
your way into the coast with the lead during the day-time, as it frequently
happens that a thick fog prevails at sea, while, at the same time, within a
mile or two of the land, a beautiful clear bright sky, and open horizon are to
be found : if disappointed in this, you have but to wear, haul off again, and
heave to till the desired change does take place.
San Francisco to Vancouver Island.—From. San Francisco northward to
the strait of Juan de Fuca, tbe north-westerly are still the prevailing winds;
in the months of June, September, and October, we found them almost constantly so ; hard gales from all points of the compass, however, may be looked
for here at all seasons, especially during the winter, and the equinoctial months.
These begin generally from S.E. to S.W., bringing thick rainy weather with
them. After blowing from these quarters for some hours, they fly round to
the northward, (by tbe west), with Utile if any warning, except the increased
heaviness of tbe rain, and blow even harder than before. During the spring,
easterly and north-westerly breezes are more prevalent than at other seasons.
In the summer months, westerly winds and fine weather prevail, but from the
end of July to the end of August the fogs are so frequent that many weeks wiU
sometimes pass without a clear day.
Method of Making Passages within the 1st Division.—From the southward to Panama Bay.—From what has been said respecting tbe winds which
prevail within the first division, it will be seen that tbe passage from the
southward to Panama bay is easily made during tbe greater part of the year; but
in the fine season, when within tbe influence of the "northers", the following plan
should be adopted.    Make short tacks in-shore, as there is generaUy a set to the
i
1382
APPENDIX.
mm I
• :
northward found within a few miles of the land, and where that is interrupted,
a regular tide is exchanged for a constant current farther off. Between
Chirambira point and cape Corrientes the land is low and faced witi shoals,
caused by the mouths of the numerous rivers which have their outlets on this
part of the coast, but after passing cape Corrientes, it may be approached
pretty closely, except off Solano point, where some shoal rocky patches
extend to seaward, as the coast is in general bold-to. Care, however,
should be taken not to run into the calms caused by the high lands, as it is
difficult to get off into the breeze again, and the swell sets in-shore where it
frequently happens that no anchorage is to be found till close to the rocks.
In beating up the bay of Panama, in the fine season, the eastern passage,
or that between tbe Perlas islands and the main is to be preferred, as, with one
exception, it is free from dangers. The water is smooth, and a regular tide
enables you to make more northing than it would be possible to do in nine
cases out of ten against the strong current and short high sea which at this
season prevail in the centre or on the western side. During the rainy season
a straight course up the bay is preferable to entangling yourself with the
islands, the current generally foUowing the direction of the wind.
Panama Bay to the Southward.—But the great difficulty, at all times,
consists in getting either to the southward or westward of Panama. The passage to the southward is made in two ways,—either by beating up the coast
against a constantly foul wind and contrary current, or by standing off to sea
tiU sufficient southing is made to allow you to fetch your port on the starboard
tack. Both plans are very tedious, as it frequently takes twenty days to beat
up to Guayaquil, whilst six or seven days are an average passage down.
Panama Bay to the Westward.—If bound to the westward during the
" northers," a great deal of time may be saved by keeping close in-shore, and
thus, taking advantage of them; they wfll carry you as far as the gulf of Nicoya.
When past the Morro Hermoso, 'papagayos' may be looked for, and with them
a course should be steered for the gulf of Thuantepec, and it will then depend
on the port you are bound to, whether, after crossing the gulf by the aid of
one of its gales, you should keep in or off shore. H bound for Acapulco, keep
in, and beat up ; but if bound to the westward, you cannot do better than
make a west course, as nearly all tbe winds will aUow you: but as the in-shore
winds are now under discussion, we wfll leave the consideration of the best
means of reaching the trade winds for a future occasion.
The passage to the westward of Panama, during the rainy season, is' a most
tedious affair,—calms, squaUs, contrary winds, and currents, accompanied by a
heavy swell, and extreme heat, as well as an atmosphere loaded with moisture
and rain, are the daily accompaniments. It often occurs that 20 miles of
westing are not made in a week, and it is only by the industrious use of every
squaU and slant of wind, that the passage can be made at all. Opinions are
divided amongst the coasters as to the propriety of working to the southward
and trying to get rid of tie bad weather, or beating up within a moderate
distance of the land. My experience would lead me to prefer the latter, as
the strong winds and frequent squalls which so often occur near the land, sometimes allow a long leg to be made to the north-westward, while, farther off,
this advantage is sacrificed for only a shade finer weather.
General Observations respecting the Off-shore Winds.—With respect
to the winds which prevail in the open ocean, the same general rules obtain
in the Pacific, as are recognised throughout the rest of the globe, i. e., a north-'APPENDIX.
888
eastern trade within the limits of the northern tropic, and a south-eastern
within the southern; also as to the prevalence of westerly winds when either
to the northward or southward of those boundaries. There are, however,
exceptions to these rules. Within the tropics, wherever large groups of islands
are found, tie trades are subject to great variations both in direction and force.
Also to tie northward of the tropic of Cancer, when bound from the Sandwich
islands for the American coast, there are many instances, during the spring
and summer, of 45° or even 50° of north latitude being reached, before a
westerly wind could be obtained.
Galapagos Islands to Cape San Lucas.—I have already alluded to tie
difficulty of getting to the westward from the bay of Panama. The trade wind
seems to possess no steady influence to the eastward of a line drawn from
cape San Lucas, in 23° N., to the Galapagos islands on the equator. Amongst
these islands the south-eastern trade wind is steady during nine or ten months
of the year, and it is only in January and February, and sometimes March,
that they are interrupted by long calms, and occasional breezes north and
north-west, but these are never of any strength. To the northward of them,
the eastern limit of the trade seems to depend upon the time of the year. In
the early part of April, I have found it between the parallels of 8° and 13° North,
900 to 1000 mfles farther to the eastward than at the end of June; and in
the intermediate months, either more or less to the eastward as it was earber
or later in the season, but in no case that I have met with has a steady
or regular trade been experienced tfll the above line has been reached. It is
this circumstance, and the prevalence in the intermediate space of westerly
winds, calms, and contrary currents, that makes the passage from Panama to
the westward, as far as this line, so tedious. I have been 40 days beating
from tbe entrance of the bay, in 80° W., to the eastern edge of the trade, in
111° W., a distance of less than 2000 miles, or, on an average, about 40
mfles per day.
From the Meridian of Cape San Lucas, Westward.—When once within the
influence of the trades, a passage is easily made either to the southward,
westward, or northward ; but it must be born in mind that the eastern verge
of this trade seems, in these parts, to be influenced by the seasons. Thus in
June and July, I found it fresh from N.N.W., and even at times N.W., as far
out as the meridian of 125° W., whereas in March and April it was light from
N.N.E. to E. and E.S.E. from our first meeting it in 98° W. tfll past the
meridian of cape San Lucas in 110° W., where I picked up a good steady
breeze from N.N.E.
As a general rule the wind is found to haul more to the eastward as you
get farther off the land, and I did not find this rule affected by the latitude,
as, although, as I have stated, the wind hangs to the northward, and even at
times to the westward of north, near the eastern limit of the trade, from the
tropic of Cancer to the variables near the equator, I found it about tbe meridian of the Sandwich islands, as far to the eastward on and near the Une as it
was in 35° north, in which latitude the westerly winds are in general met
with.
From the Sandwich Islands to the Northward and Eastward.—The passages,
therefore, from the Sandwich islands to any part on the north-west coast of
America, are made by standing to the northward tiU the westerly winds are
reached, when the. run into the coast is easily made, taking care, however, if
bound to a port to the southward of you', not to bear up till well in with the834
APPENDIX.
land, when, as I have said, north-westerly winds will be found to carry you
down to tbe southward.
On this coast, as a general rule, the land should always be made to the
northward of the port you are bound to, as in almost all cases the wind and
current both prevail from the northward from Vancouver island to cape
Corrientes of Mexico.
Though lying between the parallels of 19° and 23° north, the Sandwich
islands are often visited during the winter months with strong breezes and
gales from south and south-west, but for tbe rest of the year the trade-wind
blows pretty steadily. In making a passage thence to the coast of Chile
or Peru, the best way is to stand across the trade as near the wind as the topmast-studding-sail will stand. This, as the direction of the wind is in general
from E.N.E. to E., will enable you make Tahiti, and pass the Society islands
by one of the clear channels to the westward of it. It is of bttle use trying
to fetch to the eastward of these, as not only do you lose much time by hugging
the wind too close, but also the strong current which sets to the westward,
from 20 to 40 miles a day, is pretty sure to drift you that much to leeward;
and even were this not the case, so difficult, tedious, and dangerous is the
navigation amongst the archipelago of low coral islands which be to the eastward, that unless you can weather the Marquesas altogether, it is better even
to bear up, than to entangle yourself in such a labyrinth. After passing the
Society islands, stand on to the southward, till, in or about the 30th parallel,
the westerly winds wfll be found. These wiU carry you into the coast; care
being taken, as on the northern coast, not to bear up when within the influence
of tbe southerly winds, tfll near enough to the land to ensure keeping them
down to your port.
Trade Winds affected by Groups of Islands.—I have before stated,
when once within the influence of these island groups, the trade winds are
found to be subject to great alterations and deflections, or lost altogether.
This is especially the case during the time the sun is to the southward of the
equator amongst those in the southern hemisphere, West and south-west, as
well as north-west winds are then often experienced, and amongst the far
western groups, heavy gales almost amounting to hurricanes are experienced,
when from their latitude they should be in the very centre of the trade winds.
As a proof of this deviation from the usual course of the trades when near
large groups of islands, I may mention, that, when making the passage from
the Sandwich to the Society islands, in June 1849, I had the wind nearly east
all the way to the parallel of the Marquesas (10° S.), when it came from the
south-eastward; but I left Tahiti at the same month for Valparaiso with a northwesterly wind, though this island is situated in 17° S. This carried me
500 miles to the westward, nor did I again meet the trade, though the usual
boundary (the paraUel of 30° S.) was not passed till I had sailed with (for the
most part) a fair wind, upwards of 2000 miles to the eastward.
From the time I left Pitcairn island (13th July) to within 100 miles of tie
American coast, a distance of more than 3000 miles, I experienced strong
winds, and sometimes gales from south round by west to north-west, only one
day's interval; this being, from all accounts, tie general character of winds in
these latitudes."
The following remarks are from the Mercantile Marine Magazine, 1858,
I In tie year 1855, in connection with the U.S. Survey of the Pacific coast,APPENDIX
885
showing the absence of a return
observations were made on the character of the winds of the Western coast of
the United States, at three permanent stations, viz :—
Astoria, Oregon    -    -    -    -    lat. 46° 11' N.      long. 123° 49' W.
San Francisco, California    -      ,,   87   48 „    122   28
San Diego „ „   32   40 „    117   12
The directions of the wind were noted in points, and the observations taken
three times each day, at 6 a.m., at noon, and at 6 p.m., except on Monday in
each week, when hourly observations were made.    From these, the following
general characteristics may be said to predominate :—
1. The great prevalence of westerly winds, representing a flow of the air
at the surface from tbe ocean in upon the land
2. The general absence of easterly winds
current at the surface.
The proportion of westerly to easterly winds is as 8 to 1.
8.    The. increase of westerly winds in the summer, and their decrease in
the winter.
4. That when easterly winds blow at all, it is as a rule during tbe winter.
5. The N., N.E., and E. winds blow more frequently in the morning4than
in the afternoon hours.
6. The S.E., S., and S.W. winds are in general pretty equally distributed
over the morning and evening hours.
7. The N.W. is the prevailing direction of the ordinary sea breeze at
Astoria and San Diego, and the W. at San Francisco.
Sometimes the W. wind has that character at the first named stations, and
sometimes the S.W. wind at the last named.
As some of the details connected with these observations will be of service
to our nautical readers, they are here furnished.
San Francisco :—At San Francisco the great current of air flowing from
the sea to the land comes generally from the W. or S.W., rarely from
the N.W.
In the period from November to March, inclusive, the W. is the prevaibng
wind, exceeding in quantity both the others, the S.W. wind exceeding in
quantity the N.W. In the period from April to October, the W. and S.W.
winds are nearly equal, and each exceeds the N.W.
The W. wind has, in general, the features attributed to the sea breeze,
beginning after the rising of the sun, increasing until after the hottest part'of
the day, and dying out or much diminishing at nightfall.
The W. and S.W. winds are prominent features at San Francisco.
Tbe S.W. is the prevailing wind in June and July; S.W. and W. winds
blowing nearly the whole of those months, not succeeded by an easterly land
breeze—but rising and falbng. May and August resemble each other, the
N.W. and S..W. winds being nearly equal in quantity, and each less than the
W. wind. In April and September the N.W. wind has nearly died out.
The W. wind diminishes in quantity through March and February, and
through October, November, and December, to January. The N.W. wind
increases again from April towards December, and is very small in October
and November. The S.W. wind disappears in October, reappearing in
November and December, and increasing towards January. The W. wind
has a maximum in April and May, and another in September and October,
the minima being July and January.
The N. wind in December, January, and February, reaching a maximum886
APPENDIX.
in January, is the only other point to be noticed for San Francisco, partaking
with the other places in tie general absence of easterly winds, although these
show themselves slightly in winter.    There is also but Utile S. wind.
Astoria and San Diego.—In general, the winds at these two places
resemble each other more than those at San Francisco do either. April,
May, June, July and August have tie same general character.
The N.W. wind is the summer wind and has the characteristics of the sea
breeze, but there is no return land breeze. The N.W. wind reaches a maximum in July, and a nuhimun in December. It is the great prevailing wind
of the year at San Diego. As it decreases it is generaUy replaced by W. and
S.W. winds of less quantity. In December the quantities of the three winds
are nearly equal.
The resemblance of these winds at San Diego and Astoria is remarkable,
the remarks just made applying generally to both places. There is, however,
much less N.W. wind at Astoria than at San Diego. Except in June, July
and August, there is some S. wind each month at Astoria, and especiaUy from
September through October, November, December and February. At San
Diego this is less marked, tie two agreeing most nearly in quantity in Marci,
April and May.
Tie S.E. wind is a distinct feature in both places in February and March,
and at San Diego in April and June.
The E. wind is prominent at Astoria in January, February and March, and
the N.E. from October to January, inclusive.
Astoria has the most easterly wind, the N.E. beginning in October and
blowing until February, and being replaced by the E. wind in March.
The summer is the windy season on tie West coast,—July being one of
the windiest months of the year."
The foUowing general remarks are by Captain Basil Hall, R.N., "On the
south-west coast of Mexico, the fair season, or what is caUed tie summer,
tiough the latitude be north, is from December to May inclusive. During
this interval alone it is advisable to navigate the coast; for, in the winter,
from June to November inclusive, every part of it is Uable to hard gales,
tornadoes, or heavy squaUs, to calms, to constant deluges of rain, and the
most dangerous bghtning; added to which, almost aU parts of tie coasts are,
at this time, so unhealthy as to be abandoned by tie inhabitants. At tie
eastern end of this range of coast, about Panama, the winter sets in earber
than at San Bias, which Ues at the western end. Rains and sickness are
looked for early in March at Panama; but at San Bias rain seldom faUs
before the 15th of June; sometimes, iowever, it begins on the 1st of June,
as we experienced. Of the intermediate coast I have no exact information,
except that December, January, and February are fine months everywiere;
and fiat, with respect to the range between Acapulco and Panama, the months
of March, April, and half of May, are also fine; at other times tie coast
navigation may be generaUy described as dangerous, and on every account to
be avoided.
From December to May inclusive, the prevalent winds, between Panama
and cape Blanco (gulf of Nicoya) are N.W. and northerly. Thence to Realejo
and Sonsonate, N.E. and easterly. At this season, off the gulfs of Papagayo
and Tehuantepec there blow hard gales, the first being generaUy N.E., andAPPENDIX.
387
the latter N. These, if not too strong, as they sometimes are, greatly
accelerate the passages to the westward; they last for several days together, with
a clear sky overhead, and a dense red haze near the horizon. We experienced
both in the Conway in February, 1822. The first, which was off the gulf of
Papagayo on tie 12th, carried us 230 miles to the W.N.W.; but the gale we
met in crossing the gulf of Tehuantepec on the 24th, 25th, and 26th, was so
hard that we could show no sail, and were drifted off to the S.S.W. more than
100 miles. A ship ought to be well prepared on these occasions, for the gale
is not only severe, but the sea, which rises quickly, is uncommonly high and
short, so as to strain a ship exceedingly.
From Acapulco to San Bias, what are called land and sea breezes blow;
but, as far as my experience goes, during the whole of March, they scarcely
deserve that name. They are described as blowing from N.W. and W.
during the day, and from N.E. at night; whence it might be inferred, that a
shift of wind, amounting to eight points, takes place between the day and
night breezes. But, during the whole distance between Acapulco and San
Bias, together with about 100 miles east of Acapulco, which we worked along,
hank for hank, we never found, or very rarely, that a greater shift could be
reckoned on than four points. With this, however, and the greatest diligence,
a daily progress of from 30 to 50 miles may be made.
Such being tbe general state of the winds on this coast, it is necessary to
attend to the foUowing directions for making a passage from the eastward :—
On leaving Panama for Realejo or Sonsonate, come out direct to the northwestward of the Perlas islands ; keep from 20 to 30 leagues off the shore as
far as cape Blanco (gulf of Nicoya); and on this passage advantage must be
taken of every shift of wind to get to the north-westward. From cape Blanco
hug the shore, in order to take advantage of the north-easterly winds which
prevail close-in. If a papagayo (as the strong breeze out of that gulf is called)
be met with, the passage to Sonsonate becomes very short.
From Sonsonate to Acapulco,
30 leagues from the coast.    We
tie eastward at this part of the passage ; but whether by keepin
or farther out, we should have avoided them, I am unable to say
direction is that usually held to be the best by tbe old coasters.
If, when off the gulf of Tehuantepec, any of tbe hard breezes, which go by
that name, should come off, it is advisable, if sail can be carried, to ease the
sheets off, and run well to the westward, without seeking to make northing ;
westing being, at all stages of that passage, by far the most difficult to
accomplish. On approaching Acapulco, the shore should be got hold of, and
the land and sea breezes turned to account.
This passage in summer is to be made by taking advantage of the difference
in direction between tbe winds in tbe night and the winds in the day. During
some months, the land winds, it is said, come more off tbe land than at others,
and that the sea breezes blow more directly on shore ; but in March we seldom
found a greater difference than four points; and, to profit essentially by this
small change, constant vigilance and activity are indispensable. The sea
breeze sets in, with very little variation as to time, about noon, or a little
before, and blows with more or less strength, till the evening. It was usually
freshest at two o'clock ; gradually fell after four; and died away as the sun
went down. The land breeze was by no means so regular as to its periods or
its force. Sometimes it came off in tbe first watch, but rarely before mid-
z
keep at the distance of 20, or
met with very strong currents
at most,
running to
farther in,
The above
ferll888
APPENDIX.
night, and often not tfll the morning, and was then generaUy Ught and uncertain.
The principal point to be attended to in this navigation is, to iave tie ship so
placed at the setting in of tie sea breeze, that she shaU be able to make use
of the whole of it on the port tack, before closing too much with the land. If
this be accompbsed, which a bttle experience of the periods renders easy, the
ship wfll be near the shore just as the sea breeze has ended, and there she
wfll remain in the best situation to profit by the land wind when it comes;
for it not only comes off earber to a ship near the coast, but is stronger, and
may always be taken advantage of to carry the ship off to the sea breeze
station before noon of tie next day.
These are the best directions for navigating on this coast which I have
been able to procure; they are drawn from various sources, and, whenever it
was possible, modified by personal experience. I am chiefly indebted to
Don Manuel Luzurragui, master attendant of Guayaquil, for the information
they contain. In his opinion, were it required to make a passage from
Panama to San Bias, without touching at any intermediate port, tie best way
would be to stretch weU out, pass to the southward of Cocos island, and then
run with the southerly winds as far west as 96° before hauling up for San Bias,
so as to make a fair wind of tie westerly breezes which belong to the coast.
An experienced old pilot, however, whom I met at Panama, disapproved of
this, and said, the best distance was 15 or 20 leagues all the way. In the
winter months these passages are very unpleasant, and it is indispensable that
the whole navigation be much further off shore, excepting only between
Acapulco and San Bias, when a distance of 10 to 12 leagues wfll be sufficient.
The return passages from tie west are always muci easier. In tie period
called iere the summer, from December to May, a distance of 80 to 50 leagues
ensures a fair wind all tie way. In winter, it is advisable to keep stfll
further off, say 100 leagues, to avoid tie calms, and tie incessant rains,
squalls, and Ughtnings, which everywhere prevail on the coast at this season.
Don Manuel Luzurragui advises, during winter, that aU ports on this coast
should be made to the southward and eastward, as the currents in this time
of tie year set from tiat quarter.
H it were required to return direct from San Bias to Lima, a course must
be shaped so as to pass between the island of Cocos and the Galapagos, and
to the south-eastward, till the land be mado a bttle to the southward of the
equator, between cape Lorenzo and cape St. Helena. From thence work
along-shore as far as point Aguja, in lat. 6° S., after which work due S., on
the meridian of that point, as far ll£° S., and then stretch in-shore. If the
outer passage were to be attempted from San Bias, it would be necessary to
run to 25° or 80° S. across tie trade, whioh would be a needless waste of
distance and time.
Such general observations as the foregoing, on a navigation stfll imperfectly
known, are perhaps better calculated to be useful to a stranger than detailed
accounts of passages made at particular seasons. For, although the success
of a passage wfll principaUy depend on the navigator's own vigilance in
watching for exceptions to the common rules, and on his skfll and activity in
profiting by them, yet he must always be materially aided by a knowledge of
the prevalent winds and weather. As many persons, however, attach a certain
degree of value to actual observations made on coasts Utile frequented,
altiougi tie period in whioh they may iave been made be limited; I have
given hi the two foUowing notices, a brief abstract of the Conway's passagesAPPENDIX.
839
from Panama to Acapulco, and from Acapulco to San Bias. Tie original
notes from whence they are taken are too minute to interest any person not
actuaUy proceeding to that quarter of the world.
Panama to Acapulco (5th of February to 7th of March, 1822—30 days).—
We sailed from Panama on the 4th of February, and anchored on that afternoon at the island of Taboga, where we filled up our water. Next evening,
the 5th, we ran out of the bay with a fresh N.N.W. wind, and, at half-past
two in the morning of the 6th, rounded cape Mala, and hauled to the westward. As the day advanced, the breeze slackened, and drew to the southward.
In 24 hours, however, we had run 140 miles, and were entirely clear of the
bight of Panama. It cost us nearly 6 days more before we came abreast of
cape Blanco (gulf of Nicoya); at first we had light winds from S.S.W., then a
moderate breeze from N.N.W., which backed round to the eastward, and was
followed by a calm : during each day we had the wind from almost every point
of the compass, but light and uncertain. Between the 11th and 12th, we
passed cape Blanco, with a fresh breeze from S.S.E. and then S.S.W.,
which shifted suddenly to tbe northward, afterwards to the N.N.E.,
where it blew fresh for upwards of 24 hours, and enabled us to run more than
280 miles to the W.N.W. in one day. This breeze, which is known by the
name of papagayo, failed us after passing the gulf of the same name, and we
then came within the influence of adverse currents. On reaching the
longitude of 92° W., on the 16th, we were set S. 16° W., 77 miles; on the
17th, N. 16 miles; on the 18th, E. 51 miles; on the 19th, S. 78° E.,
63 mfles; on the 20th, S. 62° E., 45 miles; on the 21st, S. 87° E.,
17| mfles; all of which we experienced between 91° and 93° W., at the
distance of 20 or 30 leagues from the shore ; meanwhile we had N.N.E. and
northerly winds, and calms.
After these currents slackened, we made westing as far as 93£°, by help of
N.N.E. and easterly winds. On the 22nd, 23rd, and 24th, we were struggling
against north-westerly winds off Guatemala, between 14° and 15£° N.
latitude. This brought us up to the top of the bay of Tehuantepec at sunset
of the 24th ; we then tacked and stood to the westward. The weather at this
time looked threatening;" the sky was clear overhead, but all around the
horizon there hung a fiery and portentous haze, and the sun set in great
splendour; presently the breeze freshened, and came to the north by west,
and before midnight it blew a hard gale of wind from north. This lasted, with
Utile intermission, till six in the morning of the 26th, or about 30 hours.
There was, during aU the time, an uncommonly high short sea, which made
the ship extremely uneasy. The barometer fell from 29*94 to 29*61, between
noon and 4 o'clock, p.m., but rose again as the gale freshened; the sympie-
someter fell twelve-hundredths. This gale drove us to the S.W. by S., about
140 miles. A fine fresh breeze succeeded from N.N.E., which carried us
120 miles towards Acapulco, and left us in longitude 97£° W. and latitude
15° N., on the 27th. This was the last fair wind we had on the coast; all the "
rest of our passage, as far as San Bias, being made by dead beating. The
distance from Aeapulco was now less than 180 miles, but it cost us 8 days'
hard work to reach it, principally owing to a steady drain of lee-current
running E. by S., at the foUowing daily rates, viz., 13, 16, 27, 37, 25s, 10,
9, 7, and 9 miles. The winds were, meanwhile, from N.W. to N.N.W.,
with an occasional spurt from S.E. and S., and several calms. We had not
yet learned the most effectual method of taking advantage of the small
variation between the day and night winds,
z 2
fl340
APPENDIX.
Acapulco to San Bias (12th to 28th of March, 1822—16 days).—This
passage was considered good for the month of March, but in the latter days
(Of December, and 1st of January, an English merchant made it in 10 days,
iaving a* fair wind off shore nearly all the way. A merchant brig, which
passed Acapulco on the 6th of February, at the distance of 150 mfles, was a
fortnight in reaching cape Corrientes, and nearly 3 weeks afterwards getting
from thence to San Bias, a distance of only 70 miles. There is, however,
reason to believe that the vessel was badly handled.
It would be useless to give any more detailed account of this passage than
thene wfll be seen in the preceding remarks. We generaUy got the sea breeze
about noon, with which we laid up for a short time W.N.W., and then broke
off to N.W., and so to the northward, towards the end of the breeze, as we
approached the coast. We generally stood in within a couple of miles, and
sometimes nearer, and sounded in from 15 to 25 fathoms, If the breeze
continued after sunset, we made short tacks, in order to preserve our vicinity
to the land, to be ready for the night wind. With this we generally lay off
S.W., sometimes W.S.W. and W., but only for a short time. After passing
latitude 18°, the coast trended more to the northward, and a much larger leg
was made on the port tack, before we were obliged to go about. As we
approached cape Corrientes, in latitude 20°, the land winds became more,
northerly, and tbe sea breezes more westerly; so that, as the coast also
trended off to the northward, a more rapid advance was made.
During our stay at San Bias, from the 28th of March to the 15th of June,
we had bght land-winds every night, and a moderately fresh breeze from west
every day, with the thermometer always above 80°.
Towards the end of the period, tie sky, which had been heretofore clear,
became overcast; the weather lost its former serene character, becoming dark
and unsettled ; and, on the 1st of June, the periodical rains set in witi great
violence, accompanied by thunder and Ughtning, and fresh winds from due
south. This was nearly a fortnight earber than the average period. The heat
and closeness of the weather increased greatly after the rains set in; but
although our men were much exposed, no sickness ensued, excepting a few
cases of highly inflammatory fever. The town was almost completely deserted
when we came away; the inhabitants having, as usual, fled to Tepic and other
inland towns, to avoid the discomfort and sickness which accompany the
rains.
As soon as the rains subside, in tie latter end of October, or beginning of
November, the people return, although that is the period described as being
most unhealthy, when the ground is still moist, and the heat of the sun not
materially abated."
The remarks that foUow are by Commander C. B. Hamilton, R.N.,*
" Tbe west coast of Mexico is considered highly dangerous in the bad season,
viz., from June to 5th November, and aU the vessels obliged to remain in the
neighbourhood lie up, either in the secure harbour of Guaymas, at Pichilinque,
or in tie bay of La Paz, all in the gulf of California.
The hurricanes that occasionally visit this coast are so much dreaded, that
* See the Nautical Magazine, 1849.APPENDIX
841
in tie months of July, August, September, and October, the ports are
deserted, and trade ceases. I beUeve the FroUc is the first vessel of any
nation, whether men-of-war or merchant-ship, that ever remained the whole
bad season on the coast,—and, that off the two most dangerous ports, viz.,
San Bias and Mazatlan. I shaU therefore give aU the information I can,
relative to the bad season.
The hurricane so much dreaded on this coast is caUed the Cordonazo de San
Francisco, a name given by the Spaniards on account of the hurricane
prevailing about the time of San Francisco's day, the 4th of October, the
word cordonazo signifying a ieayy lasi witi a rope or whip; but from my
own experience, and all I can learn, these cordonazos may be expected any
time from the middle of June to tie 5th of November; the worst ones that
have been experienced of late years having occurred on the 1st of November,
although the weather usually clears up about the 20th of October, and sometimes even sooner ; and as soon as the weather does begin to clear up, a ship
may, with common precautions, venture into the anchorages again, for this
reason,—as soon as tie weather has cleared up, the change in the appearance
of tbe sky and weather wfll give ample warning of a coming hurricane,
whereas, in the previous four months before the weather has cleared up, the
"thing that adds to tie danger of this coast is, that owing to tbe threatening
appearance of the sky every evening, and the violent thunderstorms and
squalls at night, accompanied by heavy rain and lightning, the wind veering
about, you are first led to beUeve that the hurricane is coming every night,
and latterly you see it is utterly hopeless to foresee the coming of it, as, every
night, appearances were as bad as they could be; the barometer here being
of little or no use, and a tremendous sea occasionally setting in. Thus the
remaining off this coast during the hurricane season will cause great anxiety.
The squalls and gales usually commence about S.E., and quickly fly round
to the southward and S.W.; you have generally time to get to sea when it
commences at S.E.; but, as I have before shown, you must go to sea every
night, if you can, if you would be free from the danger of the cordonazos
coming on. But a tremendous swell frequently sets in whilst the weather is
in this threatening state, and the wind still light, which makes it impossible
to get out. Moreover, if our boats happened to be out and on shore when the
swell came, it was impossible to hoist them in ; and for this reason we have
frequently been obliged to send our boats from the ship, with their crews, to
be hauled up on shore, and remain there until the swell went down, that
I might be ready to sbp and go to sea.
It appears that the cordonazos come on an average once in 6 or 8 years,
and we experienced none during our stay, although we had a gale on the night
of the 21st of September. I was fortunately under way, and had plenty of
room when it came on, having stood out to sea on the evening of the 19th,
on account of the weather being bad, and fearing the full of the moon on
the 20th.
It commenced about 9h. 30m. p.m., from S.E., flying round to S.W.;'
heavy rain, thunder, and lightning, with a very heavy sea, reducing us to close
reefed main-topsail, and fore-staysail, washing away a boat, and obliging us
to batten down. The squaUs came on very suddenly, the prevailing winds
being in the bad season from S.E. to S. and S.W., and the heavy sweU
usuaUy before and after the full and change of tie moon. The swell is such
as is seen in tie bay of Biscay in a heavy gale, and unfortunately usuaUy sets
into the bays before the wind comes.842
APPENDIX.
to slip and stand
I therefore think that a ship caught at anchor off San Bias or Mazatlan by
a cordonazo, would have small chance of escape, especiaUy off the former, as
she would either go on shore or go down at her anchors
out the instant it commences from S.E. is her best course.
The range of the thermometer for June was 77° to 86°; July, 80° to 87°;
August, 81° to 89°; September, 83° to 92°; October, 83° to 90°.
The barometer appeared to be of Utile service, usually remaining at
80 inches ; seldom varying above a tenth, except during a heavy squab, when
it rose considerably.
Our anchorage off San Bias during the bad season was usuaUy in 12£ fathoms,
soft .mud,—Piedra de Mer, N. 58° W.; Piedra de Tierra just open southward
of the bluff to the southward of San Bias river, N. 47° E.; point off watering-
place, N. 72° E.
Off Mazatlan, during the same season, in 28 fathoms, soft mud ; centre of
Crestin isle, N. 13° E.; north-west extreme of North Venado isle, N. 28° W.;
southernmost rock on souti side of Mazatlan, N. 80° E.; small black rock
nearly covered, N. 28° E.
I should not recommend a ship to lay closer than this, which is the best
berth to get out from, in case of bad weather.
ExceUent biscuit can be procured at Guaymas, at a very moderate price ;
and a most superior spirit, not inferior to the best whiskey, called TequeUa
Mascal, can be procured in any quantity at San Bias, at a very reasonable
price, by applying to the consul at Tepic.
After the 4th of November the coasting and other vessels again make their
appearance on the west coast of Mexico. San Bias is very sickly during the
bad season. Guaymas is healthy, although the thermometer stands there at
the astonishing height of 106° in July, August, and September, and owing
to the extreme dryness of the atmosphere, ships receive much injury, by the
wood opening. Furniture, apparently well seasoned, there cracks and falls
in pieces.
On this coast there are some immense fish of the ray species. I caught
one of them, and with difficulty hoisted one on board; it measured 19 feet
in breadth across the back, tie mouth was 8 feet 5 inches wide, and the flesh
was 3 feet 6 inches deep in the centre. I had no means of ascertaining the
weight, but found I could not lift it with the yard tackles and '60 men, it
requiring 130 men, with the heaviest purchases in tie ship, to hoist it in.
These fish are common on the west coast of Mexico and gulf of California,
where they are more dreaded by the pearl divers than sharks, or any other
fish."
GENERAL REMARKS ON PASSAGES TO VARIOUS
PORTS, &c. &c.
The following general sailing directions for the coast of California are by
Commander W. P. MacArthur, U.S. Navy (1850.)*
* These were drawn up after the preliminary examination of the coast, preparatory to
the survey.APPENDIX.
343
" Previous to giving sailing directions for this part of our coast, I propose
to notice the character of the winds, at different seasons, with their effect
upon the sea and currents.
From Marci to October the prevaibng wind along the coast, and for many
mfles to tie westward, is fresh from the north-west, being freshest from
lOh. a.m. to 2h. p.m., and not unfrequently falbng Ught during the night.
During this season of the year, the north-west wind blows with almost the
regularity of a trade-wind. During tbe months of August and September,
fogs prevail to a great extent, and impede and endanger navigation materially.
During the greater part of the year above-mentioned, there were no heavy
gales of wind and Utile or no rain.
These winds cause a current of about half a knot per hour along the coast,
setting to the southward.
From October to March the wind is variable, both witi regard to velocity
and duration. During tiis season heavy gales occur from the south-east,
south, and south-west, generally accompanied by protracted rain, and causing
a very heavy sea and swell along the coast.
The current during this season sets generally to the northward, varying in
velocity with the strength of the wind.
These facts being known, it is now to be considered how directions should
be given which would be most useful to navigation.
Sailing vessels bound to tbe northward from Monterey, or any more northern
port during the summer season, should stand well off-shore, not too close
hauled until, about 200 miles from the land, when they will be beyond the
influence of the southerly current, and in a situation to take advantage of a
slant of wind, which frequently occurs from the W.N.W. They would do
weU not to approach the land, unless favoured by tbe winds so as to enable
them to lay their course, or nearly so, until up with the latitude of the
destined port.
Steamers should follow the coast from point to point as nearly as possible,
always keeping within 15 miles of the land. They will by this means shorten
tie distance, and frequently avoid tbe strong north-west wind, as they wfll
often find it quite calm close in with the shore, when there is a wind to
seaward.
Vessels bound to the northward in the winter season should keep as close
along the land as practicable, and take every advantage of aU southerly winds
to make latitude. They should always endeavour to make the land at least
20 or 30 mfles to the southward of the destined harbour.
H bound to the southward keep the coast in sight, and take advantage of
either tack upon which tbe most latitude may be made, always making the
land to the northward of the port in summer, and to the southward in the
winter season.
Bound to San Francisco or Monterey, use every opportunity to observe for
latitude and longitude, so as to know the vessel's position up to the latest
moment, as fogs and haze, preventing observations, prevail near the land.
Allow generally for a southerly set of £ a mile per hour, until within about
50 miles of land; after which, at times, it is not appreciable. With these
precautions vessels may steer boldly on, shaping a course for the South
FaraUon, an islet about 250 feet high and a mile long, having 14 fathoms
water, and good holding-ground on the S.E. side.
On approaching soundings the water becomes of a pale green colour.
Soundings may be had in 60 to 40 fathoms, soft ooze, if approaching point344
APPENDIX.
Reyes. Below 40 fathoms is near the land, and the surf should be heard, if
haze prevents the land from being seen. If the soundings are 30 fathoms or
under, and the sea smooth, anchor with a kedge until the land becomes visible,
so as to take a compass bearing, as the position cannot otherwise be relied on.
If up with the South FaraUon and night approaching, or there are appearances of fog, anchor at the FaraUon and wait till dayUght, when tie morning
breeze wfll carry the vessel to the bar, or pilot-ground.
Inside the Farallones the ' set' is generally towards the north shore, which
may be approached without risk, keeping outside of the kelp, that marks
rocks under water.
Duxbury reef is 6 miles, W. by N. £ N., from Bonita point, projecting
nearly 2 miles from the bluff; is well marked by the bluff, and the sea generaUy
breaks on it.
To enter San Francisco without a Pilot, bring Alcatraz island in range with
Fort point, and run on. This gives point Bonita a good berth, and all dangers
on the south shore are plain in sight.
If bound into Monterey, shape the course for point Ano Nuevo, in order
to avoid point Pinos. At Ano. Nuevo there is no danger clear of the shore
line. When up with cape Ano Nuevo, point Pinos (the only point where
tbe pines reach the sea,) wfll be clearly seen, and as the beach rises to view
the town of Monterey also. Give the souti shore a good berth, (most
necessary near night, as it generally falls calm,) and stand on; anchor nearest
to the western shore, a short distance from tbe wharf. The holding-ground
is good, and with good tackle vessels can ride at anchor in safety at aU seasons
of the year.
Going out, make long stretches towards point Ano Nuevo, in order to avoid
the ' set' and sweU off point Pinos.
The bay of Carmel, south of point Carmel, must be carefully avoided.
Point Reyes is a high, bold, and very prominent headland, visible in clear
weather 50 miles.
Between May and October vessels may anchor in Drake bay, but it is not
advisable, as a kedge is equaUy safe to preserve position outside in case of fog.
From point Reyes to Bodega the coast is variable in height, but clear of
danger, and with a commanding breeze may be approached at pleasure.
Should the wind fail when to the northward of point Reyes, drop the kedge on
reaching 30 fathoms, as the swell will set the vessel graduaUy towards the
beach.
Falling in with the land northward of Bodega, do not pass inside of fixed
kelp, as it indicates foul ground.
From Bodega to cape Mendocino the coast consists of high, bold cbffs,
with but few indentations; the dangers are only at the shore line.
Near cape Mendocino is Blunt reef (a smaU patch of rock under water),
sea generally breaking upon it. There is a clear channel, 2£ miles in width,
between the reef and the Sugar-loaf rock at the cape.
There are no dangers from cape Mendocino to Trinidad head; tbe beach
may be approached to within a mile, and the anchorage is good aU along the
shore in 13 fathoms.
Having passed westward of cape Mendocino, Trinidad head wfll be
readily recognised. Trinidad bay is an open roadstead, only available from April to November. The southerly winds of winter render it
an unsafe anchorage.   To enter, pass between the main round bluff (or headland)APPENDIX.
345
and the islet until the town is opened, wien anchor in 8 fathoms, good holding-
ground. In April and October anchor weU outside, to have room for getting
under way if necessary. Do not pass inside the Turtles, as the ground is
broken and the swell generaUy heavy.
North of Trinidad head do not approach the shore closely, unless tie breeze
is steady. Tbe dangers are in plain sight. At night it generally falls calm,
and if calm the swell wfll set the vessel too near the beach.
Klamath river has usuaUy about 15 feet on the bar at low water, and is
sometimes not difficult of entrance with a good breeze, but very difficult to get
out of, the current running so strong that saibng vessels must come out stem
foremost to be steered.
Port St. George is a safe anchorage in the summer at tbe point indicated
by the anchor. The reef off cape St. George consists of rocky islets. The
in-shore channel is good and clear, and shown by the track of the schooner
Ewing.    From Pelican bay, with a breeze, take this channel.
From cape St. George to Rogues river, there are no special dangers. In
the summer, vessels may anchor anywhere along tbe coast, and there are
landing-places south of all the rocky points. Rogues river has but 10 feet on
tie bar, is rapid, and passes between high mountains.
Avoid the kelp, which indicates rocks under water, and do not approach the
shore at night.
Ewing harbour is a safe anchorage in summer. There is no surf in the
landing cove.
From cape St. George to cape Orford, the coast is thickly inhabited by bands
of wild Indians, and care is necessary not to be surprised by them
There is a reef of rocky islets off cape Orford.
From cape Orford to cape Arago there is apparently no danger outside tie
beach.
The Kowes river has not yet been examined. The anchorage to the northward of tbe bluff is good.
The Umpquah is accessible for steamers, and for small sailing vessels only,
under very favourable circumstances. When off cape Arago, in clear weather,
the high sand bluffs of tbe Umpquah are plainly seen.
The coast from Umpquah river to the Columbia is generally bordered by a
sand beach, with white sand hills,- and the interior is densely wooded with fir
or pine. The cliffs, when they occur, are bold, but afford no shelter for
anchoring. In the summer, a vessel may anchor in 20 fathoms off any of
these beeches.
When proceeding northward in winter, make Killamook head, and if tbe
weather renders approach to the bar of the Columbia undesirable, keep southward of cape Hancock, as the current is northerly in winter.
There are usually good pilots in attendance at the mouth of the Columbia,
and the chart of the entrance and bar wfll give directions for approaching. ■
The pilots are usually off the south channel, in a small schooner showing a
fly at the main.    If not seen, fire your guns.
To avoid mistaking Shoalwater bay for the mouth of the Columbia (the
soundings being similar) make Eillamook head. Never omit this in winter.
There are no dangers off the beach northward of Killamook head, and the
soundings in approaching it are regular.
Note.—Notwithstanding tbe remarks as to tbe general fact of the winds
prevailing in the N.W. and N.N.W. quarter during the summer, it is proper346
APPENDIX.
to state that, in the month of June, 1850, the winds to the northward of San
Francisco were light from the southward and westward, with showers north of
Mendocino for the whole month, and the coasters ran to the northward with
all steering sails.
It is, however, yet to be demonstrated whether June is a regular period of
southerly breezes."
Tbe following is by Mr. Masters, a gentleman in the Merchant service, who
was for some time engaged in trade on the west coast of Mexico, (1839.) " On
the whole coast of Mexico (on its Pacific side) from June to November, the
weather is very tempestuous, with rain, thunder, and Ughtning, and in many
parts of it this season is also very sickly. On the coast of Oajaca, and in the
gulf of Tehuantepec, the rainy season generally commences about the end of
April, or the beginning of May, from which time the roadsteads are very unsafe, until the bad weather breaks up, which is in December, and on the sea
of Guadalajara and Sonora in November.
The dry season is generally fine, the sky generally clear, and the winds
moderate, and rain falls very seldom. From our leaving Mazatlan, in January,
to our sailing from the coast of Oajaca, on the 1st of April, we had not even
a sign of a shower.
A heavy faU of dew is almost a sure indication of a breeze from the northward. A few hours previous to its springing up, the air becomes sultry and
parching, and continues so during the time the "norther" is blowing. In tie
gulf of Tehuantepec, particularly, the "norther" is very uncomfortable. Adismal
haze hangs over the land, and the wind comes off in gusts as if it had passed
over a furnace, veering from N.N.W. to N.N.E. On the western coast it is
generaUy to the westward of North.
In the dry or summer season, a vessel bound to the northward of cape
Corrientes from Chile, or round cape Horn, should cross the equator in long.
105° or between it and 110°, and proceed due north if possible. The wind
in her progress to the northward will haul round from S.E. to E. and N.E.,
with a current setting in the same direction as the wind is blowing, or nearly
so, and at times at tbe rate of 1 mile per hour. It is very probable that in
standing with tbe starboard tack on board; that westing wfll also be made. If
a ship be on the port tack, and the wind supposed to be N.N.E., she
would make a very bad landfall, taking tbe current into consideration, even
allowing her to be as far north as 15°, but by standing on as far as the latitude
of cape San Lucas, there is every chance, indeed almost a certainty, of having
the wind from the north-west, and at the same time the whole range of coast
under the lee. I stated this opinion to the captain of an American whaler
who had been on the coast several times; he fully agreed witi my observations,
and said that the prevailing wind on the coast of California is north-west, and
that the best way to make a short passage to the gulf of California or Mazatlan
would be to keep clear of tie coast of Mexico, and stand well to the northward.
In the winter, or rainy season, as the wind is often from the south and east a
direct course would be most advisable.
In my passage to Mazatlan we did not stand to the northward, as I afterwards found, far enough, although we did not tack to the eastward until we
were in latitude 18£°, the wind in general being N.E. As we got to tbe eastward the wind gradually hauled to the northward, when we made the coast ofAPPENDIX.
847
Mexico, about 40 miles to the south-east of cape Corrientes, from which it took
us three days to get to tie southward of the Marias islands. When in-shore,
the wind, when it blew fresh, was from tie N.W.; and when moderate, from
N. to N.N.E. In tie morning we iad an irregular land-breeze, the current
setting constantly to the S.E. From the Marias islands we were two days
getting to Mazatlan, with the wind as afready stated.
It appears that in the gulf of California, in the dry or summer season, the
wind is mostly from the N.W., strong breezes, with a short chopping sea. The
coasting vessels always keep tie Caifornia siore aboard in beating up the gulf.
The port of Guaymas is said to be the best on the whole coast of Mexico.
It is also more healthy than any on tie soutiem part of the coast. Vessels in the
rainy season lay up here; it is the only place, with tie exception of San Bias,
tiat can be considered safe, on this part of the coast."
Lieutenant S. Osborn says:—
" A vessel anxious to keep on the coast of Mexico or its neighbourhood,
during the bad season, cannot do better than run over to the bay of La Paz,
on tie west store of the gulf of California, and but bttle to the north of
Mazatlan. This splendid harbour is formed by the main land of South CaU-
fbrnia on the starboard hand going in, and a long chain of islands with shallow
passages between, on the port hand. The most eastern island is Espirito
Santo, tie north end of which Ues in about lat. 24° 30' N., long. 110° 22' W.,
and has a large rock due north of it, distant 5 miles.
Approaching this bay from Mazatlan, the island of Ceralbo wfll be first
made, high and mountainous, north end lat. 24° 23' N., long, of south end
109° 45' W,; from it Espirito Santo wfll be seen, bearing about W. by N.
The bay is at least 30 miles deep, and for the first 20 mfles a deep bold shore
on either hand, no bottom with 20 fathoms close to the islands. Large vessels
anchor under the island of San Juan Nepomezcino ; but smaU ones anchor
within £ a mile of tie vfllage of La Paz : fish, water, turtle, cheese, and fruits
are to be obtained here ; and cattle, also, in the wet season, when pasturage
is to be found on the coast.    Snakes are very numerous and venomous.
A knowledge of the tides and currents in the neighbourhood of this port
would be very serviceable; it has been much frequented by the Americans
during their operations against Mexico. A vessel bound to California could
only have one object in making tbe Mexican coast, en route, namely, tiat of
communicating with her owners, by overland despatch through Mexico, and
as that is a possible occurrence, I will give the few foUowing notes for general
guidance.
A vessel making the passage northward from San Bias had better make an
in-shore tack, until she reaches the latitude of, or sights cape San Lucas, as
she wfll there get tie true wind, which blows almost without intermission
along the Une of coast from the northward. A west, or may be south of
West course wfll only be first made good, but as the offing is obtained, the
wind will be found to veer a Utile to the eastward. However, it wfll always
be the object to make headway, and get out of the tropic without any reference
to the longitude, as a strong north-west wind wfll soon in lat. 25° or 28° run
off the distance, provided you have sufficient northing.
The attempt to beat up in-shore amounts to perfect folly, if it does not
deserve a worse name, a strong current accompanying tie wind; and the
■m
1848
APPENDIX.
latter must be taken into consideration, when running in for your port with
westerly winds.
Should a vessel, however, be bound to California direct, I would cross the
Equator in the Pacific ocean in about 100° W. long. Cross the N.E. trade
with a topmast-studdingsail set, and thus pass into the Umit of the westerly
winds, about 300 miles to windward of the Sandwich islands, and once in them
take good care to keep to the northward of my port, for as you approach the
shore, the wind wfll draw round north, and the current to the southward
increase.
San Francisco has only two drawbacks, that of a narrow entrance in an
unsheltered line of coast, where fogs are both sudden and dense, and the
sudden manner in which the roUers set in on the bar at the mouth. A merchantman, however, is not so likely to miss his port when its being correctly made
depends principaUy on knowing his latitude."
The foUowing extract from the remarks of H. M. S. Spy. Lieutenant-Commander S. 0. Woolridge, as to Mazatlan and Muleje bays, gulf of Cabfornia,
may prove interesting, though there are in it many points stated, irrelevant to tbe
present purpose:—
" Our passage from CaUao to Mazatlan, of a few hours less than 26 days,
is considered exceedingly good; indeed, one of the best ever made. As we
drew in-shore, I found tbe current affected by tbe wind. With northerly
winds, the current set to southward, and vice versa. We remained at Mazatlan
10 days, during which time the weather was, upon the whole, fine. At night
we had occasionaUy strong squaUs, with rain.
July 17th, 1847, weighed for Guaymas. All the charts of the gulf are
miserably incorrect, and not to be trusted; but, I see no difficulty in navigating it by the lead. The water appeared to shoal very gradually from
17 to 6 fathoms, when I always tacked. I used to stand into 10 fathoms at
night, and 6 by day. As far as I can judge, Captain Hamilton's (Frolic)
positions of the coast are very fairly correct; and there is no doubt we are
indebted to him for a capital assistance in navigating the gulfs, in the absence
of all Government charts. The shoal laid down in black in his chart, off
Ignacio point, I passed over ; but, I placed the island further to the eastward
(in lat. 25° 22' N., long. 109° 18' 36" W.) than Captain Hamilton's red
Ignacio isle.
I arrived at Guaymas on the 21st, in four days from Mazatlan. During
this passage, we experienced strong currents i*unning to the N.W., from 1 to
1^ miles an hour. They were much influenced by the wind, whicb, from the
19th to the 21st, was south-easterly and southerly. Current also runs with
more force on the eastern shore, which side we kept.
Cape Haro can be easily distinguished by the Tetas, or Paps, which
resemble the teats of a goat; they are to the northward. The island of San
Pedro Nolasco is just visible from the deck, to the N.W. The ■ land of the
Yagui shore is high and peaked; keeping this broad on your starboard bow,
steer to the northward of a deep bay where the land breaks off, and you will
soon perceive the island of Pajaros, which is at the entrance, or facing Guaymas. The water is deep aU along tie island of Pajaros, that is to say
4 fathoms, so close as to throw a biscuit on shore.
A large ship wfll have to anchor soon after passing Pajaros ; that is, abreast
the Morro, in 5 fathoms.    A small ship can anchor inside the isles of ArdfllaAPPENDIX.
849
and Almagre, and in 4 and S£ fathoms, just inside tiem ; and in 8 fatioms,
as far in as tie point off the town. You may go close to either of the isles
Ardflla or Almagre, in 8 and o£ fatioms.
Fresh beef and vegetables are to be obtained here, but tbe price depends
greatly on tie season of tie year. In August, when tie Spy was tiere, it
was a bad time of the year, being the hottest season ; the thermometer
averaging 98° (Farh.), in the shade when the country is very dry, and there
is no herbage for cattle, which makes it difficult to obtain, and higher in
price. The Spy paid eight doUars a quintal for it, and the same for vegetables ; but in October I am told it is much lower. There is also very good
flour to be obtained here, between July and March, that is, all the end and
beginning of tie year; and witi Utile difficulty (chiefly depending on time)
very good biscuit can be made. In August this article is also scarce, and
dear in comparison, because the new batch of flour is just coming in, and the
difficulty of transportation from the interior is very great, owing to no herbage
for the mules. I contracted for 640 quintals of biscuit for H.M. ships-
Constance and Spy, at ten dollars the quintal, to be debvered at the contractor's house, and bags found by purchaser. Flour at this time was sixteen
dollars the carga, or 300 lbs. But I am told in September and October it
will faU to nine dollars the carga, when biscuits will be proportionably
cheaper. Water is very difficult to be got; it is to be obtained by sending
about 4 mfles for it, or it can be purchased ; but owing to its having to be
brought in on mules or in carts, the price is very high. I wanted 12 tons,
which I found could not be obtained for less than $30 ; which would be
nearly ten shillings a ton ; I therefore weighed, August 10th, and proceeded
to Muleje bay.
" Conception point is difficult to make out, when you have about a dozen
of the same kind within a few miles of each other. However, the best marks
I can give are some table-land which is very remarkable, and is rather to the
right of Muleje village. Keep this about two points on your starboard bow,
and you may stand in, until you discover some sandy islets which are off a
point caUed Punta San Ynes. When you are east and west with them, you will
be distant from them about 3 miles. After passing these islets, steer
S. and S.S.W., until you make out the Pyramid rock, spoken of by Captain
Hamilton. This rock is named Sombrerito, or Little Hat. I think it bad to
caU it Pyramid rock, as there is a point which, in standing in, may be easily
mistaken for it, resembling also a pyramid ; but the rock is a pyramid fixed
on a round pedestal like a fort. Another good way of making out this place
is, when the wind is fair, to keep Tortuga island about 20 miles (?) distant,
bearing about N.W., and steer in S.E., till you make out the sandy islets,
and proceed as above. There is a passage between the islets and the main
land for smaU vessels, but, though very inviting, should not be attempted.
I tried it, but getting into 2£ fathoms, I put about as quick as possible.
My anchorage marks in Muleje bay were as follow, in 5 fathoms:—Point
Conception, N. 84° E. ; Tortuga isle. N. 4° W.; Lobos isle, N. 2° E. ;
Sombrerito, S. 67° W. (Pyramid rock of Captain Hamilton); Equipabto,
S. 22° W. (Rock on south side of entrance to the river); and Punta San Ynes,
N. 10° W.
This is very close in, but I wished to facilitate the watering ; about £ a
mile further to the northward, in 8 fathoms, is a very good berth. In going
into tie bay after making out tie Sombrerito, if you wish to go close in, take
1
■
IfI*?f
350
APPENDIX.
care not to bring the Sombrerito at aU on your starboard bow; that isr do not
open the mouth of the river, as, by sounding, I discovered a rock with only
one fathom on it; it is on a sand-bank witi 8 fathoms aU round it, about
three-quarters of a mile from the shore; but the rock itself has only one
fathom. It Ues with the entrance of the river open, directly between the
Sombrerito and tbe Equipabto rocks, distant from half to one mile off shore.
I am surprised Captain Hamilton has not mentioned it, for I must have gone
very close to it, in rounding my vessel to.
The report of the facility of watering is very delusive and uncertain.
In the first place I cannot think it possible to water out of the river, as it
is salt for at least 2 or 2£ miles, and a great portion of the time, boats could
not possibly get up so far. I was there, fortunately, when the moon was
nearly fuU, and the water was only low between eleven at night and four in the
morning, so that I was enabled to water about 18 hours out of 24, and though
I had but one smaU boat (23-feet cutter), I managed to get 12 tons in two
days. She had to go l£ miles up tie river, to the house of Joseph Padras,
and the casks were rolled about 100 yards to a smaU stream in his garden ;
with a force pump it might be obtained without running the casks. The
water is debcious to drink at the stream, but it is so very low, and our water,
after being a day or two on board, became so black, and smelt so strong of
decayed vegetable matter, that, though it improved by keeping, it served
chiefly for cooking and washing.
In going up the river, in boats, keep close to the Sombrerito, and keep the
starboard shore on board, tfll you are one or one and a quarter mfles up the river,
when you wfll encounter a sand-bank in the centre of the river, and must keep
over on the port shore to clear it. Abreast this sand-bank is tbe Rancho of
Joseph Padras. At the time I visited this place, in August, owing to tie dryness of the season, and the want of fodder, there was no beef or vegetables to
be procured. The bay is open to the north-east winds, and there is no
shelter from the sea, which rolls in heavily; but with aU other winds I think
any man-of-war could get out, if she did not leave it too late, tfll the sea was
too heavy, as there is plenty of room for beating.
The passage from Guaymas to Muleje bay can be easily done in 20 hours.
I left Muleje again on the 14th, and arrived at Guaymas on the 16th, being
86 hours. On the 26th of August I sailed from Guaymas for Mazatlan,
where I arrived on the 3rd of September, in eight days. This, at this season
of the year is considered very fair, as south-easterly winds and calms prevail.
I kept over, by advice, on tbe western shore, and passed inside of Catalina
island ; but I think tbe more you can keep in mid-channel the better. We
experienced Utile or no currents, but the wind was very light, and the weather
fine all the way.
On the 80th and 31st of August we had an easterly current, about 14m. per
diem. We anchored off Mazatlan, about 4 mfles off Crestin, on the foUowing
bearings, 23 fatioms water:—Crestin island, N.N.E. £ E.; Rock, N.E. £ E.;
Venado, N.N.W.; and Town, N. by E. £ E. This is a very good berth for
a large ship like the Constance, but on the 8th I went about l£ miles further in,
with the foUowing bearings, in 22 fathoms water:—Crestin, N.N.E. £ E. ;
Town, N. by E. £ E.; and Rock, N.E. £ E. This is a very good berth for a
small vessel, and quite far enough off for safety, and more convenient when
you have occasionally to communicate with the shore, with only one boat fit
for the purpose.    Here I lay tfll  the 23rd of September :  during the wholeAPPENDIX.
861
time we experienced Ught winds and generaUy fine weather. The nights were
always and invariably attended with heavy thunder, and very vivid bghtning,
and generaUy heavy rain witi an occasional squall.
On tbe morning of the 19th we experienced a very heavy squall, which
lasted for about two or three hours, and the water regularly boiling, which, for
the time, made me imagine that it was the commencement of a very heavy
cordonazo ; but in four hours it had passed off, and was quite fine. As far as
I could judge, tie weather was not worse than you would meet witi anywhere
at certain seasons, but the rolling your boats into the water every now and
then is the natural consequence of being anchored 8 or 4 miles off the land,
in the open sea where the current at times keeps the ship swung across the
wind.
On the 23rd, the barometer being very low all day, the moon being near
the fuU, and the sun near tie Equinox, it was deemed advisable to weigh, but
we experienced nothing more than very terrific bghtning and thunder, with
heavy rain.
On the 26th, I weighed for Guaymas again. During this passage, of seven
days, we had very light winds, and chiefly from the north-west.
On tie 2nd October, we experienced a very heavy long rolling swell, from
the south-east, which lasted two days. It was subsequently accounted for
by being informed that on that day, at Mazatlan and San Bias, it blew a very
heavy gale of wind ; but in the gulf we had no wind but only tbe sweU.
We arrived on the 4th of October, and sailed on the 6th for Mazatlan,
where we arrived on the 13th, in seven days. During most of this passage,
the winds were very bght and variable, and I kept about tbe mid-channel.
The last three days, though the wind was from south-east and south-west, the
current ran to the southward, from half a mile an hour. I anchored outside
Crestin, about 2 miles at first, but requiring about 28 miles tons of water,
and seeing two merchant-ships inside, I weighed on the 16th, and ran in also.
Anchorage marks :—Town, N. by W. f W.; Crestin, N.W. by W. £ W.;
Outer rock, S. £ E. At this season it is better not to anchor nearer Crestin,
as in case of blowing you have room to drag.
PASSAGES TO AND FROM VARIOUS PORTS IN
m
THE  PACIFIC.
The following remarks on passages to and from various ports on the coast
of western America, and in the Pacific, are by Captain Beechey, R.N.:—
"KOTZEBUE SOUND TO CALIFORNIA.—These passages were made
from October 14th to 7th November, 1826, and October 6th to 29th, 1827,
when north-westerly winds prevail, and consequently at a favourable time for
getting to the southward. In both years they occupied exactly 23 days; and
it is further remarkable, that in each, the Aleutian islands were passed on the
ninth day after our departure. The route persued by the Blossom was to the
westward of King island, and between St. Lawrence island and the mainland
of America, and thence, within sight of St. Paul's and St. George's islands, to
the strait of Ounimak.852
APPENDIX.
li
To the eastward of King island the soundings are very irregular, varying
from 9 to 6 fathoms; and as at the season above mentioned the weather appears to be generally bad, it is advisable to go to tbe westward of the island,
where the water is deep. Between St. Lawrence island and the continent of
America there is a bank with 11 fathoms water upon it. If, on approaching
it in foggy weather, it be doubtful, from tbe shoaling of the water, whether it
be not the island that is the occasion of the decrease of soundings, haul over
to the American shore, and the water wfll deepen. To the southward of
St. Lawrence it is necessary only to mention the islands of St. Paul and St.
George, which apparently may be safely approached within 4 or 5 mfles; but
I could not get near them in either year to ascertain what dangers be close
off the shore.
I should recommend the passage being always made to the eastward of these
islands, as between them and Ounimak there is a strong current from Bristol
bay, which in 1827 drifted the Blossom 35 mfles to the S.W. in the course of
the day. The strait of Ounimak, lying between the islands of Ounimak and
Ougamok, appears at present to be the safest opening to the Pacific from
Kamschatka sea. The Aleutian islands in tie autumn appear to be enveloped
in fog about half-way down, and to have a region of mist lying to windward of
the archipelago, which makes it necessrry for a ship to be certain of her
position, before she attempts any of the channels as she might be led down
so close upon the land in the fog, that she would not have room to rectify a
mistake, should she unhappily incur any, which is very likely to happen, from
the irregularity and velocity of the currents about the islands. Under these
circumstances I should recommend making the north-west end of Ounimak,
and afterwards keeping along the coast of that island to the southward. As
this island lies 40 miles to the northward of the other islands of the chain,
Oumnak excepted, which is three degrees to the westward, it cannot be mistaken, unless the reckoning of the ship is very incorrect indeed. And by so
doing, in the event of not liking to attempt the passage, a vessel wfll still be
far enough to windward, supposing the breeze to be from tbe northward, to
weather the other islands of the chain ; and if from tie westward, she may
reach into Bristol bay.
We had no opportunity of seeing the summits of either Ounimak or Ouna-
lashka, which, when clear, are good guides for the strait; but when the low land
of the former can be seen, the south-west point of Ounimak may be known by a
pointed rock situated near the base of a remarkable wedge-shaped cliff, conspicuous from the northward and north-westward. The narrowest part of tie
strait is between this rock and Ougamok island, and the. distance exactly
9£ mfles, in a S. 1° 30' E. (true) direction. In a Une between these, at the
distance of 4 miles from tbe rock, there are soundings in 30 fathoms, and
I understand that if necessary there is anchorage close under Ounimak.
Ougamok island is about 4 miles in length, and may be known by a remarkable peak near its N.E. extremity, in lat. 54° 16' 52" N. and long
164° 47' 6" W.
From tbe Aleutian islands to San Francisco we steered nearly a direct
course, with winds generally from N.W. and W., and made Point Reyes
on the 3rd November. In this passage the currents were variable. From
Behring strait to the Aleutian islands they prevailed to the westward, and
near the islands ran strong, but afterwards they continued between S.E. and
S.W. On our arrival off California, the whole amount, in 1826, was S. 89° W
64 miles; and in 1827, S. 26° W., 40 miles.APPENDIX.
353
graduaUy became
N. we had some
136° W., we had
MONTEREY TO OAHU, SANDWICH ISLANDS.—This passage
(January 6th to 25th, 1827,) was begun at a period when the north-west and
westerly winds are proverbially prevalent upon tie coast of Oregon, and
extend a considerable distance to the westward.
We sailed from the bay of Monterey on tie 5th of January, and immediately took a northerly wind, which carried us into the trades ; and we arrived
off Maui on the twentieth day. Our passage might have been considerably
shorter, had we not taken a circuitous route in search of some islands reported
to Ue to the southward, and had sail been carried throughout the 24 hours,
instead of hauting to the wind as soon as it was dusk, to maintain our position
during the night, that nothing might be passed unseen within the limit of our
horizon.
As we left the extra-tropical latitudes, the atmosphere
more hazy and humid, the clouds increased, and in 18°
showers of rain. On the 18th, in lat. 16° 18' N. and long.
a very strong trade at N.E., with squally weather, and a long cross sea from
the westward, which was afterwards found to be the effect of a gale of wind in
tie.paraUel of 21° N.; but which did not reach us.
There was very Utile current in this passage ; this bttle generaUy ran to
tie soutiward and westward, and averaged 3*6 mfles a day. The barometer,
though so far entered in the tropical latitudes, was perceptibly affected by tbe
changes of weather, but maintained its horary oscillations.
On my arrival I found that from the 15th to tie 21st tiere had been very
strong gales from the westward at Oahu, and from S.W. at Hawaii. This
was, no doubt, the cause of the high cross sea we experienced from the 18th
to the 23rd. I found also that the Harbinger, an American brig which quitted
Monterey nine days after the Blossom, was obliged to lie-to for three days,
from the 20th to 23rd January, in a strong gale from the S.W. She had
steered a direct course from the Sandwich islands, in which she experienced
very variable winds, and, on the whole, had bad weatier, and was only one
day less performing the passage than ourselves ; whence I tiink it fair to conclude tiat nothing is lost by running well into the trade. During the winter
season, I should recommend ships gaining the 17th parallel before they shaped
a direct course for the islands. This seems to me to be the best mode to
ensure a good passage and fine weather.
SAN FRANCISCO TO SAN BLAS (MEXICO).—We found no difficulty
(December 6th to 21st) in getting to tbe southward, the prevailing wind at
this season being from the N.W. It is advisable, however, to stand about
40 or 50 leagues off the coast, to avoid interruptions from variable winds,
which occur near the land. These winds are in general taken advantage of
by vessels bound in the opposite direction to that of our present course.
The weather tirougiout this passage was remarkably fine. The wind was
from W.N.W. to N.N.E., until we made Cape San Lucas, when it veered to
E.N.E., and obbged us to pass between tbe Marias islands. This route
occasioned the loss of a day, and I should advise any vessel making the
passage to close the land to the northward of Cape San Lucas, provided the
wind is in tie north-east quarter; as in addition to the inconvenience which
a shift of wind to the E. would occasion, there is another arising from a strong
eurrent, which generally sets out of the Gulf of California. From the Cape
steer for Isabel island, and thence for Piedra de Mer.
A   A854
APPENDIX.
Between 33° N. and cape San Lucas we found a current to the westward,
and from tie cape to tie Marias islands to the southward. The whole effect of
current from San Francisco to these islands was S. 58° W., 80 miles.
SAN BLAS TO ACAPULCO AND VALPARAISO.—At this season
(March 8th to May 1st, 1828) north-westerly winds prevail upon the coast
between San Bias and Acapulco, mclining towards tie land in tbe day, and to
the sea at night. We passed 4 miles to westward of Corvetena (a small rock
situated N.W. by N., 19 miles, from Cape Corrientes,) without having soundings in 80 fathoms. On the 10th were within sight of the volcano of Colima,
12,003 feet above the sea, and on the 13th anchored at Acapulco.
At San Bias we beard various opinions upon the best route from Acapulco
to Valparaiso, some being in favour of a passage to the eastward of the Galapagos, by keeping along the land, and carrying the N.W. wind, and others to
the westward, by steering at once out to sea. We adopted the latter mode of
proceeding; and after light and variable winds, principaUy from the eastward,
crossed the equator in 99° 40' W. on the eleventh day of our passage, about
two degrees more to tie westward than was intended.
After two days' unsettled weather and hard showers of rain we got the S.E.
trade in 3° S. latitude. It was at first held to the southward, but, as we proceeded, veered graduaUy to the eastward, and obbged us to make a long sweep,
in which we went as far to the westward as 108°, and having brought us into
23° S. and 106° W. it left us. We had afterwards variable winds and squaUy
weather, and found some difficulty in approaching our destination. At this
season very unsettled weather prevails on the coast of Chile, and storms and
heavy-rains from the northward are by no means unfrequent. It appears to
me to be advisable at this period to steer direct for the port, if possible, and
to disregard the chances of winds and of currents near the land. The currents
in the first part of this passage ran about 7 miles a day to the eastward, but
from 8° N. and 98° W. to 19° S. and 108° W. they flowed in a S. 88° W.
direction, at the average rate of about 28 miles per day, and on our arrival at
Valparaiso they had drifted the ship S. 81° W., 401 miles, or at the average
rate of ll£ mfles a day.
On account of these strong currents it is desirable to cross the equator weU
to the eastward, in about longitude 96° or 97° W., and to pass the latitudes
in which they prevail as quickly as possible, by keeping clean fuU."
SAN FRANCISCO TO PERU.—The foUowing remarks are by Maury
and are extracted from an article on the subject in the Mercantile Marine
Magazine, 1854:—
" The best route from California to tbe guano islands of Peru, is the track
from California to tie United States, until the belt of the S.E. trade winds be
crossed; or until they wfll aUow the guano bound vessel to lay up for her
port. Though the guano islands are in 12° S., vessels bound to tiem from
California wiU frequently iave to go as far souti as 35° to 40°, or even further,
before they can lay up for them.
When a vessel, therefore, bound for Peru, comes out of San Francisco, her
best course is to run down for the equator, about its intersection with the
meridian of 115° to 120° (125° is not too far) and with topmast studding-sail
set, to stand on to the southward until the wind hauls so as to aUow her to
lay up for her port; or, when the wind fails so to haul, she should keep onAPPENDIX.
855
south across the calm-belt of Capricorn, and with the west wind on the polar
side of these calms, run down easting enough, so that when she returns to the
S.E. trades, they wfll lead her into port.
The usual passage from California to these islands now occupies from
65 to 70 days; by the route here recommended, it should not be so long.
The way is plain; dash down form California, not caring to make easting
until the winds are fair for CaUao. Every homeward bound vessel from
California crosses the track of the guano traders from Austraba.
The Comet, to where she crossed it (lat. 49° S., long. 107° W.), bad
28 days; and from this crossing (which is out of the route from San Francisco
to CaUao) the guano traders from Austraba have usually from 20 to 25 days
to CaUao.
The passage from San Franciseo to the guano islands of Peru ought not,
on the average, to occupy more than 55 days."
ENGLAND TO VANCOUVER ISLAND.—Tbe following remarks are
by Captain J. F. Trivett, late of the Hudson Bay Co's. service, and now
Examiner in Navigation to the Local Marine Board at the port of London :—
" The colonies of British Columbia and Vancouver island, although so
Utile known or appreciated at present, are destined at no distant period to
become very important possessions of Great Britian; the former containing
all the elements necessary for the formation of a Western Canada, with considerable mineral wealth—as gold, silver, &c.; and the latter, in addition to
its inexhaustible mines of fine coal, not only possesses valuable fisheries, but
its fine harbours are available at aU times for ships of the largest size, and
in the interior, hemp is found growing wild, which having been tested in
England has been pronounced equal to that of Russia.
One great drawback in connection with these colonies has been the length
of a voyage from England. May not this be amended—I shaU endeavour
to shew tiat it can.
Tie passages from England to Vancouver island have hitherto been verv
long, I admit; but yet, if we take the average of those passages it will be
found not to exceed that of the passages from England to Calcutta and to
Austraba, when tbe navigation to those places was as Utile known as the
proper route to Vancouver island appears to be at present. I am convinced
that a stout ship, of good safling vquaUties, could, on the average, make her
passage from England to Vancouver island under 120 days.
Having made many voyages to that part of the world, my present object
is to give my experience as to the best route to be adopted in making a
passage from England to Vancouver island.
Of that part from the Channel to the Equator—the old beaten track—
nothing need be told; however for tbe information of those who may not have
seen Commander Maury's valuable I Sailing directions," I would say—do not
bother yourself about where you are to cross the equator providing you do
not go to the westward of 31°; but, of course, no man would choose such a
leewardly position if he could avoid it. I have twice 'crossed in 31°, and
found no difficulty in weathering cape San Roque; and I have frequently
passed to leeward of Fernando Noronha.—Should you be driven to the westward after crossing the Une, take every advantage of the shifts of wind, and
stand to the eastward333 asi onally, so as to keep cape San Roque on a certain
a a 2
I856
APPENDIX.
bearing, and do not faU to leeward of it. Maury cites instances of American
ships crossing the Une in 35° west, and even then weathering cape San Roque
without much difficulty. I consider ships from England should cross the
Une between 27° and 31° W. I have not crossed east of 27° W. for some
years.
After passing cape San Agostinho, I would keep about 150 to 180 miles
from the outline of the Brazil coast, endeavouring to cross the southern tropic
in about 39° W.; then steer in a direct course to pass 40° S., in about 56° W.
H, in the neighbourhood of the river Plate, about the fuU or change of the
moon, strong S.E. breezes may be expected : I have generaUy carried double
reefs, and made good runs with them; off the river Plate the water is generaUy
discoloured a considerable distance seaward; I have obtained soundings in
40° 24' S., 56° 31' W.—70 fathoms fine sand; from the above position
I would endeavour to make the land about Valdes peninsula, or cape Dos
Bahias,—if I could do so without loss of time ; I consider those places better
than cape Tres Puntas or cape Blanco, as dangers exist in the vicinity of the
last named position and extend some distance from the land. After passing
cape Blanco, I steer a true South course for cape San Diego or to windward
of it, variation allowed 19° E. increasing to 2l£° E. off cape San Diego.
I consider this to be an important part of the passage ; and a great improvement on the old route—outside or east of the Falklands; along the
inner route you frequently meet with heavy breezes from off the land, which
of course, wfll induce you to keep in with the land to obtain the benefit of the
smooth water, and at such times (under close reefs and reefed courses), I.
have made good days to the southward; when by the old route, outside the
Falklands, I should have been laying-to, drifting to the N.E.
No danger exists between the Falklands and tbe main, but a bank of
soundings is laid down on the charts, by which, in thick weather, it is useful
to test your reckoning. American ships frequently make cape Penas,
Tierra del Fuego, which I think not unadvisable, although I have never done
so myself.'
If the wind, weather, and daybght serve, always go through the strait of
Le Maire. In October 1856, I entered the strait about noon, with a fresh
N.W. breeze, kept about 5 mfles distant from the Fuegian shore, and at
2.30 p.m. was clear of the strait. With a N.W. wind keep well out from
the high land of cape Good Success, as you are likely to get becalmed under
its lee,—at least, such was my case, as also that of a ship in company—both
had to run out S.E. to get the true breeze. I have twice attempted the strait
since that voyage, but on each occasion was driven back by strong southerly
winds. During my last voyage I lay-to very comfortably under the lee of
Staten island during a heavy gale from S.W. -which lasted 30 hours,
Bar. 28*77.
There is no danger to apprehend in approaching the east coast of Patagonia,
from strong easterly winds, as Captain Symley and American Captains engaged
in tbe sealing trade can testify. Captain Symley has passed 22 years of his Ufe
between south Shetland and the river Plate, and for 6 years was never to the
northward of 40° S.; during aU that time he never knew the wind to blow
heavy, directly on the shore, for 12 hours continuously.
The prevailing winds on the East coast of Patagonia are West and N.W.
In steering from the east end of Staten island towards cape Horn, a strong
indraught from the southward towards the strait, of Le Maire (to N.N.E.)
should be guarded against.APPENDIX.
857
make good use of a S.W.
When up with cape Horn, little is required to be said, beyond what.is
evident to the sense of every navigator—make westing—whatever you do—
make westing—but to make it, there lies the rub; to do so, or to endeavour to
do so, very often tries both ship and crew severely, yet sometimes I have been
lucky enough to get round this abominable cape with bttle or no trouble. I
see no necessity to go.so far south as some recommend; I would at all
times lay my ship upon that tack which makes the most westing—endeavouring
at the same time to maintain a sufficient offing to
wind.
Much difference of opinion exists as to the utflity of the barometer in this
part of the world, some Captains go so far as to say a ship is better without
one ; for my own part I have never seen the mercury fall greatly without a
change foUowing it—with wind, rain, or snow ; yet after the change I have
known tbe mercury to remain low, ranging about 28*50 for several days witi
very fine weather, and at such times have generaUy had more wind after the
mercury had commenced rising.
In no part of the world that I am acquainted with (and I have been pretty weU
all over it) is such constant attention to tie appearance or signs of tbe weather
requisite as in the neighbourhood of cape Horn. I have frequently been compelled to take in sail as quick as possible—from all sail to a close reefed main
topsail—and glad to get that in also.
After having rounded the Horn, and attained the longitude of 80° W., it is
advisible to steer about W.N.W., if the wind wfll aUow you, for the purpose
of making your westing where tie degrees are siort; you can afterwards steer
more nortierly in the S.E. trades, and bring those winds more on tbe beam ;
but it is seldom that such a westerly course can be steered in this locabty,
for the prevalent winds are from the N.W. quarter, and you are frequently
compeUed to make easting with your northing. It is no uncommon occurrence
to make the island of Juan Fernandez,—indeed, ships may be driven to the
eastward of it by the continuance of westerly winds. I once carried the
westerly winds as far north as San Felix island.
Having obtained the S.E. trades, which you wfll usuaUy do about the
southern tropic, steer to cross the equator in longitude 118° W.
Here again, the New Route, if I may be aUowed the term, differs from what
I shall eaU the Old Route. Ships formerly used to cross the equator in about
104° W., and frequently used to make the CUpperton rock. By thus crossing
the equator too far to the eastward, you are more likely to meet with calms,
rains, squaUs, and the usual equinoctial doldrums ; and are less likely to
meet the N.E. trades until well north—in the summer time, probably not
have them at all, and a very long passage may be the result. From the
researches of Commander Maury we have the passages of 445 vessels from
cape Horn to California, with the longitude of their crossing the equator, and
the result is that the best passages are made by those ships which cross the
equator in longitude 115° to 120° W.; the principal cause of this being that
they meet with less calms, and get the N.E. trades sooner than those ships
do which cross further to the east.
Having got the N.E. trades, which you do generally in about the parallel
of 7° N., it will be better to make a fair wind of tiem ; at least, endeavour to
cross the northern tropic in longitude 134° W.—not to the eastward of that;
as a general rule, the further you are from the coast of North America, the
more likely you are to have a fresh N.E. trade.
I858
APPENDIX.
1 If
In January 1859, I crossed the northern tropic in the Hudson Bay
Company's steam vessel (under sail alone) in long. 127° W., the winds gradually
failing, until at length it feU quite calm, when we got up steam: about the
same time the Honourable Company's ship Princess Royal, 7° further to tie
westward, had a fresh N.E. wind, which she carried as far as 40° N., shewing
the advantage to be gained by keeping well to the westward.
After losing the N.E. trades, and having got through the belt of calms which
sometimes exists outside their northern border, N.W. winds are generaUy met
with; my plan is to get cape Classet on a N.E. bearing as soon as possible,
and then steer for it, because N.W. and S.E. winds being very common about
the entrance of the strait of Juan de Fuca, both those winds will be fair.
Approaching the entrance of the strait in tie night, or in thick weather, a
ship should be certain of her latitude; and it is safer to be in error to the
northward than to the southward. The coast of America souti of cape Classet
is dangerous to approach in thick weather, as rocks be some distance off the
shore. I have remarked, by the colour of the water, that a bank of soundings
appears to exist off the entrance to Barclay sound, Vancouver island; but
the water darkens again in colour as you proceed eastward; the south coast of
Vancouver island should be avoided when there are light winds; as, should it
faU calm, you will be at the mercy of the heavy swell almost always setting
on the shore; and rendering it at times difficult to get off the coast. I once
narrowly escaped destruction about BoniUa point by drifting close to the shore
during Ught baffling winds from the southward. I wfll add, you soon lose
sight of the light on Tatoosh island (as you proceed up the strait) by the projecting land about Nee-ah bay. The prominent and projecting land about
CaUam bay and point Pillar is in each case a very good mark to distinguish
vour whereabouts during almost any night, if you keep your course along the
southern shore, which is generaUy thought to be the safest. The Ught on
the Race rocks is an excellent one, and renders tbe navigation of that part
comparatively easy. A navigator visiting these regions should provide himself
with the small charts of the several anchorages about tie strait, such as Nee-ah
bay, port San Juan, Sooke inlet, Becher and Pedder bays, &c, as well as the
charts of the various anchorages in the neighbourhood of cape Horn.
Ships from sea bound up the strait of San Juan de Fuca should steer for
the light on Tatoosh island at the entrance of the strait, and in doing so the
latitude at least should be correctly known; but as in the winter time, in this
climate, the sun may be clouded for many days consecutively, it will be necessary
to embrace every opportunity of ascertaining tie latitude by sidereal observations, and by double altitudes of tie sun when visible; it is safer to be in error
to the northward, than to the southward—the coast of Vancouver island being
comparatively bold to approach, and the high land in the neighbourhood of
Barclay sound, a bttle westward of the entrance of the strait, is visible at a
great distance, even in the night, if it be clear.
With the wind from the southward or S.W., you may expect to feel tie
influence of a set to the northward, as you approaci the coast.
With light S.E. or easterly winds, do not approach tie Vancouver island
siore, when outside the strait: those winds are very likely to leave you becalmed near the land, and at the mercy of tie heavy swell which is almost
always found setting on to tbe shore—which I once painfully experienced.
Having made out the entrance, pass tie Ugitiouse on Tatoosh island at a
safe distance, say 3 miles, and proceed up the 'strait, keeping the southernAPPENDIX.
859
Bhore on board, and in doing so, the Ught wfll soon be lost sight of, by the
projecting land about Nee-ah bay. The bay is easily distinguished, and although
it wfll afford good anchorage in case of necessity, it had better be avoided by
sailing ships of large size, as vessels have been driven on the surrounding reefs
by the tide, when getting under way, and before any command of them could
be obtained.    The Americans generaUy avoid it.
When abreast of Nee-ah bay, the deep indentation on the coast of Vancouver
island which forms port San Juan will be plainly visible, even in a dark night.
As you proceed up the strait, keeping about 3 miles distant from the Une
of the southern shore, the projecting land forming the east point of CaUam
bay is a good landmark in the night. CaUam bay is said to afford shelter
during strong easterly winds.
From above Sbp point, the point alluded to in the preceding paragraph,
the coast is bold and may be approached with safety as far as point Pfllar,
which is another remarkable landmark, and serves the mariner to distinguish
his position even in a dark night; when seen from tbe eastward during the
night, it appears like a Utile round island, or headland, jutting out into the
strait.
When abreast of point Pfllar, from a ship's topsail-yard, or from the height
of 60 feet, in a clear night, tie bght on the Race rocks will be visible distant
about 23 miles; and from an ordinary ship's deck, or 16 feet, it wfll be visible
at about 18 mfles, a brilUant flashing bght.
Having once sighted tbe Race rock light, do not lose it by standing over to
tbe north shore, and shutting it in by Beechey head.
When abreast of Sooke inlet the tide-rips and eddies will begin to be felt.
These eddies sometimes take charge of a ship in Ught winds and turn her
round against helm and sails, for which reason ships should be careful to keep
out of the stream of tide of the Race rocks. With Ught winds, vessels have
been carried through the Race channel by tie force of the tidal current, and
others; not so fortunate—the Nannette, a recent case for example—was driven
on the rocks and sunk in about 4 fathoms. Ships, therefore, unless with a
commanding breeze, should keep weU out from the Race rocks.
With a commanding breeze from the westward, round the Ughthouse at the
distance of about l£ or 2 miles, and if bound to Victoria or Esquimalt, in the
day time steer direct for your port, or to windward of it according to wind and
tide. Pilots wfll come out from Victoria upon your making the requisite
signal. For Esquimalt or Royal bay, the chart and Captain Richards' directions
will be quite sufficient.
In the night time, with a commanding westerly breeze round tbe Race rocks,
as above, and gradually haul up to tbe N.W. or as far as the wind wiU allow
you, for Parry bay, or until you bring the Race light to bear S. by E.; you
wfll then be pretty well under shelter of the land, and may get your beavy sails
furled if it be blowing hard, or otherwise considered necessary.
Shortly after rounding the Race rocks, you will see tbe light on Fisgard
island at tie west side of the entrance to Esquimalt harbour. In hauling up
for Parry bay, do not shut in this light with Albert head. You may pass
Albert head at the distance of £ a mile or less, then bring Fisgard bght to
bear N. by W., steer for it, and anchor in 12 fathoms, an excellent berth and
good holding ground.
When passing Albert bead, yon wfll have no bottom with the hand lead, but
stand boldly on under easy sail, and you will soon find 17, 15, 18, and 12
fathoms.    Anchor as above directed.860
APPENDIX.
If bound to Victoria with an easterly wind, and should you be up with the
Race rocks during the night, it will be prudent for a stranger to continue
working to the eastward, giving tbe Race rocks a good berth, (and also guard-
ingiagainst Ediz hook, on the American shore, which is low and very dangerous
in a dark night) until tie bght on New Dungeness is visible from the deck;
then from the bearings of the two lights there can be no difficulty in maintaining a safe and weatierly position until daybght, when a course can be shaped
according to circumstances.
Pilots are always in attendance for Victoria harbour; they are attentive and
skilful; vessels drawing 17 feet can enter at the proper time of tide witi
safety. The harbour accommodation is very limited, and ships discharge
their cargoes generally by laying alongside the wharves, where they ground at
low water; the best and safest wharves are weU up the harbour, towards tie
bridge.
Vessels from Victoria, bound down the strait, meeting with a fresh westerly
wind, had better remain at anchor in Royal bay, until there is a prospect of a
fair wind—for Utile good can be done in tbe narrow part of the strait with a
foul wind.
Port Angelos, on tbe southern shore, is a good and safe anchorage; New
Dungeness should be avoided. But should vessels be well to leeward and
caught by a westerly gale, port Townshend wfll be found an excellent harbour.
For these last named anchorages, the chart with Captain Richards' directions
will be found amply sufficient to enable any stranger to take his ship to a
place of safety.
A fixed white Ught is now placed on Admiralty head, which must be of great
service to vessels running for port Townshend in the night.
Vessels sometimes anchor on what is caUed " The Bank," between point
Wilson and point Hudson when shelter only is required; a good berti must
be given to point Wilson to avoid the reef which Ues off it—also to point
Hudson for a similar reason."
COAST  OF MEXICO  AND   GULF  OF CALIFORNIA.
The following notes on tie west coast of Mexico and gulf of California are
rom the work of M. Duflot de Mofras, pubUshed in 1844.*    They furnish
some information not embodied in tie part of our work wiich refers to that
coast.
"The coast westward of Acapulco has a westerly direction, is low and
consists of what is known as tie beaches of Coyuca. At point Jequepa the
shore trends rather more northerly, and after continuing thus 20 leagues, there
is a projecting point the Morro de Petatlan, a high mountain easily recognised
by the islets surrounding it. Between this point and numerous white islets
is the little port of Sihuatanejo. All this coast is bordered with villages and
salt pits, and there are no rivers of importance.    All this coast is safe to
* Exploration du territoire de I'OrSgon, des Californies et de la Mer Vermeille,
executee pendant les annees 1840, 1841 et 1842. Par M. Duflot de Mofras,- attache a la
Legation de France a Mexico.APPENDIX.
861
4
approaci, but there is no anchorage. The river Sacatula which issues from
the volcano of JoruUo; also those of Canute and Coalcaman, are not navigable.
The bays of Tejupan and Santiago, southward and eastward of the promontory
of Tejupan, can be considered only open roadsteads.
From point Tejupan the general direction of the coast is almost due North
for about half a degree; it then inclines a Utile to tie westward as it
approaches the harbour of Manzanflla, and includes within this space tie
rivers Coaguanaja, Apisa and Armeria.* The southern point of ManzaniUa
harbour is named San Francisco or Ventanas ; the north point wfll be recognised by the two high bills of Jeluapan, and by the coast being covered with
palm trees.
Manzanilla or Salagua port is infinitely superior to the open roadsteads of
San Bias and Mazatlan. It contains four exceUent anchorages and vessels of
considerable draught of water can anchor in it at aU times. To find the bay,
when at a distance from the land, it is necessary to get into its latitude and
then steer in for the coast, having as a landmark the double peak of the
volcano of Colima. When near the port, the entrance of which is wide, it wfll
be seen that it is divided into two bays by PeUcan point which runs to the
southward ;—the eastern bay is named Manzanflla; the western, Browning,
and it is in this latter that the best watering place is to be found. When the
wind is from southward, it is preferable to anchor in the eastern bay, which
may be reached from the entrance by steering in a N.E. £ E. direction ; the
anchorage is in 6^- to 9 fathoms opposite San Pedrito rock. The western bay
may be reached by steering N.E. £ N., and passing the Frailes rocks, which
surround   the   second  point   of Juluapan, the  anchor  should be cast in
6 or 6 fathoms behind tie hill, at a short distance from the shore.j- To attain
the anchorage in this bay witi a leading wind, steer North a Utile easterly or
westerly to avoid PeUcan rock off PeUcan point, which point it has already
been observed is directly opposite the entrance. The tide occurs every
24 hours, the flood in the morning and the ebb in the evening ; it rises about
7 feet, and the current runs to the southward.
At Salagua water and wood are very abundant, and bullocks very cheap.
There may alsobe obtained vanilla, tortoise (with good sheU), fine pearls, sbeU-
fish which furnish purple colour, and many exceUent woods such as ebony,
mahogany, &c. &c.
The port of Manzanilla has been opened to foreign vessels, and received
many rich cargoes from Europe ; but in 1836 the jealousy of the merchants
of Tepic and San Bias caused it to be closed, as well as Mazatlan which
was opened more recently to external commerce.
The advantageous situation of Salagua is such that it possesses greater
faculties for supplying the provinces of CoUma, Mechoacan, and Jalisco ; and
above aUit is able to furnish more rapidly, and at less-cost, merchandise to
Guadalajara and the celebrated fair of San Juan del Rio.
ManzaniUa is at about 20 leagues from the city of CoUma, the capital of
the territory of that name. The road from the sea is sufficiently good for
carts," and the distance might be considerably diminished by means of a short
i
These rivers are not mentioned in the Admiralty chart No. 516.
+ The Sisters rocks appear to be in the way of this course^   See the plan of ManzaniUa
bay in the Admiralty chart No. 516.\m
362
APPENDIX.
cut, which would place the port in communication with the salt lagoon of
Cuyutlan, navigable by large flat boats. With the exception of frequent
earthquakes (and goitres, with which the inhabitants of Colima are affected)
there is nothing remarkable in the city; tbe population amounts to about
20,000, who are wholly occupied in agriculture and commerce.*
At 8 leagues from ManzaniUa bay in an E.N.E. direction is the volcano of
CoUma, the most western of the Mexican volcanoes. Its summit is 11,995 feet
high ; it is in activity and emits sulphureous vapours, cinders and stones,
but no lava has flowed from it for a long period. The diameter of its crater
is 492 feet, and its edge jagged. The sides of the mountain are barren and
chffy. The sulphur on it is of bad quality. At a league northward of the
volcano there is an extinct crater, the summit of which is covered with snow;
this is 695 feet higher, and consequently has an elevation of 12,690 feet.
The great height of these mountains renders them visible from a considerable
distance at sea, hence in clear weather they form an exceUent means of
recognising the land when approaching ManzaniUa.
The valley in which CoUma is situated is apparently formed of volcanic
products and decomposed lava. No minerals are found in it, but only very
beautiful specimens of porphyry. The vegetation of the plain consists of
palms, aloes, pomegranates and fine orange trees. Upon the higher lands are
forests of sombre pines, covering the part of the Sierra Madre which extends
almost to ValladoUd.
Between ManzaniUa bay and cape Corrientes are the three anchorages
Guatlan, Navidad and Tamatlan ; these are but Utile frequented.
GULF OF CALIFORNIA.—Tbe entrance of the gulf of CaUforniais
bounded geographicaUy by cape Corrientes (in tbe province of Jalisco) on the
east, and by cape San Lucas (at the south extremity of the California peninsula) on the west. It was designated by tbe first Spanish navigators under
the name of the Red or Vermflion sea (Mar Rogo, Mar Vermejo), on account
* Sir Edward Belcher, B.N., remarks on Manzanilla bay as follows, 1838. See
' Voyage of the Sulphur.'
" This port has a good anchorage, and is well protected against the southerly winds
prevalent during the rainy season ; but, on account of a very considerable lake of stagnant
water in its immediate neighbourhood, is very unhealthy during the summer. Infested
by myriads of mosquitos and sand flies, even in the dry season, it is nearly impossible to
reside there.
This port has been open to foreign countries for several years, but has not been able to
make much progress. The port itself has not a single house, and the first adjacent town
is Colima, formerly the capital of the territory bearing the same name, now embodied with
the department of Mechoacan.
Colima, it is true, is a large town, of considerable consumption, containing about
38,000 inhabitants; but the distance from the port (30 leagues, or 18 hours' travel), and
the difficulty of communication, the roads being passable in the dry season only, naturally
augment the expenses on any mercantile transaction to such a degree that it scarcely pays,
as any cargo which could be introduced would be merely to supply the district of Colima.
Such drawbacks, added to the detention, deter vessels from touching at Manzanilla.
Another cause which must draw the maritime trade from Colima and Manzanilla is the
preferable market at the capital of Guadalajara, for its produce of sugar, maize, coffee, cocoa,
indigo, &c.; and as these articles are not eligible for exportation, on account of the .high
cost prices, the foreign merchant could only deal in cash payments ; whilst Guadalajara,
which is generally over-stocked with goods, vi& Tampico on the East and San Bias on the
West, can supply Colima with the necessary merchandise by barter.
The articles saleable at Colima are linens, cotton goods, woollens, and a little hardware;
but, as already stated, in small quantities, calculated perhaps for the consumption of about
10,000 or 15,000 souls."
(Manzanilla and other ports on the W. coast of Mexico are now places of regular trade.)APPENDIX.
863
of the colour of its waters, and for its resemblance to the Red sea of Arabia.
The learned Jesuite missionaries traversed it entirely, calling it Seno or Mar
Lauretaneo, gulf or sea of Loreto, in honour of tbe Virgin, protector and
patroness of the apostobc enterprises of the society.*
The length of the gulf is about 800 leagues; its greatest breadth is 60
leagues at its entrance ; bat throughout its extent the distance from one side
to the otier does not exceed 25 to 40 leagues. Beyond the thirty-first
parallel, its breadti rapidly diminishes to the Rio Colorado, which falls into
it at its head, and divides California (U.S.) from Sonora. The configuration of
the Adriatic gives a very good idea of that of the gulf of California.
It has been often remarked, that a singular phenomenon occurs here, which
science does not explain, and of which we possess but few examples;—it is
that of rain falling when the atmosphere is quite clear, and the sky perfectly
serene. Humboldt and Capt. Beechey have related the fact; the first having
testified as to its occurring inland, the second in the open sea.
Tides are felt throughout the gulf of California; their height varies
witi tie direction and force of tie wind, and tie configuration of the coasts :
thus it is 7 feet at Mazatlan, the road of which is open; and at Guaymas, the
port of which is strewn with islets, and sheltered from the wind, it does not
exceed S£ feet.
Independently of a great number of fish, of a variety of species, there are
two species of immense shark (el tiburon, and la tintorera) found in the gulf,
which often seize the pearl fishers. Whales are also met with in considerable
numbers, but, up to tbe present time, no whaler has pursued them; and the
inhabitants are quite ignorant of this productive fishery. On the islands are
numerous seals and sea-calves, the furs of which are very thick; there are,
we beUeve, no beavers.    The pearl fishery is, or rather was, also foUowed.
The two coasts of the gulf of California run paraUel with each other toward
tie N.W.; they are very low and full of salt marshes, tenanted by alligators,
reptiles, and insects. The general aspect of the country is horrible; the
imagination cannot conceive anything more naked,—more desolate. There is
an entire want of water and vegetation; there are only mangroves, and some
thorny plants, such as the cactus, magueys (aloes), or acacias, to be seen.
Orange trees or palms are rarely met with, and one must proceed some leagues
into the country to find vegetable mould. The shore is formed by sand and
lands quite unfit for cultivation.
At tbe entrance of the gulf, on the eastern side, may be seen in the distance,
the summits of the Sierra Madre; these separate the provinces of Jalisco,
Sinaloa, and Sonora, and those of Nuevo Mexico, Chihuahua, and Durango.
The coast of Lower California presents, without interruption, a series of
rugged peaks of volcanic origin, and without any vegetation. This mountain
chain, which comes down from the North, and extends throughout the whole
peninsula, graduaUy decreases in elevation as it approaches cape San Lucas.
* There are apparently only two reasons why the gulf of California was called the
Vermilion Sea ; these are probably—1st the colour imparted to the water during the rainy
season by the rivers draining a ferruginous country, the river Colorado especially, and
 2ndly the beautiful purple colour which the waves take at sunset and sunrise.    In the
day time the waters are blue or green according as the clouds intercept or modify the solar
rays, conjointly with the nature and depth of the bottom of the sea. It is also possible
that the colour may be owing to banks at its surface, composed of myriads of Crustacea
somewhat similar to the prawns of the coasts of Europe.364
APPENDIX.
The eastern side of the gulf of California, between latitudes 23° and 82°,
consists of the coast of the departments of JSinaloa and Sonora, which are
divided by the river Fuerte. The population of these two provinces is about
300,000, of whom perhaps 60,000 are Indians. The climate is temperate,
and the lands in the interior are fertile, but the principal sources of wealth are
the mines of gold and silver; it is said that upwards of two hundred places
have been explored and worked, and that these precious metals are met with
every where. In these two departments are some considerable cities. The
most important are in the province of Sinaloa, Cidiacan, where reside the
governor, bishop, and the prefet of the province &c, population about 10,000,—
Rosario having a population of possibly 3500, and where the general commanding the forces of Sinaloa and Sonora resides;—in the province of Sonora,
Arizpe was the capital until the year 1839 when in consequence of the incursions of the Apache Indians the seat of government was transferred to the
ancient mission of San Jose de los Ures, 40 leagues to the southward,—
population 7000. In this province the port of Guaymas concentrates all
maritime commerce, but Hermosfllo is the centre of its trade andriches. Besides
these towns there are in these two provinces many large villages or pueblos.
Valle de Banderas Bay.—Beyond and eastward of cape Corrientes,
which should be made by all vessels from southward bound to San Bias, is-
the great bay of Ameca and tie VaUe de Banderas, 12 or 15 leagues in
extent. Here foreign vessels sometimes load brazil-wood, witi which the
coast abounds.
Marias Islands.—Opposite to and a bttle south of point Mita, which forms
the northern limit of Valle de Banderas bay, are, almost upon the same parallel
of latitude, the Marietas (three little islands) and the Corvetena, an islet
further to seaward. This group being only about one degree distant from that
of the Marias islands, a sbght error in latitude might cause them to be taken
one for the other; but this error should not occur, if it be remembered that
the Marias islands are much larger than the Marietas, and that they aU
Ue on the bne of almost N.W. and S.E., while the Marietas and Corvetena
are very smaU and lie almost East and west.
The coast beyond point Mita trends a Utile eastward, and then runs northerly to a sbght projection, known as point Custodios, the southern limit of the
roadstead of San Bias. It contains, after passing point Tecusitan, the
anchorages of Chacala and Matanchel.
San Bias.—The roadstead of San Bias is open and exposed. The
anchorage is safe in the dry season and less dangerous during the rainy months
than that of Mazatlan. The extent and configuration of the roadstead renders
an approach to it easy, and when leaving it the prevailing current often affords
considerable assistance. It is recommended to avoid remaining in it during
the season of the cordonazos. The harbour has tie great advantage of being
a bttle bay, caUed el pozo, which is closed in and sheltered from tie sea by a
natural jetty of rocks. In this harbour there is considerable accommodation
for careening; it is however to be regretted that there is not room for more
than five or six vessels, which should not be of a greater draught than 10 feet
or they wfll be unable to cross tie bar.
It is very easy to make San Bias, so many landmarks serve as guides.
After having doubled the Marias islands, which are about 60 miles to seaward
of the port, a course may be steered for the land, and mount San Juan wfll be
seen to the eastward.    This mountain is about 6230 feet high and situatedAPPENDIX.
865
in lat. 21° 26' 15", long. 105° 07 54" (approximate); behind it is the town of
Tepic. When steering for the mountain, tie Piedra de Mer or Afuera^cannot
fail to be recognised as it is an enormous white rock about 150 feet high, and
soon after passing it at a short distance on its souti side, anotier white rock
wfll come into view, named Piedra de Tierra or Adentro ; this latter is the
smaUer rock, and exactly marks tie anciorage. It is eastward of tie Piedra
de Tierra where the anchor should be cast, in about 8£ (?) fathoms.
The anchorage may be run for either during day or night. The two Piedras
are nearly East and West from each other, distant about 11 miles. All the
coast of the bay is quite clear from reefs and tbe soundings are regular.
While under sail it is necessary to take notice of the direction of the current,
which runs southward, sometimes with considerable strength.
San Bias is very unhealthy, especiaUy during the rainy season when malignant
fevers prevail. There are clouds of mosquitoes and gnats whose stings often
cause painful eruptions, optialmic complaints, and serious inflamatory
disorders;—hence shipmasters should not permit the sailors to sleep on deck,
on shore, or in any place where they wfll be exposed to these disagreeable
pests.
Merchandise discharged at San Bias suppUes tie district of Colima. Some
goods are sent to Mazatlan, Durango, San Luis Potosi, and to Zacatecas.
The vessels usuaUy return in ballast, but occasionally go either to Mazatlan
or VaUe de Banderas bay for brazil-wood. If they arrive at San Bias in July,
August or September or even later in tbe year, tie cargoes are more easily
disposed of than in the earber months, as they are then forwarded to the fair of
San Juan de los Lagos and are privileged with a discount of 53 per cent upon
the charges of entry. San Juan de los Lagos is situated upon the road from
Mexico to Guadalajara, at 40 leagues from the latter city; it is a small place,
but its fair is very important, as it continues 8 days and receives goods not
only from Mexican territory but also from Guatemala.
Upon tbe parallel of San Bias, at rather more than 20 leagues to seaward,
are the Marias islands, discovered by Mendoza in 1532. High and uninhabited, these islands have often served as a refuge to pirates, and their position
is such tiat tiey would be of considerable importance in tbe event of a hostile
force having to blockade tbe coast of Mexico. Vessels stationed there would
also be able to capture vessels from the Sandwich islands, China and
California. Tortoises with fine shell are to be obtained here, also game,
sponges, wood and excellent water. There is a good passage between the
middle and north-western island, and vessels may anchor westward of them in
18 to 20 fathoms.
At 40 miles from San Bias in a north-westerly direction is the Utile uninhabited island of Isabel. It is immediately opposite the river San Pedro.
Vessels may anchor in about 8 fathoms near its north-west point and find
shelter from north-easterly winds.*
In lat. 22° 25' are the smaU hills of Bayona. The mouth of the river
Bayona is known as the river Boca de Teaeapan.    At 8 leagues further north-
* Isabel island is of moderate height, nearly barren, and its herbage and grasses can
scarcely be distinguished. Neither wood nor water are to be obtained from it. The
beach is lined with rocks, with the exception of a small sandy cove open to westward,
where boats may be hauled up on the shore. The island is only frequented by sealers.
Du Petit Thouars tome 11.366
APPENDIX.
ward are seen the hiUocks of Chamatla. The west point of the river Chamatla
or Rosario is in lat. 22° 50', long. 105° 58' (approximate). It was from the
Utile port at the entrance of this river that Fernando Cortez embarked,
April 15th, 1535, when he discovered California; at a mile outside it the
depth is 8 and 9 fathoms.
When saibng along this coast, northward from San Bias, several large
farms or haciendas are seen, Del Mar, San Andres, Santa Cruz, Teacapan,
Del Palmito, &c. Bullocks may be bought from them and also vegetables.
The water of aU the rivers is good and firewood very abundant.
Seasons, Winds, dc.—The year is divided into the dry and rainy seasons
the changes into which take place generally and at variable periods, louring
the dry season the weather is constantly fine. The winds prevail regularly
during the day from N.W. to West, following the direction of the coast and
are replaced at night by a Ught breeze from the land or by a calm.
The rainy season, which commences in June, is at first indicated by calms
and sbght showers ; as the season advances the showers become heavier and
more frequent, and instead of prevailing only at night they commence in the
afternoon and terminate in very violent tempests accompanied by thunder and
Ughtning and violent winds from aU quarters of the horizon. This weather
continues till the end of September and it frequently occurs that the season
is terminated by a violent hurricane, which usually takes place from tbe 1st
to the 5th of October the period of tbe fete of Saint Francis. These storms,
which always prevail from S.E. to S.W., are of short duration; but their
violence is so great, and tbe sea which accompanies them so high, that
nothing canresist their influence ;—hence they are known in the country by tie
term cordonazos de San Francisco de Asis.* When overtaken in the roadstead
by one of these storms the anchor should be immediately raised, or the cables
cut, and the vessel ran ashore (sic). At the approach of the cordonazo the
offing should be run for, or if obUged to anchor in the roadstead it should be
at such a distance from tbe land that it will be easy to get away on tbe first
intimations of its commencement. These observations are not applicable to
roadsteads entirely open, for such should be avoided during the months of
September and October. OccasionaUy the cordonazo, contrary to the experience of seamen, occurs later than St. Francis' day; for instance, on
November 1st, 1839, twelve vessels supposing the season to have passed,
were surprised in the port of Mazatlan and were almost entirely destroyed.
On November 1st, 1840, three vessels, under a similar error, were lost in the
roadstead of San Bias, and several people were drowned, without it being
possible to render them any assistance.
Although this coast is within the region of the N.E. trade, yet'such is its
configuration that a S.W. wind occupies its place in the gulf of California;
it is not however felt on the coast northward of lat. 23°.
Mazatlan.—Mazatlan is distant from San Bias about 120 miles; the
navigation between is very easy and usually occupies 2 to 5 days. Tbe
intermediate coast is everywhere safe, and has off it at a moderate distance
a depth of 6 to 1£ fathoms, and at some mfles in the offing 38 to 55 fathoms.
The roadstead of Mazatlan, like that of San Bias, is open and exposed,
although in the dry season a vessel may anchor in it in security and find
Cordonazo—Spanish—Stroke with a cord or rope.APPENDIX.
867
protection from the prevailing winds, which are then always from N.W. and
from seaward. During the rainy season, the port is extremely perilous ; if at
this period a vessel be driven on shore, it would in all probabflity become a
total loss, for the coast is strewn with rocks against which the sea breaks
with violence.
The roadstead of Mazatlan, in the province of Sinaloa, is quite open to the
most dangerous winds that prevail in the rainy season. The port is formed
by a hollow in the land; in tie midst of it is the town, which can be
approached only by vessels of the lightest draught. Large vessels anchor
souti of tie town, and are sheltered on the west side by Crestin, a smaU but
very lofty islet on the north-west side of the roadstead; this islet is separated
from an islet north of it by a channel only a few fathoms wide, and
this last islet is itself only a cable's length from the land. When approaching
tie port directly from seaward, tie object of recognition is Crestin islet,
which appears isolated; to the north-westward of it are two islets named
Venado and Pajaros, which are also useful marks when steering in for the
coast, as it is only on this part of the coast that islets exist.
The anchorage at Mazatlan at present resorted to is southward of Crestin
island, but the islets just mentioned form with the coast a roadstead which in
former days was much frequented by Spanish vessels and which is certainly
to be preferred during tbe rainy season. In this latter roadstead, there is
shelter from southward and south-westward and the vessel, if need be, can
get to sea either through the channel between the islands or between them
and the coast; but as during the dry season the prevailing north-westerly
winds are there very much felt, and the heavy seas they raise break on the
beach with great violence, the discharge of cargo is rendered so difficult and
dangerous that vessels now prefer the roadstead southward of Crestin where
these inconveniences are not experienced.
The port of Mazatlan has been opened to foreign commerce for some years;
the official name appbed to it by the Mexican government is La villa de los
Costillas. Its population amounts to about 15,000 during the rainy season,
but is much larger during the dry season or the period when foreign vessels
arrive, for at that time the merchants of the provinces of Chihuahua,
Sonora, CoUma, Sinaloa and Durango, resort to it to make their purchases.
The trade is almost entirely in the hands of foreigners who realise considerable
profits.
The town of Mazatlan is open on all sides, having neither fortifications nor
batteries, a few indifferently equipped soldiers forming the entire garrison.
Ships ought to get their water in the peninsula which forms the south side
of the road; everywhere else it is brackish. Although Mazatlan is less unhealthy than San Bias, severe fevers are common during the rainy season, and
as there is no hospital in the town, shipmasters should be strict in not allowing
their men to run into any excesses, which might be foUowed by dangerous
conseqnences.
Mazatlan is the only port in this part of America, north of Guayaquil, where
a ship can procure a complete supply of provisions. A buUock costs 8 or 12
piastres. Flour from Guaymas, which is excellent, is from 12 to 14 piastres
for 12 arrobas (305 lb Engbsh). Sail-cloth, pitch, tar, cordage, chains,
anchors, and timber (partly from wrecks) may be procured in the stores, (1840)
At 10 leagues eastward of the port, on the road leading to San Bias and
Tepic, and 3 leagues from the sea, is the old Presidio of Mazatlan.    This868
APPENDIX.
village is now scarcely more than a ruin; for since the removal of the trade to
the port, it has lost all its mflitary importance. There are no vestiges of the
old fortifications, and the fine barracks built by tie Spaniards only serve
now to sielter a few cavalry soldiers; the population is about 500. The Rio
de Mazatlan, which runs near the presidio, and faUs into the harbour, is not
navigable.
The Coast.—In no part of the many miles of coast between Mazatlan and
Guaymas is there a town. At a short distance from the beach there is a depth
of 7 to 8 fatioms, and at 15 to 20 miles from it 44 to 55 fatioms. Tiere
are no shoals nor any reefs, at least if such there be they are unknown. The
principal rivers, sailing northward, are the Piastla, having at its entrance tie
little anchorage of Navachista; the Tavala; the Culiacan, with a smaU port
named Altata (the sea in front of this river is so shallow that large vessels
ought to give the entrance an offing of 5 or 6 miles); the Tamasula; tie
Macapule; the Sinaloa,—to the north-westward of whici is point San Ignacio
whence a reef extends seaward about 3 miles,—it has been stated that in
the mouth of this river is a depth of 7 fathoms, and that vessels may tiere
find shelter from north-easterly winds. North of point San Ignacio is the
river Santa Maria de Aome. It is said that at the river Fuerte, it is necessary
when anchoring to get a mile north or south of the entrance to obtain a depti
of 5 to 6£ fathoms. At 15 miles north-westward of the river Mayo, vessels
sometimes anchor in 7 fathoms : and, beyond this, near tie land, is tie Utile
deserted island of Lobos Marinos. In the vicinity of Guaymas is the river
Yaqui, tbe banks of which are inhabited by an Indian tribe of the same name.
Altbougb none of the rivers, just mentioned, are navigable, then* entrances
wfll receive coasters, which bring merchandise from Mazatlan, Guaymas and
sometimes even from San Bias. The goods are carried thence on tie backs
of mules to Cubacan, Villa Feliz de Tamasula, Sinaloa, ViUa del Fuerte and
Alamos.
Guaymas.—The port of Guaymas may be recognised from the offing by a
mountain surmounted by two peaks which are supposed to resemble the teats
of a goat; hence the mountain is named by the Mexicans Las Tetas de Cabra.
When this is distinguished, run along the coast, leaving it a Utile to port, and
Pajaros island, on the east side of the entrance will soon be seen; steer now
so as to leave this island to starboard, and you will pass through tie ciannel
which it forms with the shore and soon gain sight of the town and port of
Guaymas. It is necessary to pass westward of Pajaros island because a bank
runs from it northward to the shore. The entrance of the harbour once
doubled, two islands are seen in the inner part of the bay, and tie passage is
between these to reach the anchorage, near or off the land, according to the
vessel's draught of water. Vessels under 100 tons make fast to the landing
place, and those drawing 12 to 15 feet anchor a £ of a mile off, in
8 or 4 fathoms. Corvettes, and frigates, ought to cast anchor outside these
islands in 6 or 7 fathoms. This harbour, which would hold a considerable
number of vessels, is very safe in all seasons; the bottom is good holding
ground, and it is sheltered from aU winds, and forms a large basin, strewn
with islands, which prevent any heavy swell reaching it. The bank in front
of the entranceNis tie only danger to shipping but it is easily avoided with
leading winds, by keeping along the land. A vessel obbged to beat in, must
be careful not to toucb this shoal.
The town of Guaymas has usuaUy about 5000 inhabitants during the fine
season,—during the rainy season about 2000 return to the smaU towns in theAPPENDIX.
369
interior. The port possesses neither fortifications nor garrison. There are
numerous mibtary and naval officers residing in this town, but as for the
vessels of the latter they exist only on paper.
The low price and excellent quality of the flour at Guaymas offer considerable advantages to shipping requiring such. The merchants export the flour
to Mazatlan, San Bias, Loreto, and La Paz. Bullocks are sold for about
12 piastres. Vegetables are very scarce and dear, and the water in the
harbour is so bad that it is usual to send boats for it to the river Yaqui about
12 miles eastward of the port.
Guaymas is surrounded by high mountains, hence the heat is very great in
the rainy season.    Tbe same fevers prevail here as at San Bias and Mazatlan.
The Coast.—Following the coast of Sonora northward from Guaymas there
is at about 4 leagues from that port an excellent harbour known as puerto
Escondido ; and, there are also off this coast some islands which bear the
names of San Pedro Nolasco, Tortuga, San Pedro Martir, and in about
lat. 29° that of Tiburon. Tbe last mentioned island is in inhabited by the
Seris tribe of Indians, who have some huts on the main land ; it is 10 leagues
long, and is tbe only island in the gulf which is inhabited. The channel eastward of the island, between it and tbe shore, is narrow and dangerous, and is
fronted at its northern end by Patos island.
All this part of the province of Sonora is barren and inhabited only by
some miserable Tepocas Indians. In tbe interior is the little mission of Caborca,
on tbe banks of a small river at about 22 leagues from the coast, and situated
in about lat. 31°. North of the river Concepcion de Caborca is the bay of
Santa.Sabina and the islet Santa Inez,, the river Santa Clara and the watering
place (aiguade) of Los tres Ojitos (the three small eyes). As far as the river
Colorado tbe coast is very low and barren, and the wind continually raises
from it clouds of very fine sand.
River Colorado.—This river, now in United States territory—except
near the mouth-—rises on tbe western slopes of the Sweetwater mountains
and the Sierra de las Grullas, between latitudes 40° and 44°. Its length from the
upper sources of its tributaries is about 1500 miles,—the country in its
vicinity being inhabited chiefly by Indians. It has but little depth, especially
in the dry season; its banks, also, are so low that after heavy rains
and the melting of the snow on tbe hiUs at its sources its waters overflow
and inundate the flat country through which it passes. Its mouth, at the
head of the gulf, is nearly 6 miles wide and divided into three channels by
two small islands, named Mas de los Tres Reyes. The tide rises here 20 or 25
feet and causes very strong currents, which run sometimes 12 or 15 mfles
an hour. Tbe entrance is so shallow that it is necessary to run moderately
close to the coast of CaUfornia to find the channel, which is only 5 or 6 feet
deep, narrow and dangerous. Within the river are many banks dry at low
tide.
At about 8 leagues from its entrance the Colorado receives the Rio Gila,
which falls into it from the eastward, after it is increased in volume by the
Rio de la Ascencion, formed again by the junction of the Rios Verde and
Salado. All these rivers rise in the branches of the Sierra Madre, have but
Utile depth, and during the rainy season overflow their banks. The country
in their vicinity is very fertile, and furnishes abundant evidence of the existence
of gold; it is inhabited by Yumas, Axuas, Cocomaricopas, Apaches and other
Indian tribes, in number about 20,000.
B   B870
APPENDIX.
The missions hi this part of the country have been almost destroyed. At
about 20 leagues from the river Colorado is the mission of Santa Catalina,
which is the most northern of those in Lower California; it is distant about
6 days journey from port San Diego on the Pacific ocean.
The Coast.—When descending the western side of tie gulf, from North to
South, we pass the marshes which extend to cape San Buenaventura, the
watering places of San FeUpe de Jesus, San Fermin, Santa Ysabel, La Visita-
cion, San Estanislao, the bay of San Luis de Gonzaga, San Juan y San
Pablo, Los Remedios, the bay of Los Angeles, San Rafael, capes San Miguel
and San Juan Bautista, the islet of San Barnabe, cape Trinidad, Santa Anna
islet, and the cape of Las Virgenes, which is the last extinct volcano in Lower
California, and which according to the Jesuits, was stfll in activity in 1746.
There is much sulphur in the neighbourhood of the crater of this volcano.
Upon the parallel of the volcano of cape Las Virgenes, at 5 and 8 leagues
in tbe interior, are the missions of Santa Maria Magdalena and Nuestra
Senora de Guadalupe.
In lat. 29° is the island of Angel de la Guardia, which is long and
narrow, and forms with the coast the canal de Ballenas, where a great number
of whales have been met with. Opposite the island, at 9 leagues from the
shore, is the mission of San Francisco de Borja. To the southward, the
islands of Sal si Puedes (get out if you can), Las Animas, and San Lorenzo,
present a very dangerous passage. Southward of cape Las Virgenes are seen
the bay of Santa Agueda, Galapagos island, tie cape and island of San
Marcos, which, with the Tortuguitas islands and cape San Miguel, form the
bay of Mulege.
Opposite the island of San Marcos, but at 6 leagues inland, there still
exists tbe mission of San Ignacio. That of Santa Rosalia Ues £ a league
from the sea, on the banks of the Rio Mulege. This point is easy to be
found;—in approaching it from seaward a smaU hiU wfll be seen, caUed the
Sombrerito, from having the form of a hat. The bay is shallow, and boats
of only 15 or 20 tons can enter it. Some pearls are found tiere, and on the
banks of the river some fruits and grain are, or have been grown.
From Mulege bay to Loreto there is always, near the land, a depth of from
20 to 80 fathoms, and the coast contains several good anchorages ; the points
of Concepcion, Santa Teresa, Colorado, tiose of Pulpito, San Juan, the bay
of that name, that of Mercenaries, Point Maglares, and San Bruno cove.
At 8 leagues northward of Loreto the Utile island of Coronados offers
sielter from the north-eastward. Near tie beach of the mission there is a
depth of 4 fathoms, and under the lee of the island of Carmen 13 to 16 fathoms.
The anohorage at Loreto is indicated by the church and a clump of palm
trees, and it may be distinguished at a distance by a very lofty peak
surrounded by smaller bills.    This mountain, called El Cerro de la Giganta
is tie highest in Lower California.   Its height above tie sea level is 4554 feet
according to trigonometrical measurement; it is of volcanic formation as is the
rest of the chain that runs through the peninsula.
The anchorage of Loreto is exposed to winds from North, N.W. and S.W.
When they blow very strongly it is recommended to get under way to escape
being driven on shore. If tbe vessel be of Ught draught she may make for
Puerto Escondido, 14 leagues to the southward.
The mission of Real de Loreto, opposite Carmen island, was the capital of
Lower California but now has only about 200 inhabitants; it is so muchAPPENDIX.
871
decayed that the authorities have been transferred to the Real de San Antonio.
The presidio, the mission, and tie church, are in ruins. These buildings,
very substantiaUy built by the Jesuits, were intended to serve, in case of
attack, as an asylum to the inhabitants. They are surrounded by a thick
wall, which turns tie waters of a torrent tiat descends from tie mountains ;
and wiich, several times, washed away the houses and the vegetable earth.
The presidio was defended by some small bronze artiUery, which was never used.
The church, for a long time after its decay, contained many pictures, Bflver
vessels, and dedicated jewels of considerable value, which, though left quite
exposed, were considered safe from spobation. At Loreto there are some
gardens, but water is generally scarce ; and that from the wells is brackish
and unwholesome.
At 15 leagues in the interior, westward of Loreto, are the missions of San
Jose de Comandu and San Francisco Xavier.
Under the Spanish government a courier left Guaymas every month, and
went to Loreto, whence the letters were despatched to the different missions;
but this is long since abobshed, and now one may be a whole year in Mexico,
without news from California.
Southward of Carmen island are the Danzantes islands, the Pearl banks,
the Galeras islands, Catalana, (3 leagues in length), Monserrate, &c. The
only points visited by shipping are tbe harbours of La Paz and San Jose del
Cabo.
La Paz, (where Cortez landed, May 3rd 1585,) is in lat. 24° 10', long.
110° 18' (approximate). Vessels anchor in Pichilinque bay, eastward of the
island of San Juan Nepomezcino, in from 5 to 9 fathoms, and at 2 leagues'
distance from the houses, passing at equal distances from the island of Espiritu
Santo and point San Lorenzo ; only small vessels can approach near to the
houses. The population of La Paz consists of about 500 people, the greater
part descended from foreign seamen. This is the most commercial port of
Lower California. Vessels from San Bias, Mazatlan, and Guaymas, often
come to purchase sheU at from 16 to 18 piastres the quintal, and mother-of-
pearl shells at 6 piastres the hundred-weight.
At La Paz, the Rio Yaqui, and Guaymas, eight or 10 small vessels, of 20
to 40 tons each, are fitted out for the pearl fishing. The divers are all Yaqui
Indians, who often descend to a depth of 10 or 12 fathoms. The fishing
begins in May, and ends in October. The principal pearl banks in the gulf
are in the bay of La Paz, near Loreto, the S.W. point of Carmen island,
Puerto Escondido, Los Coronados, Los Danzantes, San Bruno, and San Marcos
islands.
After having doubled cape San Lucas, and proceeding along the coast, at a
short league from it, the missions of Todos Los Santos soon comes into view;
this stfll contains a few Indians. There is an anchorage, with a small rivulet
where water can be procured, and we bebeve also that provisions can be had
from the mission.
At the paraUel of 24°, the mountains form a promontory, surmounted by
three peaks, the truncated summits of which resembles tables, and which are,
from tiis.reason, caUed Las Mesas de Narvaez.
From this point the coast runs nearly N.E. to tbe large island of Santa
Margarita, on the south side of the entrance to the extensive bay of La
Magdalena."
i372
APPENDIX.
The foregoing observations written many years ago having been found
erroneous as regards the population, corrections have been made according
to the census of 1865.
The foUowing information upon various ports in tie gulf of California, by
Lieut. L. Detroyat, appeared in the Annales Hydrographiques, volume for
1867, during the progress of our work through the press.
"Piastla River in about lat. 24° 10', long. 107° 15', is an open roadstead.
Vessels anchor in 7^ fathoms at about §■ of a mile from tbe coast, but those of
very light draught of water and coasters may approach nearer until they get
into 13 feet at 2 cables' length from the shore. The landing is moderately
good.    Some Indian huts are on the beach.
Drinkable water may be obtained at a short distance from the beach from
a lagoon which is dry during the months between March and June; two wells
sunk on its bank serve for cisterns or reservoirs. Good water may also be
procured from the river Piastla.
At about a league from the landing place is a plain where about 400 mules
or horses can find support for a few days. Cattle can be obtained from this
plain and from the woods surrounding it. Forage, carts, draught-horses,
&c. &c. can be obtained from the rancho of Estancia del Potrero, 3 leagues from
Barras, near the river Piastla and on the road to Durangito. "
Boca Tavala or San Lorenzo in about lat. 24° 32', long. 107° 45'.
The roadstead is at about f of a mile from the entrance to the river; vessels
may also anchor in 7£ fathoms at about 40 feet from the entrance. The bar can
be crossed only by smaU coasting vessels drawing 5 feet. The distance from
tie mouth of the river to the village of Quila is 17 miles, and from Quila to
Culiacan 37 mfles.
Altata,—approximate position lat. 24° 40', long. 107° 55'. The norti
entrance is completely closed by shoals, the south entrance is consequently tie
only ciannel that can be used. Anchorage is obtained in the estero or creek
of Altata (known also as the creek of Robalar), in 3£ to 4f fatioms, opposite
to and near the village of Salina. There is but a poor supply of drinkable
water, and provisions are scarce. Cattle can be procured from the rancho of
Tule, at 6 miles from the landing place.
There is a good road from Altata and also from Salina to CuUacan ; it runs
along tbe river Cubacan which falls into the estero of Altata. On both banks
are Indian villages, the inhabitants of which cultivate maize, beans, &c. The
distance from Altata to Cubacan is 86 miles. Provisions and various means
of conveyance can be obtained at Altata.
CuUacan is only second in importance to Mazatlan. It was founded in
1534, thirteen years after tie taking of Mexico by Cortez. In 1853 the town
was pillaged, since when its importance has greatly diminished, so that it
contains now only about 3000 inhabitants. If a time of tranquility were to
return it would soon regain prosperity, its geographical positions being excellent. It stands on the left side of the river at its confluence with the Humaya.
Its commerce is chiefly in dye woods, cotton, and maize.
Playa Colorado.*—Vessels which come here for brazil-wood anchor in
6$- fatioms at the head of the banks of the channel to the esteros of Caiman
and Playa Colorada.
Playa Colorada is not mentioned on the Admiralty chart of the gulf.APPENDIX.
878
The north-west bank is to seaward of the others, and extends out about
mfles.    The depti of the channel is 9£ feet, hence it is only vessels of very
Vista,
it  so far as tie rancho
It is from this rancho
of Bella
that the wood is
2
Ught draught that can ascend
4 or 5 miles from the entrance,
exported.
There is a carriage road from BeUa Vista to Mocorito the chief town of the
district of the same name, and also to the rancho of Cienega. The goods
which are sent from Mazatlan to Chihuahua pass through Mocorito, Bacubirite
and San Jose de Garcia ; this route is preferred to the old road, which was
through Navachiste. The distance from Bella Vista to Cienega is 28 miles,
to Mocorito 27 miles.
Navachiste.*—The anchorage is at about a mile from the entrance in
6£ to 7$ fatioms. The channel, between two islands and some banks, is
8 to 10 feet deep. The custom-house is at Sinaloa, to which place goods are
sent either on tie backs of mules or in carts. Moderately good water may be
obtained here from Macapule islet, the islet on the south side of the entrance,
but it is necessary to sink wells for it in tbe sand.
The rancho of Chino is at 7 mfles from the entrance, upon the right bank
of the river Sinaloa. The distance from the rancho of Chino to Sinaloa is
48 miles, and to Fuerte 112 miles, along roads that can be traversed by
carts.
Tobolampo Bay or Estero dela Piedad.f—A large and weU sheltered
bay, but with a narrow and difficult entrance, the channel being between
shoals; the depth of the channel is 3£ fathoms. This bay is rarely visited
except by vessels of tbe British Navy for the purpose of dehvering specie, a
remark which also apphes to the Boca Tavala, already mentioned.
The distance from Tobolampo to Sinaloa is 70 miles, and to Fuerte
86 miles ; tie roads between are but Utile frequented.
River Ahome in lat. 27° 2', long. 109° 52' (approximate position.) Tbe
anchorage is at about £ a mile from tbe entrance, in 6^ fathoms. The bar can
be crossed only by vessels of a less draught than 9 feet. The village of Ahome
is at about 8 mfles from the sea, and from this vfllage there is a road along
the left bank of the river to Fuerte, a distance of about 80 miles. Provisions
of various kinds are abundant.
Agiabampo.—This was hitherto the port of Alamos and of Fuerte, but
it is now inaccessible except to coasters of very Ught draught of water. The
approach is through a narrow and difficult channel between shoals, and has a
depti of 6 feet as far as the anchorage; it is necessary afterwards to ascend
an estero.
The distance from the landing place of Agiabampo to Alamos is 45 miles,
and to Fuerte 47 miles, along carriage roads.
Santa Barbara situated near the entrance to tbe river Mayo, the
approximate position of which is lat. 27° 8', long. 110° 15', is now the port
of Alamos. The anchorage is in 2£ to S£ fathoms at about l£ cables' length
from tie coast. Tie approach is easy excepting when it blows from the S.W.,
which is very seldom and rarely continues long.    Provisions are abundant.
The distance from Santa Barbara to Alamos is 32 mfles, along a carriage
road.
* Not mentioned in the Admiralty chart of the Gulf.   "We beUeve its entrance to be
in about lat. 25° 27', long. 108° 60'.
+ This is not mentioned in the Admiralty chart of the Gulf.874
APPENDIX.
River Yaqui or Viejo, approximate position of the entrance, lat.
27° 48', long. 110° 38'. The channel in is only sufficiently deep to admit
vessels drawing less than 6 feet, it can consequently be used only by the
smallest coasters.
The road from Alamos to Guaymas, by the coast, passes by the eight
villages of Yaqui upon tbe right bank of the river. AU tie country watered
by the rivers Yaqui and Mayo, is exclusively inhabited by Indians.
GUAYMAS.—This port, although small, is one of the best on the coast
of the Pacific. It is perfectly sheltered from all winds, and is sufficiently
deep to accommodate frigates. Vessels of light draught can approach the
mole, which is in a bad state, and if the water in front of this were dredged
so as to increase the depth 5 to 10 feet, almost aU commercial vessels could
get to it.
General Remarks.—It is the opinion of seamen well conversant with
tbe coast, that at all the places mentioned in tbe foregoing remarks, troops,
cattle, provisions and materials can be either landed or taken on board almost
throughout the year. It is sometimes necessary to erect stages to estabbsh
a communication with the land, which wfll cause a delay of some hours.
None of these places should be visited without a pilot.
The prevaibng winds from November to May are from the N.W. From
May to July, calms and soft sudden breezes prevail. From July to October,
Ught winds from the S.E. are felt in the morning, and these gradually veer
to the N.W. quarter in the afternoon ;—in this season, sudden gusts of but
Utile strength are often experienced from East, S.E. and South, which continue about 18 hours and rarely exceed 48 hours.
At certain distant intervals of time a local hurricane or cyclone of very
limited radius occurs on this coast. It is known under the name of
cordonazo.
The seas upon the coast are stronger, as might be expected, during the
rainy season.    In June and July tide races (raz de marie) occur.
The coast between Altata and Guaymas should be approached only with
the greatest precaution on account of the shifting shoals which extend some
distance from the land ; the currents also are variable and sometimes prevail
with considerable strength."
RUSSIAN-AMERICAN TRADING POSTS.
The Department of State, Washington, U.S., has recently (October
16th, 1867) printed for circulation the following " Notes on the Russian-
American Trading Posts " by Lieut. James Black, Secretary to the Marine
Western Union Telegraph Expedition:—
The Russian-American Company has the following trading posts :
1. Sitka, or New Arkbangel. 2. Fort Constantine. 3. Fort St. Nicholas.
4. Kodiak island, five posts. 5. Roobets, Afgonak island. 6. Ounamok.
7. Katmy. 8. Delorav, Ounga island. 9. Ounalaska, Elulook harbour!
10. Atka. 11. Attou. 12. Copper. 18. Behring. 14. St. Paul. 15. St.
George. 16. Fort Alexandrovski. 17. Fort Michaelovski. 18. Shumshu.'
19. Simusir.APPENDIX.
875
1. Sitka, or New Arkhangel, is tie residence of the Governor of the Russian
colonies of America, and chief depot of the Russian-American Company. It
has a population of from 600 to 700; there is a railway that is capable of
taking up a vessel say of 400 tons, an iron and brass foundry, a machine
shop, and other conveniences for making repairs on vessels. A sawmill is
situated within tie town, which turns out a smaU supply of lumber; there is,
however, a mfll of greater power a few mfles from town, where can be
manufactured a large amount, if needed, whence it can be transported by
water to Sitka.
In the storehouses (or magazines) can usually be found cordage, canvas,
and many of the most needful articles for ships' use.
. The harbour is exceUent, and is fronted to tie west by almost innumerable
islands, and comparatively quite easy and safe to enter or depart from.
Wood, salmon and water can be obtained in any desired quantity, and, in
extreme necessity, quite extensive repairs could be made to a sailing vessel or
steamer.
2. Fort Constantine is situated on the south-west side of Thargalouk island,
and on the north shore of Noockak, lat. 60° 20' 18" N., long. 146° 52' 50" W.
The anchorage is in a smaU cove to the northward and eastward of the post,
distant some 2 mfles; depth of water varying from 5 to 10 fathoms, and is
free from aU hidden dangers; the shores are lined with a thick growth of
trees of the fir and hemlock species ; no Indians inhabit tie island, but they
resort to this post from tbe interior and from along the coast north and south
to barter their furs. The island, called by the Russians " Sooklu " and by
tie Engbsh " Montague," is inhabited by about 400 natives, who also come
to this post to trade during the months of April and May. Tbe Indians
inhabiting the Copper river country to the east of the fort do not come until
July, as the river is not clear of ice nor free from heavy freshets before that
time.
Abundance of wood and water can be obtained, but no other supplies for
a ship.
8. Fort St. Nicholas is near the head of Cook inlet, at the east side, near
the mouth of the Kakanon river, in lat. 60° 32' N., long. 151° 19' 15" W.
The tide at full and change of the moon rises from 20 to 80 feet. At the
mouth of the Kakanon a vessel drawing 12 feet has ascended the river as far
as the fort.
The company has at this place eight or ten men, including the commander
and priest.
The surrounding country is sparsely wooded with a stinted growth of birch
and other varieties of hard wood; the soil, however, is said to be good; in
many places potatoes are raised in quantities that exceed the wants of the
people at the post, and are at such times exported to Sitka, when a company's
vessel visits them at a suitable season of the year for that purpose.- The
post is said to be of much importance as a trading post; large suppbes of
eioice furs are obtained annually from the surrounding country.
A vessel can be at anchor in Cook inlet, off the river, in tbe summer
season, and boats can safely enter the mouth, as it is usually quite smooth.
4. Kodiak Island.—There are five trading posts on Kodiak, two on tie
souti-east side; the southernmost, named " Three Saints," bes in laL
57° 8' N., long. 158° 26' W. This postis now nearly deserted, the company
having found a better location at a place called by the same name 8 miles to876
APPENDIX.
the north-east of Satiludak straits. Both places are fine anchorages, the
depth of water varying from 5 to 8 fathoms, muddy bottom Abundance of
salmon, dried or salted, may be obtained at this post, and excellent water can
be had from' a small river 2 mfles to the south-west. The best place,
however, to obtain a large supply of water would be at the first harbour, as a
ship may be anchored within J of a mile of the mouth of the river close to the
old houses.
The third trading post is on the south side of Egink bay, lat. 57° 26' N.,
long. 152° 36' W. As to suppbes for a ship the same may be said as of tie
others. The anchorage is open to the south-east, with a depth of 10 fathoms,
sandy bottom, £ a mile from the shore.
The fourth trading post is on the west side of tbe island, in Aliaska strait,
named Karlouk, in lat. 57° 86' N., long. 154° 27' W. The surrounding
country at each of the four different posts is destitute of wood, or nearly so.
There is no anchorage at Karlouk; the company's ships stop at a roadstead
on the west side of the bay of Oouiak, near an island; tie anchorage is in
5 fathoms, sandy bottom, 2 cables lengthy from shore.
The fifth and principal trading post on the island is St. Paul's, on the
north-east side, in lat. 57° 47' 80" N., long. 152° 20' 30" W. The tide
rises, on the full and change, 12 feet; high water llh., 47m. a.m. The
harbour is excellent, being situated between tbe main island and the small
island of Bleeshnee; the depth of water varies from 5 to 7 fathoms, sandy
bottom. The only objection is its limited extent, as only three or four vessels
could well be accommodated to ride at anchor with a long scope of cable.
Large coUections of furs are made at this post. Nearly all the ice consumed
in California comes from Kodiak, or rather, from a small island called Lasnoy
or Wood island, lying to the eastward of this post. About 1 mile distant, on
the west side of the last-named island, are two small lakes, from which the
ice is taken and stored in bouses erected near by for this purpose. The
village at the post of St. Paul's contains about 800 inhabitants of all castes.
They have a church, with priests and deacons, as is usual in the worship of
tbe Greek church.
.   5. Roobets, on Afgonak island,  situated on its south side, lat. 58° N.,
long
152° 42' W. There is no anchorage in this place, and many sunken
rocks hue the adjacent shores. Four of the company's men are stationed
here to purchase skins (principally of tie fox), and also to catci and dry
salmon; for the last-named purpose natives are employed at one rouble a day
(equal to 20 cents in United States coin). The inhabitants number about
100 of mixed blood, i. e., Russians, Aleutians and Kodiaks. They have a
few cattle for domestic use, principally milch cows. 300 or 400 barrels of
potatoes are annually exported to Sitka by tie way of Kodiak. The potatoes
are cultivated by the natives and by tiem transported in canoes to Kodiak.
6. Ounamok.—This post is named after the island on which it is situated,
and is in lat. 55° 50' N., long. 155° 30' W. Its south-west end is moderately
high. From the middle to the north-east it is much lower, The anchorage
is in a small bay on its west side, near the south end. The island is 10 mfles
in length by 6 mfles in breadth; a rocky islet lies off the north-west side, and
several rocks awash and/below the surface be along to the north-eastward,
distant from the beach 1 mile. The inhabitants number about 50, half of
whom are women and children. One of the Russian-American Company's
men resides on the island and acts as a kind of sub-chief, and superintends
the coUection of furs, &c.APPENDIX.
877
7. Katmy.—This post is located in lat. 58° 8' N., long. 154° 50' W, on tie
norti side of AUaska strait. The ships' anchorage, however, is to the north-east
10 mfles, lat. 58° 6' N, long. 154° 81' W. Ten or fifteen of the company's
people Uve on this island; they trap fox and hunt sea otter.
8. Delorav.—This post is located on the south-east side of Ounga. The
anchorage is in lat. 55° 10'N., long. 160° 27'W.,in a smaU bay open to the east
and south-east, with a depth of from 4 to 6 fathoms. The village contains about
100 inhabitants. Four or five of the company's men are stationed here.
The distance from the anchorage (Coal harbour) to the vfllage is about
20 miles.    Sea otter is the principal fur obtained.
9. Ounalaska, on the north-east side of Ounalaska island, and at the head
of tie bay of Elulook, lat. 53° 52'N., long. 166°25' W. The vfllage surrounding
it has from 100 to 125 inhabitants.. The object of the company in estabbsbing
a post at this point was on account of the good harbour, which is sheltered
from all winds, with a depth of 18 to 20 fatioms, sand and muddy bottom.
Sea otter and fox are found in large numbers. Fresh beef can be obtained
here ; there is also an exceUent watering place, and in September and October
a small supply of potatoes can be had.
10. Atka.—On the east side of Atka island is tbe bay of Norzan, in lat.
52° 10' 30" N., long.-174° 00' 30" W. On the south-west side of this bay is a
small but secure harbour, protected from the eastward by a cluster of islands,
making it perfectly sheltered from aU winds. There is room for two or three
ships to swing at their anchors with a fuU scope of chain. A smaU vfllage
Ues on the west shore, which perhaps 50 people residing there.
The company has some half dozen men at this post to coUect the skins of
the sea-otter and fox. Water can be obtained here ; also a bmited supply of
fresh beef and potatoes.
11. Attou.—The trading post of this island is on the border of the bay of
Chichargov, situated on the north-east side of the island, in lat. 52° 56' N., long.
173° 13' E. The inhabitants number about 100. Sea-otter and fox are the
principal skins obtained.
12. Copper island has a vfllage on its north-east side, where 20 or 30
individuals of all classes reside. A species of fox is obtained here, but its
skin is of only moderate value. Fur-seal are also taken on the shores of the
island. The inhabitants are the servants of the company. The anchorage
is in an open roadstead, in lat. 54° 47' N., long. 167° 41' E.
13. Behring island.—On the west side of Behring island, lat. 55° 12' N.,
long. 165° 55' E., is an open roadstead, the depth of water at the anchorage
varying from 4 to 8 fathoms. Inland from the shore £ a mile, abreast of
the anchorage, is a village containing a population of between 200 and
300 Aleutes and Russians.
14. St. Paul island is of moderate height; east anchorage is in lat.
57° 8' N., long. 170° 10' W.; tbe west anchorage, lat. 57° 8' 30" N., long.
170° 12' 30"W. Both anchorages are not more than £ a mile from shore, bottom
sandy; depth of water varying from 9 to 15 fathoms. They are merely open
roadsteads, but afford good shelter when the wind blows from the land, the
water being quite smooth. At this island the company obtains then* principal
supply of fur seal-skins, amounting usuaUy from 70,000 to 80,000 annually
No suppUes can be obtained except water, which is good, and can easily be
procured from a small stream at the west side of the anchorage.
15. St. George island.—The anchorage is in lat. 56° 37'N., long. 169° 33' W.
The company has a trading post here.    St. George and St. Paul together
o o878
APPENDFX.
have a population of about 80. The anchorage is open to the north, but weU
sheltered from the south-west to tbe south-east; the bottom, being a smooth
flat rock, covered with sand to the depth of 3 or 4 feet, is poor holding-ground.
The depth of water varies from 10 to 20 fathoms.
16. Fort Alexandrovski is on tbe east side of the Nooshagak river, 25 miles
from its mouth, in lat. 58° 57' N., long. 158° 18' W. The anchorage is 10 mfles
from the fort, in 4 to 5 fathoms water. The number of the Company's
employees at this post is 10 or 12. A large quantity of furs is collected each
season,—principally beaver, fox and sable. A stunted growth of fir and pine
lines the] banks of the river. There are said to be many banks and shoals,
which make the navigation of the Nooshagak impracticable without tie
assistance of an Indian pilot.
17. Fort Michaelovski is near the head of Norton sound, lat. 63° 28' N., long.
161° 52' W., on the shore of Tibenkov bay. As a trading post it is, perhaps, of
a Utile more importance than fort Alexandrovski, a large amount of furs of
the same kinds being obtained yearly. Tibenkov harbour is shallow, and
much exposed to north and north-east winds. No fresh suppbes are to
be had.
18. Sbumsbu island.—The trading post is located on the west side of tie
island (one of tbe Kuril group) and on the east side of Utile Kuril strait.
The anchorage is on the other side of the strait, however, in lat. 50° 41' N.,
long. 156° 15' E., in a smaU bay called Otomy by the Russians. Wood and
water in abundance can be procured at the anchorage, the distance from which
to the village is 3 miles. Some 10 or 12 of the Company's men are stationed
here, but few furs are collected.
19. Simusirisland—Broughtonbay.—Brougbtonbay isinlat. 47°9'N., long.
151° 55'E., 2 miles in extent, but is fronted by rock, so that it is only practicable
for boat navigation at its entrance. The Company's vessels, when visiting
this place, lie off and on, the water being bold close to the shore. It is not
of much account as a trading post."APPENDIX.
879
SUPPLEMENTARY TABLE OF POSITIONS.
The following positions by M. Lapelin of the French surveying vessel
La BrilMante in 1852, were determined by astronomical observations and
chronometers; they are dependent upon the longitude of CaUao, but unfortunately M. Lapelin does not state in his work what he considered that
longitude to be.    Those with a * attached were determined by triangulation.
Latitude, N.
Long
tud(
3,W.
Var., B.
Gulf of Dulce, house of the French Co.,-
o
'    "
o
'
"
O                 f
at Punta Arenitas    	
8
32 22
83
26
4
7    57
* Guff of Nicoya, cape Blanco islet    ...
9
34    0
85
9
14
)•                        )>
9
84 15
85
13
51
Custom-house at Punta Arenas, gulf of
Nicoya     	
9
56 45
84
59
12
7    47
Miravefles volcano (positionvery doubtful)
10
39 40
84
13
51
Orosi volcano, 8665 feet     	
10
57 14
85
25
58
San Juan del Sur, house of the American
Co	
11
15 25
86
0
57
7    50
Ometepe volcano, 5003 feet       	
11
41 45
85
26
36
Madera volcano, 4104 feet	
11
34    0
85
2
21
Mombacho volcano, 4501 feet     	
11
55 25
85
57
11
* Momotombo volcano, 3996 feet .
12
26 24
86
39
37
»j               >>                       	
12
26 43
86
34
58
* Tebca volcano, 3187 feet	
12
34 46
86
54
7
• >            »>                   	
12
31 55
86
55
11
* Las Pilas volcano, 3015 feet   	
12
28 24
86
48
127®
>)                               !>                                                       	
12
35 40
86
47
44
* Viejo volcano, 5893 feet	
12
43 14
87
4
47
j*         >>                       	
12
47    7
87
2
11
Realejo, north-west extremity of Cardon
island            	
12
27 17
87
18
42
7    48
* Coseguina volcano, 2848 feet ?	
IB
0    0
87
37
19
>>            >>                       	
12
59    0
87
40
51
Point Coseguina	
12
59 30
87
50
51
Gulf of Fonseca, M. Dardano's bouse at
Amapala (Tigre island)    ."    ...
13
18 58
87
45
1
7    43
* Tigre island, summit, 2986 feet
13
18    0
87
42
46
* Amapala volcano, 4344 feet    	
13
18 19
87
54
34
,,             if                         	
13
18    0
87
57
51
Port Jiquflisco     	
13
12    0?
88
28
51?
* San Miguel volcano, 6529 feet	
13
25 30
88
17
21
,,              )>                     	
13
26 45
88
19
57
* San Vincente volcano, 6923 feet
13
35    0
88
59
6
,,                f)                    •	
13
36 20
88
59
9
* River Lempa, entrance    	
13
13    9
88
50
18
•>                    >>         	
13
11    0
88
50
51li
380
APPENDIX.
Latitude N.
Longitude, W.
Var., E.
Mount Virola	
O         1        «
18 26    0
0          .          .
88 82 51
O              1
* Port Libertad   	
18 26 80
89 22 51
j?          j?             ••*
13 28 80
89 22 51
* San Salvador volcano, 6480 feet
13 43 80
89 21 21
• *                *j                     •
13 49 10
89 19    1
* Point Remedios	
18 84 80
89 53 11
* Isalco volcano, 4978 feet	
13 47    0
90 45 51
,,            ,,                      ...    ...    ...
13 50 18
89 44 26
Acajutla, flagstaff	
13 37 27
89 64 10
7     9
* Mount Apaneca, 5715 feet      	
13 50 10
89 59 21
* Morro des los Esclavos, 4829 feet   ...
14    0 30
90 10 51
•>                 > ?                  	
14    1 52
90 12    2
* Pacayo volcano, 6975 feet       	
14 25 30
90 40 51
91                         77                                          	
14 26    0
90 40 51
* Fuego volcano, 14,003 feet     	
14 83    0
90 59 81
9>                         JJ                                                "...
14 31 50
91    0 11
Istapa, flagstaff   	
13 56 16
90 47    6
8    17
* Agua volcano, 13,471 feet	
14 32 10
90 50 21
79                     M                                                  	
14 32 50
90 50 31
* Atitlan volcano, 11,618 feet    	
14 86 80
91 17 11CATALOGUE
OF  THE
LATEST AND MOST APPROVED
€\mi%, Ipikts, attfr fta%a&m: §00ks;
SOLD  OR  PUBLISHED  BT
JAMES   IMRAY  AND   SON,
CHART   PUBLISHERS,
AND
MANUFACTURERS OF NAUTICAL INSTRUMENTS,
Nos. 89 & 102, MINORIES, AND TOWER HILL, LONDON.—[E.]
^°
^
lEstabltabeb 1763.
MAY    BE    HAD    AT    EVERY   SEAPORT    IN    THE    UNITED    KINGDOM,   AND   AT
NUMEROUS    FOREIGN    PORTS.
1868.ADDRESS.
In introducing our new Catalogue, we avail ourselves of tbe opportunity to express our best thanks to our numerous Correspondents ^nd
Nautical Friends, for the bind patronage with which they have hitherto
favoured us, and for the very valuable and useful information we are
constantly receiving from them. The high estimation accorded to our
pubbcations for their accuracy, is chiefly to be attributed to tbe assistance so received, and on this ground we are always ready and happy
to receive suggestions tending to "Hie*improvement of any of bur Works.
At the present time many hydrograpbical surveys are being carried
on, not, only by ojir own Goviernment, but by the Governments of
Foreign. Countries, and it may be expected that the inteUigence and
skill of surveyors, furnished with superior instruments, will materially
extend our knowledge of important coasts and seas, annually becoming
more and more1 frequented by our mercantile navy. It has always been
our great aim to keep pace with the rapid advance of hydrographical
science, and .to introduce to the nautical world, as early as possible, the
most recent additions and improvements in every department; consequently, we flatter ourselves that for accuracy and extent of information
our numerous publications cannot be surpassed. Everything new and
valuable to the navigator is immediately embodied in our Charts and
Safling Directions, and will continue to be so, in order that the high
character our works have already acquired for correctness and utility
may be fully maintained.
*»* Correspondents, when giving orders, are particularly requested to refer to the present, instead of to any former
Catalogue. If mention be made of the date of the Catalogue
used, the leading words, and price of each article, it may
prevent mistakes.
Cash remittances are required to accompany the first order.
Where measurement is given of Charts fitted for the Counting
House, the first dimension is the width, and the second
the length hanging down.James Imray and Son s Catalogue, Minories, Xondon.
CATALOGUE
CHARTS  AND   NAUTICAL  WORKS.
Charts of the World, and Track Charts.
i- THE   WORLD,   on   Mercator's Projection, on four sheets,  compiled
from the latest s'tfiiveys and astronomical observations, including the discoveries of
all our recent Navigators and Travellers, Parry, Ross, Back, Franklin, Lyon,
Richardson, Scoresby, Clavering, Denham, Olapperton, Freycinet, &c. &c.
This publication, en-bracing, the twofold properties of Chart and Map, will be
found equally. useful to the mariner and merchant, and is well adapted as an
embellishment to a counting-house, cabin, or library. Price, in sheets, or lined
with blue paper ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...      16s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      21s. Od.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 4 ft. 9 in. by 3 ft. 7 in. ...        ...      31s.  6d.
2. A CHART Or Map of the "WORLD,  on Mercator's Projection, reduced from
the preceding one, on one sheet. A scale is given oh this chart for the exact
measurement of distances, in every direction, without those inconvenient appendages which have sometimes been annexed to works of this description ; 41 in. by
27 in                  7s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        8s. 9d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 41 in. by 27 in. ...        ...        ...  '  16s. Od.
3. THE WORLD.    An outline chart intended for the purpose of marking off a ship's
track. It is also a "Variation Chart; having the lines of equal variation to every
2° marked upon it.    On three sheets   ...        ...        ...        ...        ...      12s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      15s.  9d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in. ...        ...      31s,  6d.
This Chart has the Great Circle Tracks marked upon it, and is very useful to travellers proceeding abroad, as with its assistance they will be enabled to keep a daily record of the ship's
progress towards the port of destination.   Useful also for a Ship and Insurance Broker's Office.
4. ENGLAND to BRAZIL.    An outline chart intended for the purpose of mark-.
ing off a vessel's track between England and the River Plate or Cape of Good
Hope                5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use         6s. 3d,
a 2
hi;James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
The Coasts of England, Ireland, and
Scotland,.
5. ENGLISH CHANNEL, on the largest scale yet published.    With plana of
the Downs, Falmouth, Portland, Plymouth, the Needles Channel,   Alderney,
Dungeness, Dartmouth, Salcombe, &o. &o.    Compiled from the most recent
British and  French surveys.    On three sheets.    Accompanied with a book of
Sailing Directions ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...      12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...     1.5s. 9d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ...        ...      31s. 6d.
6. ENGLISH and BRISTOL CHANNELS, with the south coast of Ireland to
the River Shannon.    On three   sheets.    With  numerous plans   of harbours
12s
15s.
Accompanied with a Book of Directions.
On cloth for Captains' use
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 8 ft. 5 in. ...        ...      31s
Od.
9d.
6d.
7. ENGLISH CHANNEL, (Eastern Portion of) on two sheets, showing
the navigation eastward of Beachy Head, or long. 0° 1C E., and exhibiting
the Strait of Dover on a very large scale.    With numerous plans of harbours.
. Illustrated with views of the coast.    Scale 19J in. to 1° of Longitude.        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s.  6d.
On cloth and rollers, coloured and varnished    ...        ...      20s. Od.
8* THREE CHANNEL CHART.    This chart shows the navigation from Hull
and London to Bristol, Liverpool, Dublin, Cork, and Galway.     It   contains
plans   of the principal  harbours,  is   illustrated with numerous views of the
coast, and accompanied by a Book of Sailing Directions      ...        ...      16s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      21s. Od.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished * size 6 ft. 6 in. by 4 ft. 3 in.        ...        ...      40s.  Od.
'■>•  RIVER THAMES, on a very large scale, extending from Sea Reach to Orford-
ness and the Downs, and containing plans on a large scale of the River Thames
"from Sea Peach to London, Harwich and Ramsgate Harbours.    On two sheets.
Accompanied by a Book of Directions . .        ...        ...        ...        ...       8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d«
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house,  coloured and
varnished ; size 4 ft. 4 in. by 3 ft. 5 in. ...        ...      20s. Od.
10. RIVER THAMES, from Ramsgate and Orfordness to the Nore.    One sheet.
4s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...       5s. 3d.
ii   RIVER THAMES and STRAIT of DOVER, showing the navigation
from Orfordness and London to Beachy Head. With large plans of Harwich,
Ramsgate, Folkestone, Dover, Calais, and Boulogne Harbours. On two sheets.
Accompanied with a Book of Directions ...        ...        ...        ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house,  coloured and
varnished ; size 3 ft. 5 in. by 4 ft. 4 in. ...        ...      20s. Od.Minories, London.
15.
12. STRAIT Of DOVER, showing the south-east coast of England from Ramsgate
to Beachy Head, and the opposite coast of France from Calais to Boulogne.
With plans of Ramsgate, Dover, Folkestone, Calais and Boulogne Harbours.
Illustrated by numerous views of the coast.    The scale is very large, being 19t_
in. to 1° of Longitude.    One sheet.              4s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        5s. 3d.
13. SC-LlLY ISLANDS, on a large scale, and illustrated with some views. Drawn
principally from the surveys of Mr. G. Spence.    One sheet         4s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        5s. 3d.
14- BRISTOL CHANNEL, extending from  Hartland  Point and the Smalls to
Bristol and Gloucester.    On three sheets.    Drawn from the surveys made by
and All-
10s. Od.
13s. 9d.
ham,  R.N.,
Commanders Robinson, R.N., Denham, R.N.,   Shering
dridge, R.N., accompanied with a Book of Directions
On cloth for Captains'use
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished - size 5 ft. 2 in. by 3 ft. 3 in.
26s. Od.
IRISH or St. GEORGE'S and BRISTOL CHANNELS, on a very large
scale, ex tending from. Trevose Head in Cornwall to the Firth of Clyde, with plans
of Holyhead Bay, Tuskar Rocks, Lundy Island, South Coast of Man, North Rocks
near Belfast,  Milford Haven,  River Clyde,  Belfast Bay, Douglas Bay, and
entrances to Loughs Foyle, Strangford, and Carlingford; and illustrated with numerous views of the coast, lighthouses, beacons, &c.   On three sheets.   Drawn from
the surveys of Captains Beechey, Denham, Mudge, Robinson, Williams, Frazer;
and Sheringham, &c. &c. accompanied with a Book of Directions   ...      12s.  Od.
. On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      16s. Od.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house,  coloured and
varnished ; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in. ...        ...      31s. 6d.
16. IRELAND (The West, South-West, and North Coasts of),  from
Watefford to Lough Foyle, on the same" scale as the chart of the St. George's
Channel No. 15, preceding; containing plans of the harbours of Waterford,
Cork, "Valentia, Youghal, Banfry, Bear-Haven,iGalway, Sligo, Newport, West-
port, the River Shannon, and the anchorage within the Gola Islands. On three
sheets. Compiled from the latest surveys, and illustrated with numerous views
of the coast. Accompanied with a Book of Directions. A beautifully engraved
and elegant chart
On cloth for Captains' use
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house,
varnished; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.
coloured and
10s. 6d.
14s. 3d.
31s. 6d.
17.* NAVIGATION   round   IRELAND,   with   numerous plans of harbours.
With Sailing Directions  12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use           ...        ...        ...        ... 17s. Od.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house,  coloured and
varnished           ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ... 30s. Od.
Or it may be had in two parts, thus—
17a. Irish Channel.    With plans of Belfast, North Rocks, Maidens,  &c, Tuskar
Rocks.  Skerries Rocks, &c, Milford Haven, South Coast of Man, and Entrance
to Lough Foyle.    Accompanied with a Book of Directions ...        ...        7s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...        9s. 6d.
176. West Coast Of Ireland. With plans of Clew Bay, Broadhaven, KiUala Bay,
Killybegs, Sligo Harbour, Teelin Harbour, Kinsale, Galway Harbour, Tralee
Bay,   Valentia   Harbour, and Crookhaven.     Accompanied  with  a  Book   of
Directions          7s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...                 ...        9s. 6d.
* This publication (So. 17) has hitherto been presented as one chart, but its size being very inconvenient, this new publication has been arranged in two charts. An advantage which'follows from
this is, that we are enabled to give more plans of harbours than hitherto.
IIJames lmray and Son's Catalogue,
18. APPROACHES to the FIRTH OF CLYDE and NORTH CHANNEL,
on two large sheets, showing tbe navigation along the north coast of Ireland,
and* from the Irish Channel to Glasgow and Greenock. Drawn from the late
Admiralty surveys, and improved by the introduction of several plans of harbours.   On two sheets    ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       ...        ...      10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      12s. Od.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house,  coloured and
varnished; size 4 ft. 4 in. by. 3 ft. 5 in.        24s. Od.
19. ENGLAND (East Coast of), from Dnngeness to the River Tyne,
with plans on a large scale of the River IIumber, Yarmouth Roads, Bridlington
Bay, River Tyne, Hartlepool, Sunderland, &c. On four sheets. Illustrated with
numerous views of the coast.    With a book of Sailing Directions  ...      12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ... ... ...      17s. Od.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished • size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.               31s. 6d.
20. ENGLAND (East Coast of), from Dnngeness to Flamborongh Head,
with plans of Yarmouth Roads,   Bridlington,  and the River Huniber. On
three sheets.    With a Book of Directions      ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use ... ... ... ...       14s. 3d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house,  coloured and
varnished •■ size 6 ft. 6 in. by 2 ft. 10 in       30s. Od.
21. ENGLAND (East Coast of), from Orfordness to Flamborough Head,
with plans of the River Huniber, Yarmouth Roads, and Bridlington Bay, and illus-
■ trated with views of the coast.    On two sheets.    Accompanied with a Book of
Directions...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 4 ft. 4 in. by 3 ft. 5 in. ...        ...      20s. Od.
Note.—This chart and the chart of the Estuaries of the Thames, No. 9, will show the navigation
from Dover and London to Hull, on a very large scale.
22. ENGLAND (East Coast of), from Orfordness to Flamborongh Head,
delineating Yarmouth Roads, Hasborough Gat, Sheringham Shoals, Blakeney
Harbour, the Dudgeons and Housings, Lynn Deeps and the Huniber, with plans
of Yarmouth Roads and the River Huniber.    On one sheet.   Drawn from the
surveys made by Captains Hewett and Washington, R.N. ...        ...        4s; Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...        5s. 3d.
23. EAST COAST OF ENGLAND, from Orfordness to the River Tyne,
with plans on a large scale of the River Huniber, Yarmouth Roads, Bridlington
Bay,  Sunderland, Whitby, Scarborough, Hartlepool, and "the River Tyne.    On
three sheets.     With descriptive notes of tbe harbours, headlands, &c, and
numerous views of the coast.    Accompanied by a Book of Sailing Directions.
10s.   od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      14s. 3d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 6 ft. 6 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ...        ...      31s. 6d.
Note.—This,chart, with Nos. 9,10, or 11, will show the navigation from London or the Downs to
Newcastle on a very large scale.
24. YARMOUTH and LOWESTOFT E0ADS.   A small plan chart ahowing
all the leading marks, lights, &c. ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        Is. Od.
25. ENGLAND and SCOTLAND (East Coasts of), from Flamhorough
Head to Cape Wrath and the Orkneys, with plans of Farn Islands, Sunderland,
River  Tyne,   Cromarty,   Pentland  Firth,  Hartlepool,   Scarborough,   Whitby,Minories, London.
Montrose, Arbroath, Peterhead' Fraserburgh, Banff, Macduff, Aberdeen, and
Wick.    On three large sheets.    With a Book of Directions ...      10s. 8d.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...       »..        ...      14s. 3d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished • size 6 ft. 5 in. by 8 ft. 5 in.       ...        ...      31s. 6d.
26. ENGLAND and SCOTLAND (East Coasts of), from Flamboroagh
Head to the Orkney Islands, with plans of Sunderland, Peterhead, LBitb,
and Hartlepool Harbours, the entrance to the River Tyne, &c. Improved by a
full description of the signals exhibited at Sunderland and Hartlepool.   Compiled
from the most recent surveys.    One sheet               4s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        5s. 3d.
27. COAL   PORTS  of  YORKSHIRE,   DURHAM,   and  NORTHUM
BERLAND, with plans on a large scale of the Rivers Tees and Tyne, the Ports
of Sunderland, Hartlepool, Whitby, Scarborough, and Blyth, with Coquet Island
Road. One sheet. Drawn from the surveys of Commanders Hewett, Slater, and
Washington, R.N.   Blustrated with views of the Lighthouses, &C.&C
On cloth for Captains' use
On  cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 41 in. by 27 in. ...        ...        ...      13s.  Od
5s.
6s.
Od.
3d.
28. FIRTHS  Of FORTH  and TAY,  on two sheets.    It shows the rivers on a
very large scale, and contains plans of the Harbours of Leith, Granton,
Burntisland, Anstruther, Crail, Pittenweem, Kirkcaldy, Dysart, Buckhaven,
Elie, St. Andrew's, Dundee, Arbroath, &c. &c. Accompanied by a Book of
Sailing Directions, which contains Coloured Drawings of the Signals used at the
I  various Ports      ...        ...        ...        ...        ...                8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'usje        10s.  6d.
29. FIRTHS   Of   FORTH and TAY, on one sheet, and on a much smaller
scale than chart No. 28. Wfth plans of Leith roadstead, and several of the
most important Harbours. Accompanied with a Book of Sailing Directions.     5s.
30. WEST COAST and ISLANDS   of  SCOTLAND,   on three large sheets,
showing the whole coast from the Mull of Cantyre to Cape Wrath and the Lewis
Islands.    On three sheets.    With plans of harbours.    Accompanied by a Book
of Directions       ...        ...        ...               12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      15s. 9d.
31. NORTH  COAST   Of  SCOTLAND,   from  Cape Wrath to Pentland Firth,
including the Orkney Islands.    One sheet.     ...        ...        ...        ...        5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
32. SEA NORTH-WEST of the BRITISH ISLANDS, on two large sheets,
including plans of the Caledonian Canal and Rockall Bank.    This chart is specially adapted to the use of Shipmasters frequenting the Rockall Bank in pursuit
of the Fishery, as it -shows the Bank on a large scale,
and 63° 35' N., longitudes, 0° 30' and 15° 40' W.    ...
On cloth for Captains' use
33. WEST COASTS Of the BRITISH ISLANDS.    The same chart as No. 32
(Sea north-west of the British Islands), but with an additional sheet. This
chart shows the whole of the Irish Channel, the ooast round Ireland, the
Bristol Channel, and the English Channel west of thelfile of Wight • it also
exhibits the navigation west of the British Islands between the English Channel
and the Fseroe Islands.    Limits j latitudes   48° 20' and . 63° 35' IS., longitudes
0° 30' and 15° 40' W.     On three sheets        10s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use        14s. 3d.
34. F.-ER0E  ISLANDS to  the   BAY  Of BISCAY.    In four large sheets.
12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'', use        17s. Od.
Limits : latitudes, 53c
10s.
50'
Od.
6d.James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
Northern Navigation, comprising the North
Sea, Kattegat, Baltic, fyc*
85. NORTH SEA, on two large sheets, showing the navigation between the coasts
of England and Scotland, and the opposite coasts of France, Holland, Jutland,
and Norway.     With plans of harbours.   Illustrated with numerous views of
the Lighthouses.    Accompanied by a Book of Directions    ...        ...       8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
36. NORTH SEA The same chart as the preceding, bnt with the addition of a half
sheet to show the coast of Norway as far as Drontheim. Illustrated with
numerous views of the coast, and improved by a full description of the Currents,
Tides, &c, and remarks on the passage across the North Sea.    Accompanied by
a Book of Directions      ...                          ...      10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use- ...        ... ...      14s. 3d.
37. SOUTHERN  PART of the  NORTH SEA from Dnngeness  to Ftam-
borough Head on the English side, with the opposite coasts of France, Holland,
&.c, from Calais to Hamburg. With a large plan of the Flemish Banks. On
three sheets. •  Accompanied by a Book of Directions ...        ...      10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ... ...      14s. 3d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 5 ft. 2 in. by 3 ft. 3 in.        26s. Od.
38. NORTH  COAST of HOLLAND, from the  Texel  to Hamburg, showing
the entrances to the Rivers Elbe, Weser, Ems, Jahde, and Hever. Drawn from
the latest surveys, and much improved by the introduction of descriptive notes,
<&c. &c.    On 14 sheet.    Accompanied with a Book of Directions   ...        7s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains''use ...        ...        ...        ...        9s. Od.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 4 ft. 10 in. by 2 ft. 3 in.       ...        ...      18s. Od.
3°. Rivers Ems, Weser, Elbe, and Hever. being one sheet of the above chart.
5s. Od;
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. ')d.
40.* SKAGERRAK". or SLEEVE, extending from the Naze of Norway to Gothenburg, on a large scale.    With plans of the harbours of Christiansand, Kragero,
- Osterrisor,  Laurvig. Arendal, Winga Sound, Christiania and Christiania Fiord.
Illustrated with numerous views of Beacons and Headlands    On two sheets.
Ss. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
41.* KATTEGAT, on a very large scale, showing the navigation between the Skaw
and Elsinore.    Compiled from recent Danish surveys.    On two sheets.    Illustrated by numerous views of the coast, and accompanied by a Book of Sailing
Directions ...        ...        ... ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        Ss. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
42. KATTEGAT, SOUND, and  BELTS, with phws on a laige scale of the
Sound and Grounds, part of the Great Belt, Lamsbacka Fiord,   and Woederoe
Anchorage.    On two and a half sheets.    Drawn from the most recent Danish
and Swedish surveys, accompanied with a Book of Sailing Directions        Ss. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      12s. 3d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 5 ft. 3 in. by 2 ft. 10 in.       ...        ...      22s.  (id.
43.* SOUND and GROUNDS, on a large scale, with plans of the Drogden and
harbour   of Elsinore, illustrated with views  of the  principal  Churches,   the
Observatory, and other objects in Copenhagen, deduced from the most recent
surveys.    One sheet      ...        ...        ...        ... ...        ...        ...        5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use      -tfMt 4-    ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 41 in. by 27 in. ...        ...        ...      13s. Od.Minories, London.
44.* BALTIC Or EAST SEA, °n a very large scale, showing the navigation from
the Sound to the Gulf of Finland and Gulf of Bothnia.    With plans of harbours.
Drawn from the latest surveys made by order of the Governments of Prussia,
Sweden, Denmark, and Russia,    On two sheets.    Accompanied with a Book of
Directions ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
On cloth and. rollers for Counting-hojjse, coloured and
varnished ; size 4 ft. 4 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ...        ...      21s. Od.
45.* GULF Of BOTHNIA, on 2£ large sheets. With plans of the North Quarken
and the harbours of Gamla Carleby, and Hudiksvall. Compiled from the recent
surveys made by order of the Swedish Government.    Accompanied by a Book
of Directions       ...        ...        ...        10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      14s.  3d.
46.* GULF of FINLAND,   on three large sheets, showing the whole navigation
between Dager-ort and St. Petersburg.    With plans of Kronstat, Port-Baltic
or Rager Wik, Revel and Hango Harbours.    Illustrated with numerous views
of the coast, and accompanied by a Book of Directions        ...        ...      10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ... ...        ...        ...      14s. 3d.
* These are all new charts, engraved in the best and clearest style.   They show the navigation
from the North Sea to the Gulf of Bothnia or Gulf of Finland on the largest scale yet published.
47. COAST Of NORWAY and WHITE SEA,  on   a very large scale.     This
chart is drawn from the recent Norwegian and Russian Surveys ; and shows the
navigation from the British Isles to Arkhangel.      It   contains   plans   of  the
vicinity of Hammerfest and Tromsoe, the port of  Drontbeim, and the  bay of
Arkhangel, and is illustrated with several views of the coast.'   On two sheets.
Accompanied with a Book of Directions ...        ...        ...        ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s.  6d.'
48. WHITE SEA, on two large sheets.     With plans  of Arkhangel,  Sosnovets,
Veshnyak, Nokuev, Sem Islands, Iukanskie and Onega Harbours, the gulf of
Onega;&c.    Illustrated with numerous views of the coast, and improved by many
explanatory notes.    Accompanied with a Book of Directions         8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ... ...        ...      10s. 6d.
Shipmasters going to Arkhangel should take this chart with Wos. 35 or 36 and 47, as these publications will exhibit the whole voyage to the White Sea.
Atlantic, and Islands of the Azores,
I
c.
49. NORTH ATLANTIC, from Greenland to the Equator, on a very large scal«;
with plans of the harbour of Funchal, Horta and Pim Bays, and Fayal Channel,
and Bermuda Islands. Illustrated with some views. This chart contains much
valuable information on the winds and currents, and will be found superior to
any before published       ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 4*ft. 4 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        20s. Od.
49a. SHORT NOTES ON THE NORTH ATLANTIC. A small pamphlet containing Sailing Directions and remarks on making Passages across the North
Atlantic, price Is. 6d., to accompany this chart.
50. NORTH ATLANTIC (Cbart showing; the Currents).   The same chart as
No. 49, but with the currents distinctly shown in colour, and with an additional
sheet of plans, consisting of Track, Magnetic, Tidal, and Wind Charts.    Accompanied by the pamphlet No. 49cr. " Short Notes on the North Atlantic "    12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use        15s. 9d.10
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
51. SOUTH ATLANTIC, on two large sheets, from the Equator to 65" south
latitude, on a very large scale ; with plans of the islands of St. Helena, Ascension, Trinidad, Martin Vas, Fernando Noronha, Roccas Reef, &c. Dlnstrated
with some views. Much valuable information on the winds, currents, and
temperature of the water is embodied in this chart, and no expense has been
spared in producing a good publication ...        ...          8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 4 ft. 4 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ... ..      20s. Od.
'51a. SHORT NOTES ON THE SOUTH ATLANTIC. A small pamphlet containing Sailing Directions and remarks on making Passages across the South
Atlantic, price Is., to accompany this chart.
52. SOUTH ATLANTIC (Chart showing the Currents).   The same chart as
No. 51,  but with the currents distinctly shown in colour, and with an additional
sheet of plans, consisting of Track, Magnetic, Tidal and Wind Charts.    Accompanied by the pamphlet No. 51a. " Short Notes on the South Atlantic"      12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ... ...        ...      15s. 9d.
Notb.—This chart, _wjth the chart of the North Atlantic, No. 50, shows the whole navigation to
the Cape of Good Hope and Cape Horn, and will be found very serviceable, as the directions of all the
currents are delineated.
53. AZORES, or WESTERN ISLANDS, one shee{ on a very large scale; with
particular plans of Hort'a and Pirn Bays, Fayal Channel, St. Michael Island,
Ponta Delgada, Villa Franca Road, St. Lourenzo Bay, Villa da Porto, Praya,
Praya in Terceira, Angra Bay, the Formigas and Dollabarat Shoals, &c. &c,
illustrated with numerous views. Drawn principally from the recent Survey
of Captain Vidal, R.N. A beautifully engraved and cheap chart ... 5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        6s.  3d.
54. MADEIRA, PORTO SANTO, and the DEZERTAS, on one sheet, with
a plan of the harbour of Funchal, and illustrated with some views.    Drawn
from the recent survey of Captain Vidal, R.N. ... ...        ...        4s.  6d.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        5s.  9d.
55. CANAEY   ISLANDS,  according to the survey of Captain Vidal and Lieu
tenant Arlett,  of the Royal Navy, containing enlarged plans of Santa Cruz,
Puerto de la Luz, Arreciffe, Strait of Rio, and Strait of Bocayna, &c.    Illustrated
with some views ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
56. CAPE VERDE ISLANDS, on a very large scale ; with plans of Porto Praya,
Porto Grande, Mordeiro Bay, and English Road, drawn ahiefly from the surveys
of Commanders A. T. E. Vidal and W. Mudge, of the Royal Navy       5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ... ...        6s. 3d.
Coast of Africa,
57. COAST of AFRICA, from the Strait of Gibraltar to Sierra Leone.
With plans of the harbours of Mazaghan, Sale', Mogador, Santa Cruz or Agadir,
Portendic,  Sierra Leone, River Senegal,  River Gambia,   River Cazamance,
Goree, the Isles de Los, and Coast in the vicinity of Sierra Leone ...      12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ... ...        ...      15s.  9d.
58. COAST OF AFRICA, from Sierra Leone to the Bight of Benin.
With plans of the most important harbours, and numerous views of the coast.
On three large sheets     ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...      12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      15s.  9d.Minories, London.
11
Coasts of France, Spain, and Portugal
59.* BRITISH ISLANDS to the COAST of AFRICA, showing the navigation
from Liverpool and Ireland to Mogador. With plans of San Martin de la
Arena, Castro Urdiales, Setuval, Santander, Burling Isles, Cape Finisterre,
Rabat and SaltS, Mazaghan, Mogador, Cadiz, and the Rivers Gironde, Tagus,
and Douro. On four large sheets. With a Book of Sailing Directions 12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      17s. Od.
60.* FRANCE, SPAIN, AND PORTUGAL (the West Coasts of), extend-
ing from the entrance of the Irish Channel to Gibraltar. With plans on a
large scale of San Martin de la Arena, Castro Urdiales, Setuval, Santander,
and the Burling Isles ; the Rivers Gironde, Tagus, Douro, &c. Accompanied
with a Book of Directions        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      14s.  3d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in..;      ...        ...      31s.  6d.
•* Either of these charts with No. 32, will show the navigation from the Feeroe Islands to the
Mediterranean.
61. BRITISH  ISLANDS to  the  MEDITERRANEAN, CANARIES,
MADEIRAS,  and   AZORES.      On two very large sheets,  and with plans of
harbours.     Limits, latitude 26° N. to latitude 56° N. ; longitude 0° 40' W. to
longitude 31° 30' W.    A very useful chart, specially intended for the  orange
trade and shipmasters bound to the Mediterranean   ...        ...        ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ... ...      10s. 6d.
62. BAY of BISCAY, on a very large scale, drawn from the recent surveys made
by order of the French  Government, with  plans of the  principal harbours.
Accompanied with a Book of Directions ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use        12s. 6d.
63. COASTS of SPAIN and PORTUGAL, from Cape Ortegal to the
■'■ Strait of Gibraltar; with plans on a large scale of the Rivers Tagus and Douro,
the harbours of Ferrol, Coreubion, Vigo, San Lucar, &c. Drawn from the late
Spanish and Portuguese surveys, and improved by the introduction of descriptive
notes, views of Headlands, &c.    Accompanied with a Book of Sailing Directions
8s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
This chart and No. 62 preceding (the Bay of Biscay) show the navigation from the English
Channel to the Mediterranean on a large scale.
64. COASTS of PORTUGAL and SPAIN, from Cape San Vicente to
Gibraltar.     On a vety large scale.     With plans  of the  principal  harbours,
Cadiz, the Rivers Odiel, Guadalquiver, &c.     'ihis chart is from the most recent
surveys, and published specially for the trade to Pomeron and Seville       5s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
Mediterranean Sea,
65. MEDITERRANEAN SEA. Four sheets. On a large scale, with about
30 plans of the harbours, &c, among whicihare the following :—Malaga, Alicante,
Barcelona, Villefranche, Strait of Gibraltar, Cartagena, Genoa, Hyeres Road,
Leghorn; Toulon, Cagliari, Algiers, Strait of Bonifacio, Gulf of Naples, Palermo,
Strait of Messina, Valetta;- Smyrna, River Danube, Alexandria, Cephalonia,
Trieste^ Patras, &c. Illustrated with numerous views of the coast, and descriptive notes. Drawn from the late surveys made by order of the British, French,
Austrian, and Russian Governments, by Commanders Smyth, Copeland, Graves,12
James Itn/ray and Sonls Catalogue,
Monnier, Le Saulnier de Vauhello, Gautier,  Beautemps-Beaupre', De Hell, A.
Berrard, Dortet De Tessan, etc.    A beautifully engraved chart,  accompanied
with a Book of Directions ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...      14s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ... ...      19s.  Od.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house,  coloured and
varnished; size 8 ft. 4 in. by 3 ft. 4 in.        ... ...      42s. Od.
The same chart, without the Book of Directions       ...        ...        ...      12s. Od
This chart may also be had in two Parts, as follows :—
66. (Part I.)—Gibraltar tO Sicily, on two sheets.    This chart shows the navi
gation between the coast of Portugal and  Sicily,  and contains the following
plans, besides numerous views of the coast:—Gibraltar, Channel between Corsica
and Italy, Villefranche, Barcelona, MaTion in Minorca, Alicante, Malaga, Almeria,
Cartagena,  Strait of Gibraltar, Valetta, Strait of Messina,  Palermo,  Gulf of
Naples, Strait of Bonifacio,  Algiers,  Genoa,   Hyeres  Road,  Leghorn,  Toulon,
and Cagliari.    Accompanied with a Book of Directions      ... ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
67. (Part II.)—Italy tO Alexandria, on two sheets.    This chart comprises the
navigation between the Adriatic,  Black Sea, and the Levant,   and contains
plans of the harbours of Alexandria, Cephalonia, Trieste, Gulf of Padras, the
Channel between Zante and the Morea, Mouths of the Danube, Odessa, Smyrna,
&c;   it is also illustrated with several views.    Accompanied with a Book of
Directions ...        ...        ...        ... ...        ...        ... ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use         ...        ...        ...      10s.  6d.
68*. MEDITERRANEAN SEA (Western Portion of), on three large sheets,
showing the navigation between Gibraltar and Malta on the most extensive scale
yet published.    With numerous plans of the most important harbours.    Accompanied with a Book of Directions.    (A new chart)   ... ...        ...      12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ... ...        ...      15s.  9d.
69.* MEDITERRANEAN SEA (Eastern Portion of), on four large sheets
showing the navigation between  Sicily and Malta and the coasts of Egypt and
Syria, on a very large scale.    With numerous plans of harbours.    Accompanied
with a Book of Directions    (A new Chart.)  ...        ...        ...        ...      14s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains1 use ...        ...        ... ..      19s. Od.
* These two charts (Nos. 6S and and 69) show the whole navigation from Gibraltar to Alexandria and
the coast of Syria, on a very large scale. The chart No. 69 being very large, may be had in two parts,
as in Nos. 70 and 71.
70. MEDITERRANEAN SEA (Middle Portion of), on two large sheets,
showing the navigation between Sicily and Malta and tbe Grecian Archipelago.
Compiled from the most recent surveys, with plans of harbours.    Accompanied
with a Book of Directions        ... ... ... ... .. ...        8s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ... ...      10s.  6d.
71. MEDITERRANEAN SEA  (Eastern or Levant Portion),  on two
large sheets, showing the navigation between the Grecian Archipelago and the
coasts of  Egypt   and   Syria.    With plans   of the  most important harbours.
Compiled   from   the   most   recent   surveys.     Accompanied with a   Book  of
Directions ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ....        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
72. ADRIATIC,  on two large sheets, with numerous plans of harbours and views
of the coast.    Accompanied by a Book of Sailing Directions ...      10s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      12s. 6d.
73. ARCHIPELAGO and   IONIAN   ISLANDS,   on two sheets, on a very
large scale, with plans of Cervi, Skiatho, and Doro Channels, the Harbours of
Syra, Kalamitza, and Sigri; Salamis and Saloniki Bays, the Gulf of Smyrna
and Khios Strait, &c. Drawn chiefly from the late surveys of Commanders
W. H. Smyth, R. Copeland, T. Graves, &c, of the Royal Navy. Accompanied
with a Book of Sailing Directions        ...        ...        ...        ... ...      10s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      13s.  Od.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 4 ft. 4 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ...        ...      22s.  6d.Minories, London.
13
74. GIBRALTAR STRAIN     A  sheet showing the   Strait on a very large
scale            2s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        3s. 3d.
75. COAST OF SPAIN (Gibraltar to Cape San Antonio), with plans of
Cartagena,   Malaga,   Torre  Vieja,   Alicante,  Almazarron,   Alineria,   Porman,
Aguilbas, Portus, Carbonera, Mount Cope, Grosa Island, Benidorme, Herradura
Bay, Ceuta Bay, Alboran Island, &c. ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ... ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
76. COAST OF SPAIN (Cape San Antonio to Cape San Sebastian, in
cluding t. e Baleares Islands), with plans of Barcelona, Port Mahon, Valencia,
Mattaro, Palma, Tarragona, Alfaques, Salou,  Denia, Iviza, Cabrera, Palamos,
Pangal,  Soller,  Cape Cullera,  Columbretes Islands,  and the channel between
Iviza and Formentera    ... ...        ...        ...        . . ...        ...        5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...       6s. 3d.
77. ALEXANDRIA 'the port of Alexandria and,coast in its vicinity).
A chart showing the coast of Egypt in the vicinity of Alexandria on a large
scale, with plans of Alexandria Harbour and the New Port.   Published specially
for the trade to Alexandria       ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...       6s. 3d.
78. DARDANELLES,   on   one sheet.    With   plans   of the Tenedos Channel,
         5s. Od.
         6s. 3d.
With numerous  plans of harbours.
5s. Od.
        6s. 3d.
on three   sheets.
Narrows of the Dardanelles and Lampsaki Bay
On cloth for Captains' use
SEA   Of  MARMORA,    on one sheet.
80.
With plans of
So
On cloth for Captain's use
BLACK   SEA and  SEA of AZOV,
the Bospborus, the Strait of Kertch, Sulina branch of the Danube, Kustenjeh,
Odessa, Balaklava, Burghaz, Varni," Soujak, Rizeh, Batoum, Trebizond, St.
Douka, Ghelenjik, Gherzeh, Onnieh, Anapa, Samsoun, Kaffa, Amastra, and
Pinoub.    Accompanied with a Book of Directions.    A beautifully engraved and
elegant chart        ... ... ... ... ...         12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      15s. 9d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ...        ...      31s. 6d.
Shipmasters bound to the Black Sea or Sea of Azov, should provide themselves with the charts
68, 69, 73, 78,79, 80, as they show the navigation on a very large scale.
Coasts of North America, the West Indies,
81. NEWFOUNDLAND and COAST of LABRADOR, on four sheets. This
chart is drawn from the .late English'and French surveys, and is believed to
contain the most recent and reliable information. It is on four large sheets, and
the various plans of the harbours of Quirpon, St. Margaret's Bay, Cod Roy,
St. Pierre, Trepassy, Croc, St. John's, Harbour Grace, Conception Bay, Sandwich, Chateau, Red Bay, St. Lunaire Bay, &c., cannot fail to add to its utility; -
there are also many explanatory remarks, useful as hints to those making the
land.   Accompanied with a Book of Directions        ...        ...        ...      12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ... ..        ...      17s. Od.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 4 ft. 10 in. by 3 ft. 9 in       31s. 6d.
82. BANKS and Part of the Island of NEWFOUNDLAND, on two
sheets. Compiled principally from the recent surveys made by order of the
French Government. This chart contains plans of St. John's and St. Pierre
Harbours, and shows the Banks in an accurate manner, on a very large scale,
aud will be found extremely useful to those engaged in the Quebec and Montreal trade          7s.  6d.
On cloth for Captains' use ... ... ... ...      10s. Od.14
James Imray and Sons Catalogue,
83. COAST   of' LABRADOR,   and North.  Part of the  ISLAND of
NEWFOUNDLAND, on two sheets. With plans, on a large scale, of Croc
Harbour .and the Strait of Belle Isle. This chart extends from lat. 48° 30' to
55° 30' N., and exhibits the Coast of Labrador to that latitude, and will be
found very useful to the Labrador fishermen and St. Lawrence traders, as, independent of the plans, it shows the coast on a large scale ... 7s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use            ...         ...         ... ...      10s. Od.
84. GULF and RIVER ST. LAWRENCE, on three sheets.   This chart shows
the Coast of North America between Belle Isle and Cape Cod, and includes
therefore, the Island of Newfoundland, the Gulf and River St. Lawrence,
and Coast of Nova Scotia. In it are plans of Halifax, Conception Bay, Strait
of Belle Isle, St. Pierre, Harbour Grace, Cape Race, Cape Ray, &c. &c. Accompanied by a Book of Directions      ...        ...        ...        ...        ...      12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains" use ...        ...        ... ...      15s. 9d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ...        ...      31s. 6d.
85. GULF of St. LAWRENCE, on two sheets, on a large scale, with plans
of Gaspe' Harbour,  Miramichi Bay,   Hillsbro' Bay, and the Mingan Islands.
Drawn from the recent surveys of Captain Bayfield, R.N.  ...        ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
36. COAST of NORTH AMERICA from Scatari Island to Cape Cod,
(on three sheets,) including Nova Scotia, the Bay of Fundy, &c, "jvith plans of
the harbours   of Halifax,  Fourchu,  Yarmouth,  Annapolis,   Salem,   Portland,
Portsmouth, St. John's, and of numerous anchorages on various parts of the
coast.   Illustrated with, views of the coast      ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains''use ...        ...        ...        ...      14s. 3d.
87. COAST Of NORTH AMERICA, from CAPE CANSO to NEW YORK and the
RIVER DELAWARE, on three large sheets, with plans of the approaches to
Portland, Boston, and New York. Accompanied with a Book of Directions       ...        ... i      ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...      128. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      15s. 9d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ...        ...      31s. 6d.
88. COAST   of NORTH AMERICA,   from  NEW YORK and   the  RIVER
DELAWARE to the STRAIT of FLORIDA, on three large sheets, with plans of
the most important harbours.   Accompanied with a Book of Sailing Directions.
12s. Od.
On doth for Captains" use       . <*.   !    ...        ...        ... ■    16s. 9d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured, and
varnished; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.       ...        ...      31s. 6d.
Notb.—These Charts (Nos. 87 and 88) show the whole of the Atlantic sea-board of the United
States, and are intended to accompany each other. They include the various surveys made by the
officers engaged in the survey of the coast of the United States, and have been engraved at considerable
expense, and the greatest care has been taken in their construction, that they may not be inferior to
any published.
89. BAHAMA  ISLANDS and BANKS,   on two large sheets.    Showing the
Strait of Florida and adjacent coasts, with plans, on  a large scale,  of Cay
West, East part of Florida Reef, Havana, Matanzas,  New Providence, &c.
■Drawn from the most recent British, Spanish and United States surveys    8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
90. WEST INDIES and  COAST Of COLOMBIA,  with   plans,   on   a large
scale, of the harbours of Vera Cruz, Port Royal, Chagres, A spin wall, and Havana.
Compiled from the latest English, French, and Spanish surveys, and improved
by tbe introduction of views of the coast, descriptive notes, &c. &c.        10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ... ...      15s. 6d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 4 ft. 10 in. by 3 ft. 3 in.            27s. Od.Minories, London.
15
91. GULF of MEXICO, and Islands of Cuha, Haiti, Jamaica, the
Caribbees, Sec., on four large sheets. Showing the Windward Passages on a
large scale.    With a Book of Directions      ...        ...        ...        ...      18s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      23s. Od.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 8 ft. 4 in. by 3 ft. 4 in.        ...        ...      42s. Od.
92. GULF of MEXICO, and Islands of Cuha, Haiti, and Jamaica, being
three sheets of Chart No. 91, drawn principally from the surveys of Commanders
Owen and Barnett.    Accompanied with a Book of Directions        ...      14s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      17s. 9d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ;■ size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ...        ...      82s. 6d.
93. BAY Of HONDURAS.    On a very large scale, with plans of Belize and other
harbours.    Drawn from the recent surveys of Commanders Owen and Barnett, of
the Royal Navy ...        ... ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        7s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        9s. 6d.
94. COAST Of COLOMBIA and CARIBBEAN SEA, on three large sheets,
with plans of the harbours of Greytown, Barcelona, Cumana, Porto Cabello,
Santa Anna, Sabauillo, La Guayra, Chagres, &c. &c. Drawn from the late
surveys made by order of the British and Spanish Governments ; accompanied
with a Book of Directions  '      ...        ...       ...        ...        ...        ...      12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      15s. 9d.
On cloth' and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ...        ...      31s. 6d.
95. CARIBBEE ISLANDS.    Being one sheet of the Chart No. 91.    An elegantly
engraved chart    ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       ...       5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ... ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
96. CUBA.    On a very large scale, with plans of Havana and the principal harbours,
drawn from the recent Spanish surveys ...        ...        ...        ...        5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
97. HAITI  or   SAN   DOMINGO.     Compiled from the most  recent  surveys
6s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
98. PUERTO RICO and the VIRGIN ISLANDS.   On two large sheets.
With plans of St. Thomas' Harbour, Road Harbour, Gorda, Sound, South-east
end of  Culebra,   Chjistianstaed, Mona   Island,  Sombrero   Island, Guanica,
Mayaguez, and San Juan Harbours       ...        ...        ...        ...        ...      8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...        ...    10s. 6d.
Coasts of South America,   California,
4-
c.
99.
100.
101.
COAST of GUAYANA, from Trinidad to Cape Cachipour.   Showing
the various harbours and rivers of Demerara, Berbice, Cayenne, &c.    Drawn
from the latest surveys   ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        5s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains'use          6s. 3 1.
APPROACHES to the RIVERS AMAZONA, PARA, &e. from Cape
CACHIPOUR to MARANHAM, with plans of the Rivers Para and Amazona-
Drawn from the most recent .surveys  ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
COAST of BRAZIL, from Maranham to Rio Janeiro, on three large
sheets. With plans of the most important harbours on the coast, among which
aretthe following:—Maranham, Pernambuco, Approaches to Pernambuco, Bahia,
Parahyba do Norte, River Aracati, Rio Grande do Norte, Espiritu Santo, Port
■thio, Rio Janeiro, &c, the Roccas Islets, and other dangers.    Drawn principally
I!I
16
James Imray and Sorts Catalogue,
from the recent surveys of M. Mouchez of the French Navy, and from those
by Don A. Vital de Oliveira of the Brazilian Navy. Illustrated with many
views of the coast. Accompanied with a Book of Directions ...        ...      10s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      13s.  9d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ...        ...      31s. 6<L
102.* COAST of BRAZIL, from Cape Frio and Rio Janeiro to the RIVER
PLATE,,  on   two  large sheets.     In this chart are given plans of the most
important   harbours,   such   as   Bio  Janeiro,   Marambaya,   Santos,    Cananea,
Paranagua, Rio Grande,  Monte "Video,   Cape Sta.  Maria, &c,   and there are
explanatory notes which add considerably to its value.    Drawn from the most
recent French and English surveys.    Accompanied with a Book of Directions.
8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
* These two oluirts "(Noa. 101 and 102) comprise the whole of the Brazil Coast, and are laid down
upon the plain scale, not the diagonal.
103. RIVER PLATE. A large scale chart, on two sheets, showing the navigation
to Monte Video and Buenos Ayres. With plans of Monte Video, Buenos Ayres,
Maldonado, &c. Compiled from recent British, French, Spanish, and American
surveys     ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        7s. Od.
On cloth for Captains''use ...        ...        ...        ...        9s. 6d.
104. RIVER PLATE and RIVERS PARANA and URUGUAY.   The
same Chart as No. 103, but with a supplementary sheet showing the course of
the Rivers Parana and Uruguay, from Buenos Ayres to Rosario and Paysandu
10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      13s. 9d.
For the convenience of purchasers the Supplementary Sheet (Rivers Parana
and Uruguay) is supplied separately, price 4s.
105. SOUTH AMERICA (COAST of), from the River Plate round Cape
Horn to Valparaiso, on three large sheets. With plans, on a large scale, of
Valparaiso and San Carlos Bays, the Strait of Magellan, &c. &c. Drawn
from the surveys of Captains Fitzroy and King, of the Royal Navy. A
beautifully engraved and accurate chart ...        ...        ...        ...      12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      15s. 9d.
On doth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ...        ...      31b. 6d.
106.* SOUTH AMERICA (EAST COAST of, Chart No. 1). Showing the
navigation from the River Plate to Magellan Strait and the Falkland Islands.
On three large sheets.   With numerous plans of harbours
34° S. to 54° S., longitudes 54° 40' W. to 69" 30' W.
On cloth for Captains' use
Limits;
latitudes
10a. 0d."
13a, I'd.
107.* SOUTH AMERICA (SOUTH COAST of, Chart No. 2\ including
Magellan Strait, the Falkland Islands and Coast round Cape Horn. On three
large sheets.   With numerous plans of harbours.   Limits; latitudes 50° 30' S. to
59° S.; longitudes 56° W.,to 82° 20'W       10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      13s. 9<L
108* SOUTH AMERICA (WEST COAST of, Chart No. 3), from Magellan
'Strait to Valparaiso.    On three large sheets.    'With plans of the harbours of
Valparaiso, Concepcion, Valdivia, Chaneral, San Carlos, Barbara, Otway, &c. &c.
Limits ; latitudes 53° S. to 32° 8., longitudes 71° W. to 85° 6(f W.        10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains', use ...        ...        ...        ...      13s. 9d.
109.* SOUTH AMERICA (WEST COAST of, Chart No. 4), from Valparaiso
to Truxillo. On three large sheets. "With plans of the harbours of Callao, Pisco
Bay (Chinca Islands), Hay, Papndo, Horcon, Qnintero, - Coquimbo, A tico,
Huasco, Ylo,  Arica, Valparaiso, &c. &c.   Limits; latitudes 34° S. to 8° S.;
longitudes 68° W. to 82° 607 W.        10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      13s. 9d.Minories, London.
17
HO.  SOUTH AMERICA (WEST COAST of, Chart No. 5).   Showing the
navigation between Truxillo and Panama.   On two sheets.    With plans, on a
large scale, of Panama Bay and Harbour, Bahia Honda, the River Guayaquil,
&c, and illustrated with some views of the coast       ...        ...        ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. Od.
* These Charts (Nos. 106,107,108, and 108,) are all new, and show the navigation from the River '
Plate round Cape Horn to Truxillo, on the largest scale' yet published. They are very clearly and *
beautifully engraved, are all ou the same scale, and no expense has been spared in their production.
ill. CENTRAL   AMERICA    (COAST   of),  from   Coiba   Island   to
San Bias; one large sheet. With plans, on a large scale, of the harbours
of Sihuatanejo, Acapulco, Guatulco, San Carlos, Realejo, Salinas, Culebra,
Punta Arenas, Arenitas, San Bias, and illustrated with some views of the
coast. Drawn from the Spanish surveys, and much improved from the observations of Captain Beechey and Commander Belcher, of the Royal Navy 5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
112. CALIFORNIA (COAST of), showing the Coast from San Bias to
San Francisco Bay, on two large sheets, with plans of the harbours of
Mazatlan, Magdalen Bay, Guaymas, Monterey, San Francisco, &c. Compiled
chiefly from the United States Coast survey, the Spanish surveys, &c. &c,
and much improved by recent observations made by English and French Naval
officers       "       10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use                 12s. 6d.
113. OREGON and VANCOUVER ISLAND (COASTS of).   On two large
sheets, with many plans of harbours, including St. Juan de Fuca Strait, Port
Victoria, Nootka. Sound,   Port  San  Juan,   Beecher  and  Pedder Bays,   and
Esquimalt Harbour        ...        ... ...        10s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      12s. 6d.
113a. SAILING DIRECTIONS FOR THE WEST COAST OF NORTH
AMERICA, BETWEKN PANAMA AND QUEEN CHARLOTTE
ISLANDS. With numerous plans of harbours. Intended to accomgany the
Charts Nos. Ill, 112, and 113.  By James Frederick Imra/, F.R.G.S.   10s. Od.
!
114
115
116.
Indian Ocean, fyc.
INDIAN OCEAN, on two sheets. Showing the navigation upon a large scale,
from the Cape of Good Hope to Bombay, Madras, Calcutta, and St. George's
Sound in Australia, or between latitudes 27° N. and 50° S., longitudes 15° E.
and 124° E. Drawn from the most recent surveys made by order of the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty, the Dutch and French Governments, &c. &c. Im
fcc.
8s. Od.
10s. 6d.
proved by many remarks on the tidal phenomena, currents, winds, &c
On cloth for Captains'use
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 4 ft. 4 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.              20s. Od.
INDIAN OCEAN, on three large sheets.   The same chart as No. 114, but with
an additional sheet containing plans  of the principal islands,   the  Maldivh,
       10s. 6d.
       14s. 3d.
Chagos, Seychelles groups, &c.
On cloth for Captains'use
On cloth and rollers for Couuting-house, coloured and
varnished ...        ...        .;.
30s. Od.
Beiner the
INDIAN and PACIFIC OCEANS, on three large sheets,
same chart as No. 114, with the addition of an extra sheet, to show the coasts
of Australia, New Zealand, China, and the Filipinas Islands. The limits of the
chart are latitudes 27° N. and 50° S., longitudes 15° E. and 178° E.    12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use        15s. 9d.
On cloth, and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in       30s. Od.
B18
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
117. INDIAN and PACIFIC OCEANS. A chart for the use of shipmasters
bound to Australia, who may intend to sail on the arc of the Great Circle. In
this chart the best routes are shown, and the Great Circle Tracks from the Cape
of Good Hope to Australia are also shown. Limits, latitudes 27° N. to 62° S. ;
longitudes 15° E. to 178° E.             14s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...       ...        ...        ...      19s. Od.
118. INDIAN AND PACIFIC ' OCEANS, on four sheets. Showing the
navigation eastward of* the Cape of Good Hope to Australia and China, or between latitudes 27° N. and 50° S., longitudes 15° E. and 178° E. With a
sheet of plans of the detached groups of islands so profusely scattered over the
Indian Ocean      ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...      16s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      21s. Od.
119. PLANS of ISLANDS, &c, in the INDIAN OCEAN, on one sheet.
Being the additional sheet referred to in No. 115. The plans are Maldivh,
Chagos, Seychelles, and Lakdivh groups of Islands : Comoro Islands ; Kerguelen
Land; St. Paul Island ; Cocos Islands ; Mahe' in Seychelles; and Christmas
Harbour in Kerguelen Land. All these are on a very large scale ... 5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
119a. SHORT NOTES ON THE WINDS, WEATHER, AND CURRENTS OF
THE INDIAN OCEAN, vtogether with general Sailing Directions and remarks
on making Passages ; with two charts showing the Currents and Tracks through
the Ocean. A pamphlet intended specially to accompany the chart of the
Indian Ocean.    By W. H. Rosser    *   ...        ...        ...        ..        ...        2s. 6d.
120. SOUTHERN AFRICA and MADAGASCAR, on three large sheets.
Showing the Cape of Good Hope and Mozambique Passage on a very large
scale, and exhibiting the navigation between Table and False Bays, and the
islands of Mauritius and Reunion       ...        ...        ...        ... ...      12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      15s. 9d.
121. COAST of the CAPE COLONY, from Table Bay to Algoa -Bay,
on two large sheets, with plans of Harbours.    Compiled from the latest surveys.'
. Illustrated with views of the coast       ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
122. COAST OF THE CAPE COLONY, from Table Bay to Port Natal.
On three sheets, with plans of Harbours ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      14s. 3d.
123. MAURITIUS, one sheet, on a very large scale, with plans of Port Louis
and Grand Port.    Drawn from recently published documents        ...        5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.-
124. GULF of ADEN, one sheet, from Socotra Island to the Red Sea, with a
plan of Aden. Illustrated with views of the land. On a large sheet. Drawn
from recent surveys      ...        ... ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...       6s. 3d.
125. INDIA (West Coast of), from Cape Comorin. to Bombay, on two
large sheets,   with plans of the  harbours of Bombay, Cochin, and Calicut,
also of the approaches to Bombay.    Improved by the introduction of remarks
upon currents, winds, &c. ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
326. INDIA (West Coast of), from Bombay to .Karachi, on two large
sheets, with plans of the harbours of Bombay and Kai'achi ...        8s. Od.
Oh cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      ]0s. 6d.
127. BAY of BENGAL,   on  two sheets, on" a very large   scale, with plans of
Akyab, Bassein, Trincomalie, Colombo, Point de Galle, Bassas Reefs, &c &c.   I
. With two. small charts attached to it, showing the currents daring the South-west
and North-east Monsoons ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ... ...        ...      10s. 6d.Minories, London.
19
128. BAY Of BENGAL (No/1, West part of the), on two large sheets, comprising tbe coast from Cape Comorin to Cocanada, and including Ceylon.
With plans of Bassas Reefs, .Colombo, Point de Galle, Trincomalie, Cocanada,
Paumben Pass,. &c. &c. (Limits of chart, latitudes 4° 46' to 17° 30' N.,
and longitudes 76° 30'to 86° 45'E.)        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
129. BAY of BENGAL (No. 2, North part of the), on two large sheets,
comprising the coast between Pulicat and Bassein River. With plans of Akyab,
Bassein River, Kyou Phiouk, &c. &c. (Limits of chart, latitudes 13° 10' to 23° N.,
and longitudes S2° to 95° E.)   ...                 8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
130. BAY Of BENGAL (No. 3, East part Of the), on two large sheets, comprising the coast between Bassein River and Penang, and showing the Andamans,
Nicobars, and north coast of Sumatra. With plans of the principal harbours.
(Limits of charts latitudes 4° 46' to 17° 30'N., and longitudes 91° to 101° 20' E).
8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      108. 6d.
* These three charts (Nos. 128,129, 130), include the whole of the Bay of Bengal, and are on a
larger scale than any yet published. They form an invaluable series of charts for the use of Traders
in the Bay.
131. RICE PORTS Of INDIA.    A chart, on two large sheets, of the east coast of
•  the Bay of Bengal, between latitudes 13° and 21° N., longitudes 92° and 98° E.
With plans of Akyab, Kyou Phiouk, Bassein River, Rangoon River, Maulmain,
and Kalegouk Island anchorage.    A very useful chart for Shipmasters bound to
Akyab,  Rangoon, or Maulmain, as it exhibits the navigation on a larger scale
than any hitherto published       ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
(AH these charts of the Bay of Bengal (Nos. 127 to 131) are new publications. The publishers feell
confident that better or more useful charts cannot be obtained, as recourse has been made to every
available official survey, and no expense has been spared in their production).
131a. SAILING DIRECTIONS FOR THE BAY OF BENGAL to accompany
the charts of the Bay, particularly describing the Rice Ports. With
plans of many of the most important harbours. By James F. Imray,
F.R.G.S       6s. Od.
East India Archipelago, China, tfc,
132.
133
CHINA SEA and EAST INDIA ARCHIPELAGO, on two sheets.
Being a general chart of all the islands composing the Archipelago of the India
and China Seas.    A track chart, and not intended for navigation purposes, the
'scale   being   too   limited  for   insertion  of   the  Reefs   with   the   necessary
accuracy     ...        ...        ...        •••        •••        •••        ••■        •••        •••      8s. Od
       10s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use
EAST   INDIA   ARCHIPELAGO.
1-)
Chart No.  1.)   Limits
and 110° 50' E.     ...
(Western  Route  to   China,
ttitudes 2° 50'and 7° 10' S., and longitudes 105° 30'
               7s. 6d.
134.* EAST   INDIA   ARCHIPELAGO.    (Western   Route to   China,
Chart No. 2.)    Its limits are, latitudes 3° 0' S., and 5° 40' N.; and longitudes
103° 20', and 110° 20'E.                  7s. 6d.
135.* EAST   INDIA  ARCHIPELAGO.    (Western  Route to   China,
Chart No. 3.)    Limits, latitudes 3° N. to 16° 20' N., and longitudes 99° 20' to
110° E -        —        7s. 6d.
136* EAST   INDIA  ARCHIPELAGO.    (Western   Route  to  China,
Chart No. 4.)    Limits, latitudes 1° 2Q' to 11° 52' N., and longitudes 107° 20'
to 120° 40'E        7s. 6d.
B 220
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
137.* EAST   INDIA  ARCHIPELAGO.     (Western Route to China,
Chart No. 5.)    Limits, latitudes 10° 50* and 23°  40* N.,   and   longitudes
104° 45' and 115° 2C E.         7s. 6d.
138.* EAST INDIA ARCHIPELAGO. (Western Route to China,
.Chart Ho. 6.) Limits, latitudes 10° 50' and 23° iff N., and longitudes 112° 10'
andl22°45'E         7s. 6d.
* These charts (Nos. 133 to 138) of what is popularly known as the 'Western Route to China,
exhibit the navigation from Sunda Strait to the Coast of China on a very large scale. Each consists of
two sheets; the set, therefore, comprises twelve sheets. They have been compiled from the most
recent British, French, Patch, and Spanish surveys. In several of the charts there are notes
descriptive of the currents, winds, &c, and remarks upon the courses most advisable to follow
at certain periods of the year. If mounted on cloth for Captains' use, the price of each will be 2s. 6d.
extra.   An Index Chart accompanies the set.
139. STRAITS OF MALACCA and SINGAPORE, on two large sheets, with
plans of Singapore St rait, Singapore Harbour, Penang Island, Strait of Dorian,
&c.    Drawn from the most recent surveys     ...        ...        ...        ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
140. STRAIT Of STJNDA, on two sheets, on the largest scale yet published.
With plans of Harbours...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        7s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        9s. 6d.
141. STRAIT Of SDNDA, one sheet. The same chart as the preceding, but
without the sheet containing Batavia Road   ...        ...        ...        ...        5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
142. GASPAR    STRAIT,    one   sheet,    on   the   largest   scale   yet
On cloth for Captains' use
published.
5s. Od.
6s. 3d.
143.* EAST   INDIA ARCHIPELAGO (Eastern Passages  to   China
and Japan,—Chart No. 1). This chart with No. 133 (the Western Route to China,
Chart No. 1) will exhibit the navigation of the Indian Archipelago eastward of
Sunda Strait,  so far as Macassar Strait.    Its limits are latitudes 2° 30' and
12° 20'S., and longitudes 110° 10'and 122° 20'E         7s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. Od.
144.* EAST   INDIA   ARCHIPELAGO   (Eastern Passages  to China
and Japan—Chart No. 2), showing the Banda Sea and great island of Timor,
Pitts Passage,   &c.    Limits,  latitudes 2° 30' and 12° 20' S.,  and longitudes
121° 30'and 133° 40'E         7s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. Od.
145.* EAST  INDIA  ARCHIPELAGO    (Eastern Passages to  China
and Japan,—Chart No. 3), showing the Arafura Sea, Torres Strait, &c. Limits,
latitudes 2° 30' and 12° 20' S., and longitudes 133° and 145° 15' E.       7s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. Od.
146.* EAST   INDIA ARCHIPELAGO   (Eastern  Passages to China
and Japan,—Chart No. 4.) This chart shows the sea northward of Chart No. 1,
and includes Macassar Strait, Celebes Sea, &c.    Limits, latitudes 3° 20' S. and
8° 40' N., and longitudes 116° 10' and 125° 50' E         7s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ..,       ...      10s. Od.
147.* EAST   INDIA   ARCHIPELAGO   (Eastern  Passages   to China
and Japan,—Chart No. 5), showing the Molucca Islands and south part of
the Filipinas.    Limits, latitudes 3° 20' S. and 8° 40' N., and longitudes 125°
and 134° 40'E         7s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains'use        10s. Od.
148.* EAST  INDIA  ARCHIPELAGO  (Eastern Passages to China
and Japan,—Chart No. 6), showing the greater' part of the Filipinas, the Sulu
Sea, &c.    Limits,  latitudes 8° and 17° 40' N., and longitudes 118° 20' and
130° 20' E         7s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use        10s. Od.Minories, London.
21
149.* EAST   INDIA   ARCHIPELAGO   (Eastern  Passages to   China
and Japan,—Chart No. 7), showing Formosa, the Majico-sima Islands, &c, also
the northern part of the Filipinas.    Limits, latitudes 16° 30'and 25° 40' N,
and longitudes, 118° 20'and 130° 20'E        7s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use# ...        ...        ...        ...     10s. Od.
150.* EAST INDIA  ARCHIPELAGO   (Eastern  Passages   to China
and Japan, —Chart No. 8), showing the coast of China from Formosa Island to
the Gulf of Pe-chi-li and the western islands of Japan. Illustrated with numerous views of the coast.   Limits,  latitudes  25°  and   41°   N., longitudes
117° 30' and 132° 40' E        7s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...     10s. Od.
151.* EAST   INDIA   ARCHIPELAGO   (Eastern  Passages to  China
and Japan,—Chart No. 9), showing the islands of Japan. With numerous
plans of harbours.    Limits, latitudes 32° and 43° 54' N., longitudes 127° and
146° E         7s. 6d.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...               10s. Od.
* These charts of the eastern portion of the East India Archipelago and the Eastern and Yellow
Seas, show the various islands and passages on the largest scale yet published. Each consists of two
large sheets (double elephant size), so that the whole series is composed of eighteen sheets. They
have been compiled from the most recent English, Dutch, French, and Spanish .surveys, and no
expense has been spared to make them the most complete and accurate charts of these seas in
existence. Shipmasters proceeding to Eastern Australia from China and Japan should take, in
addition to these charts, those of the Western Pacific Ocean, (Nos. 156,157,158,159.) An Explanatory
Index Chart accompanies each set of charts.
152. COAST OF CHINA, from Canton River to Shanghae and Adjacent
Islands, on two large sheets, containing plans of the Pratas Reef, the harbours
of Hong-Kong, Amoy, Shangbae, Tongsang, Hoo-e-tow, the Rivers Yangste
and Woosung, and of the Chusan Archipelago, &c. Drawn chiefly from the
surveys of Commanders Kellet and Collinson, of the Royal Navy 8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use        10s. 6d.
152a
INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO. (SHORT NOTES ON THE WINDS,
WEATHER, AND CURRENTS), together with general Sailing Directions
and remarks on making Passages; to accompany charts of the China Sea, Indian
Archipelago, and Western Pacific. With charts to illustrate and explain the
subject.     ByW. H. Rosser        5s. Od.
Pacific Ocean,
153.* NORTH PACIFIC OCEAN, on three large sheets.    Extending from the
Equator to Latitude 69° N., and from Longitude 60° W. to Longitude 110° E.
The plans of islands and harbours are about forty in number ...       12s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...        15s.  9d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.        ...        ...      31s. 6d.
154.* SOUTH  PACIFIC  OCEAN, on  three large  sheets.    With about forty
plans of islands and harbours   ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...      12s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      15s. 9d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. 5 in.               31s. 6d.
* These are new publications, and show the great Pacific Ocean on a large scale.
155. PACIFIC OCEAN (the southern or lower part).   A chart showing the
navigation between South-eastern Australia and Cape Horn, giving also the
northern limit of icebergs in the Southern Ocean, and specially intended for use
as a track chart. The best routes to Cape Horn are laid down. Limits, latitudes 25° S. to 70° S. ; longitudes 135° E. to 50° W.          8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...   'lis. 9d.
EH22
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
156.* PACIFIC OCEAN  (Western part of, No. 1), on two large sheets.
Showing the navigation between Eastern Australia and New Zealand, and with
plans of Cook Strait, Port Jackson, Auckland Islands,  Port Nicholson, &c.
Limits, latitudes 30° to 53° 50' S., and longitudes 143° E. to 175° 10' W.    Ss. Od.
On cloth for Captains',,use ...        ... ... ...      10s. 6d.
157.* PACIFIC OCEAN (Western Part of, No. 2), on two'large sheets.
Showing the navigation northward from Sydney (Eastern Australia) to Torres
Strait, and through the New Hebrides, &c.    Limits; Latitudes 0° to 38   S.,
and Longitudes 140° to 172" 40'E         8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d
158.
159.
PACIFIC OCEAN  (Western Part of, No. 3), on two large sheets.
Limits ; Latitudes 3° S. to 35° 30' N.,  and Longitudes 150° E. to 177° 20' W.
In this chart there are about forty plans of the principal islands and harbours
met with in the route from Australia to China and Japan. ...        ...        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'.use ...        ...        ... ...      10s. 6d.
PACIFIC OCEAN (Western Part of, No. 4), on two large sheets.
Limits ;  Latitudes 3° S. to 35° 30' N., and Longitudes 120° to 152° 40' E.
8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s.  6d.
* These four charts (Nos. 156 to 159) show the navigation between Eastern Australia, New Zealand'
and Japan, on the largest scale yet published. The numerous plans of harbours and islands (about
60 in number) greatly increase their usefulness.   An Index Chart accompanies the set.
Australia and New Zealand,
160. AUSTRALIA,   TASMANIA,   NEW   ZEALAND,   &c.    A- general
Chart, on four large sheets, showing the navigation between the various ports of
Australia, New Zealand, New Caledonia, and the approaches to Torres Strait,
with plans of Bass Strait and Port Phillip. Illustrated with some views of the
coast ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...      128. Od.
On cloth for Captains.' use ...        ...        ...        ...      17s. Od.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 4 ft. 10 in. by 3 ft. 9 in       30s. Od.
161. AUSTRALIA, South, East, and West Coasts of, on three large sheets,
with plans of Ports Fairey, Stephens, Dalrymple, Botany Bay, Cock burn Sound,
King George's Sound,' Storm Bay, Port Adelaide, Jervis Bay, Portland Bay,
Ports Philiip, Jackson, Newcastle, and Moreton Bay. Drawn from the most
recent surveys.    Illustrated with some views of the coast ...        12s.  Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      15s. 9d.
On cloth and rollers for Counting-house, coloured and
varnished ; size 6 ft. 5 in. by 3 ft. o in.       ...        ...      31s. Cd.
162. AUSTEALIA (South-East and East Coasts of, Chart No. 1), on two
large sheets, showing the navigation between Australia Bight and Cape Northumberland.      With Plans of Backstairs Passage, Ports Adelaide,  Lincoln,
Victor, Wallaroo, Elliot, Rosetta, Onkarapinga, and Willinga,  Lacipede and
• Rivoli Bays, Troubridge Shoals, &c, &c.    Limits, latitudes 31° 20' to 89° S. ;
longitudes'129° to 141° E        8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
163. AUSTRALIA (South-East a^ East Coasts of, Chart No. 2), on two
large sheets, showing the navigation between Cape Northumberland and Cape
Howe, and including Tasmania. With Plans of the entrance to Port Phillip,
Ports Dalrymple, Western, Portland, and Fairy, Lady Bay, and the approach
to  Hobarton.     Limits,   latitudes  37° 20* to  44:° 30f  S.,   longitudes  140° to
152° 8'E.          8s. Od.
On cloth for Captains' use ...        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.Minories, London.
23
164. AUSTRALIA (South-East and East Coasts of, Chart No. 3), on two
large sheets, showing the navigation between Cape Howe and Tweed River.
With plans of Ports Jackson, Stephens, and Newcastle ; Twofold, Botany,
Jervis, and Broken Bays.    Limits, latitudes 28° to 38° S., longitudes 149° 50'
to 159° 10'E         8s. Od.
• On cloth for Captains'use ..        ...        ...        ...      10s. 6d.
165. AUSTRALIA (South-East and East Coasts of, Chart No. 4), on
two  large sheets,   showing the navigation   between Tweed River  and   Port
Denison, with plans of Moreton Bay, Kep'pel Bay, Ports Curtis, Denison, &c. &c.
Limits, latitudes 28° 30' to 17° 24' S.; longitudes 14S° to 157° 20' E.        8s.  Od
On cloth for Captains'use ...        ... ...        ...      10s.  6d
1
166. MARITIME ELAGS OF ALL NATIONS, on a large sheet, richly
coloured, 7s. 6d. ; if mounted on cloth and rollers, coloured and varnished, 15s.
In book, 15s.
167. The HEAVENS. A chart delineating the stars from the 1st to the 4th
magnitude, inclusive, constructed principally from the Catalogue of the Royal
Astronomical Society      ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        5s. Od.
On cloth for Captains'use ...'      ...        ...        ...        6s. 3d.
Pilots,
168. NORTH   SEA   and-COASTING PILOT.   Containing the following
Charts upon a much larger scale than the former ones :—No. 1, the River Thames,
with all its entrances, on a large scale. —No. 2, The East Coast of England,
from Orford-ness to Flamborough Head, with plans of Yarmouth Roads and
River Humber, on a large scale.—No. 3, The East Coasts of England and
Scotland, from Flamborough Head to the Orkneys ; with plans on a large scale
of the Farn Islands, River Tees, Berwick and Sunderland Ports, entrance to
the River Tyne, and Hartlepool Bay.—No. 4, A General Chart of the North Sea,
extending from the Islands of Jersey, Guernsey, &c, to Bergen in Norway, the
Shetland Islands, &c !             12s. Od.
169. ENGLAND and SCOTLAND PILOT. Containing the following
Charts, viz. :—No. 1, The River Thames, with all its entrances, on a large
scale.—No. 2, The East Coast of England, from Orfordness to Flamborough
Head.—No. 3, The East Coasts of England and Scotland, extending from Flamborough Head to the Orkneys ; with plans on a large scale of the Farn Islands,
River Tees, Berwick and Sunderland Ports, entrance to the River Tyne, and
Hartlepool Bay       10s. Od.
170. COAL TRADE PILOT. Containing the following Charts, viz. :—No. 1,
The River Thames on a large scale.—No. 2, The East Coast of England, from
Orford-ne3S to Flamborough Head, with plans of Yarmouth Roads and the River
Humber.—No. 3, Chart of the Coal Ports, extending from Flamborough Head
to Coquet Island, containing plans of Sunderland and Hartlepool Harbours, the
Rivers Tees and Tyne, Scarborough, Whitby, Blythe, and Coquet Road; and
illustrated with views of the principal lighthouses              9s. Od.24
James Imray and Sons Catalogue,
§00hs 0tt ftefripti0tt, &
NAVIGATION and NAUTICAL ASTRONOMY.    A plam, and popular
Treatise, containing all the Sailings ; Plane and Spherical Trigonometry ; various
methods of ascertaining the Latitude by Meridian, Single and Double Altitudes ;
the Longitude by Chronometer and Lunar Observations ; and the variation of
the Compass by Amplitudes and Azimuths ; and also a Journal of a Voyage from
London to Madeira. The whole illustrated by practical Rules, and a sufficient number of appropriate Examples, for rendering the student proficient in
the necessary computations of Navigation and Nautical Astronomy. Accompanied by a set of requisite Tables, with their explanation and use in resolving
the various Astronomical and other Froblems given in the course of the Work.
With an Appendix containing the Principles of Great Circle Sailing, and twenty
additional methods of finding the Latitude and Longitude. By James Griffin,
but revised and considerably improved and enlarged by Wm. Turnbull.
10s. Od.
With KEY to the Exercises, in which every Question is worked ...      12s. Od.
ROSSERS NAVIGATION, and Guide to the Marine Board Examination A complete Epitome of Navigation, with the requisite Tables. (See
page 26.)         ."       10s. 6d.
NORIE'S EPITOME Of NAVIGATION. Containing all necessary instructions
for keeping .a ship's reckoning at Sea ; with the most approved methods of ascertaining the Latitude and Longitude.    By J. W. None
RAPER'S NAVIGATION
By Lieut. Raper, R.N. ...
16s. Od.
The Practice of Navigation and Nautical Astronomy.
       16s.  Od.
THOM'S NAVIGATION.    (An American work.
21s. Od.
BOWLITCH'S EPITOME Of NAVIGATION. Containing all the Tables
necessary to be used with the Nautical Almanac in determining the Latitude and
Longitude, and keeping a complete Reckoning at Sea ; illustrated by proper rules
and examples.    By Nathaniel Bowditch, LL.D.    (An American work.)
25s. Od.
GALLO'S TREATISE On NAVIGATION. In the Italian language. Con-
taining all the rules for determining the Latitude and Longitude at Sea, with the
Theory and Practice of Navigation. By Vincenza Gallo, Doctor of Mathematics
and Nautical Professor in the College at Trieste, and Honorary Member of the
various continental learned Societies.    In 2 thick volumes. „.        ...      22s.  Od.
DAILY ASSISTANT, and Mariner's General Guide to Navigation and Nautical
Astronomy, for short voyages ; with all the requisite Tables.    By W. H. Rosser
5s. Od.
This edition of the Mariner's Daily Assistant comprises all the Rules and Tables
necessary to enable the seaman to determine his position at sea when no chronometer
is on board, as is generally the case with Coasters and vessels employed on short
voyages.
The Rules are given in as simple a form as possible, and the Tables (including the
Sun's Declination, from the Nautical Almanac) have been carefully revised and
collated.
CHRONOMETER'S COMPANION. Comprising the various methods of finding
a Ship's position at Sea ; Latitude by a Meridian Altitude ; Time by the Sun and
Stars ; Longitude by Chronometer ; the Error of the Chronometer by Equal
Altitudes; and Latitude and Longitude from two Altitudes of a Heavenly Body.
With all the requisite Tables and a Chart.    By W. H. Rosser      ...        6s. Od.
This work comprises the principal rules of Nautical Astronomy required to deter,
mine a Ship's position at Sea, with the exception of the Lunar Observations.    TheMinories, London.
Rules and Tables do not occupy much space, and on that account ready reference can
be made to them.    Several examples (worked in full) accompany each rule.
The method of finding the Latitude and Longitude by two Altitudes (commonly
called Sumner's method) is of very great utility, and if practised will be of service to
the Navigator when making the land, and generally at sea when the Latitude is
uncertain.
LUNAR and TIME TABLES. Adapted to new, short, and accurate methods,
for finding the Longitude by Chronometers and Lunar Distances; including
methods of applying corrections to a Lunar Distance for the spheroidal figure of
the Earth, the apparent elliptical forms of the Sun and Moon, and for the tem-
. perature and density of the atmosphere. With an Appendix, containing four
additional new Lunar Methods, demonstrations of the rules and mathematical
formulas for constructing the Tables. To which are added Maps of the Stars,
and Rules for finding the principal heavenly bodies. By James Gordon, A.M.
Approved by the Astronomer Royal and others.    Bound in cloth     ...    8s. Od.
*»* This work has been honoured with the approbation of the Board of Trade, the
Trinity-house Corporation, Lloyd's, and the Honourable East India Company. The
Court of Directors of the Honourable East India Company were pleased to present the
Author with the sum of £50, and at the same time ordered fifty copies for the use of
the Indian Navy. The Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty also granted a similar
reward of £50.
THOMSON'S LUNAR TABLES. Containing new and concise methods of performing the calculations necessary for ascertaining the Longitude by Lunar
Observations or Chronometers ; with directions for acquiring a knowledge of the
principal fixed Stars, and finding the Latitude by them.    By David Thomson.
10s. Od.
STARS.   How to Know Them and How to Use Them.   With copious
Astronomical Definitions, and numerous Problems and Tables. Illustrated with
Diagrams, and/our large Maps of the Stars. By W. H. Rosser ... 7s. 6d.
At sea the Navigator frequently sees the Stars during the night when the Sun has
been obscured by day; but very few (comparatively) make a practice of taking stellar
observations, owing to not understanding Sidereal Time. This Work is a Complete
Guide at once to tbe knowledge of the Stars and Constellations, and to finding Latitude, Time, and Longitude from them.
SUMNER'S METHOD of FINDING A SHIP'S POSITION AT SEA.
improved   and   simplified.    Containing   the   solution of the   double   altitude.,
problem by projection ; and a new method of finding the Time at Sea, which is
conceived to be the shortest and easiest of any yet published.    By James Gordon,
A.M.    Bound in cloth        ...              7s. 6d.
SUN'S DECLINATION AND EQUATION OE TIME (Tahles of), for the
years 1867, 1868, 1869, and 1870, with corrections to the year 1894, adapted to
the meridian of Greenwich. Also the Right Ascension and Declination of the
principal Fixed Stars, and other useful tables.    By W. H. Rosser ...        Is. Od.
SHIP'S POSITION AT SEA (METHODS of FINDING) by calculation,
or by projection on a chart.   By W. H. Rosser        ...        ...        ...       Is. 6d.
LATITUDE and TIME. A work containing new and concise methods of finding
the Latitude by the reduction to the Meridian; the Latitude and Time by
Double and equal Altitudes ; also the Time when the Sun's lower limb is on the
horizon.    By R. C. Forbes ...                Is. 6d. and Is. Od.
LATITUDE, LONGITUDE, AND AZIMUTH, (the shortest method of
finding the), first by simultaneous altitudes of two celestial bodies; secondly, by
double altitudes.    By W. H. Rosser         Is. Od.
REDUCTION OF EX-MERIDIAN ALTITUDES. By J. F. Towson,
F.R.G.S.        Is. Od.26
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
LATITUDE BY THE ALTITUDES OF TWO STARS, and also their true
bearings or azimuths at that time.    By John Burdwood, Staff-Commander, R.N.
Is. Od.
GREAT CIRCLE SAILING. A Treatise on the theory and practice of Great
Circle Sailing, comprising the several cases which require the application of
Spherical Trigonometry ; with practical Rules and Examples : to which is added
an Abstract of the formulae and rules, with outline charts.      By W. Turnbull.
3s.  Gd.
TRIGONOMETRICAL SURVEYING, containing full and detailed solutions
of all the most important cases of Triangulation that usually occur in surveying a Country or a Sea Coast; the principles herein discussed being of the
utmost utility in determining the position of remote and prominent objects,
whether on land or at sea. The whole illustrated by numerous Diagrams,
showing the method of constructing and calculating the several cases and
varieties treated of'in the work.    By W. Turnbull ...        ...        5s. Od.
SPIIEEICAL TBIGONCMETRY. Comprising the Stereographic Projection
of the Circles of the S) here ; together with the construction and calculation of
all the cases of Bight and Oblique Angled Spherical Triangles, the calculations
being performed by means of Tabular Formulas of easy reference and application,
deduced from the development of a Spherical Trahedral figure on a plane. The
whole being illustrated by numerous Diagrams, and particularly adapted to the
use of Geographers, Navigators, and Astronomers.   By W. Turnbull.   5s. Od.
With KEY to the EroRCiSFS, comprising Solutions in full, of all the Examples
proposed for the learner's Exercise", under the several cases and varieties into
which the subject is divided ; with the appropriate formulae for computing the
«        three varieties of each example, selected in their order, from the Tables given in
the work  ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...   •    ...        ...        ...        7s. 6d.
SPHERICAL ASTRONOMY. Comprising the Stereographic Projection of the
Sphere, on the Planes of the Six Great Circles usually drawn on common Globes,
including the meridian, horizon, equator, ecliptic, and the equinoctial and
solstitial colures ; with Tables of formulae and numerous problems and Rules for
determining the declinations, right ascensions, latitudes, longitudes, amplitudes,
azimuths, and mutual distances, of the heavenly bodies ; the times of their
rising, setting, and culminating on the meridian, with various other particulars
necessary to be known by those-who would become proficient in the theory of
Navigation and Geography. The whole illustrated by appropriate diagrams and
practical examples, for exercising the Studentin the application of the various
rules which are given in the course of the work.   By W. Turnbull ...        5s. Od.
With KEY to the Exercises, comprising full Solutions of all the Examples proposed
for Exercises under each problem; to which are added formulas for computing the
parallaxes of the heavenly bodies, in altitude, latitude, and longitude.       7s. 6d.
Guide Books for the Marine Board
Examination,
HAND-BOOK to the ORDINARY and EXTRA EXAMINATIONS:
being a Self-Instructor in Navigation and Nautical Astronomy for the Local
Marine Board Examinations, as well as for Sea Use; containing also an
Appendix, giving an explanation of the use of the Commercial Code of
Signals, the Lights of the Channel, the Rule of the Road, the Stowage of
Cargoes, &c, and various other subjects of a similar character. By W. H.
Rosser, Editor of the "Mercantile Marine Magazine," Author of "Notes
on the Physical Geography of the Atlantic," &c.      ...        ...        ...        7s. 6d.Minories, London.
27
MATHEMATICAL and NAUTICAL TABLES to accompany the Hand-book
to the Ordinary and Extra Examinations.    By W. H. Rosser 4s. Od.
The two works bound together, make a complete Epitome of Navigation.
10s. 6d.'
HOW TO USE THE COMMERCIAL CODE OF SIGNALS, prepared for
the Local Marine Board Examinations by W. H. Rosser. An illustrated pamphlet, with coloured flags ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        Is. Od.
EXAMINATION GUIDE for the MARINE BOARDS, containing the
Rules for, and Examples in, the various problems proposed to Candidates
for a Certificate of Competency as Second Mate, Only Mate, First Mate, and
Ordinary Master.    By James Gordon, A.M. ...        ...        ...      2s. 6d.
EXTRA EXAMINER for the NATIONAL MARINE BOABDS,
containing all that is necessary for an extra Master to pass his Examination
before any of the Marine Boards. Including Articles on Charterparties, Bills of
Lading, Bottomry Bonds, Lloyds' Agents, Protests and Surveys, Deviation of
the Compass, Great Circle Sailing, and Law of Storms. With an Appendix
containing Arithmetical Tables, Elements from the Nautical Almanac for 1851,
List of Lights in the English Channel, Description of the Lights of Steamers,
and Rules for Stowing Cargoes.      By James Gordon, A.M.    Bound in cloth.
6s. Od.
NAUTICAL EXAMINER; or, CATECHISM of NAVIGATION.   Com-
prising Questions and Answers on subjects necessary to be known by the
youthful Student when commencing a course of nautical instruction. By W.
Turnbull            Is. 6d.
CATECHISM OF NAVIGATION. Being a series of comprehensive Questions and Answers, enabling the Student to examine himself before applying
for his Certificate to the Board of Examination lately established by order of the
Board of Trade; to which are added some Rules for finding the Stars, remarks
upon the Barometer, &c. (Second Edition.) By James Griffin. Bound,
cloth          2s. Od.
EXAMINATION GUIDE; containing full instructions for passing the Marine
Board Examination, with numerous questions for exercise. By Thomas L.
Ainsley              6s. Od.
EXAMINER IN SEAMANSHIP.    By Thomas L. Ainsley ...       Is. 6d.
ENGINEER'S MANUAL, for the Marine Board Examination. Illustrated
with numerous diagrams.    By Thomas L. Ainsley   ...        ...        ...        6s. Od.
REED'S   ENGINEER'S   HAND-BOOK  to   the   MARINE   BOARD
EXAMINATION. Containing a description of the Barometer, Thermometer,
Hydrometer, and Salinometer, Multiplication and Division of Decimals, to
reduce Inches to the Decimal of a'foot, to reduce a decimal of Tons to Cwts.
Qrs. and Lbs., given the Diameter to find the Circumference and area of a
Circle, a Unit of Work, Horse Power, Meaning of Signs, Questions and-
Examples for First and Second Class Engineers, Practical Questions on Steam,
Examination Papers for First and Second Class Engineers, Tables of Inches
reduced to Decimals, Fractions reduced to Decimals, and the Areas and Circumferences of Circles from 1 to 100 inches in diameter, &c. ...        3s.  6d.
REED'S GUIDE BOOK for the MARINE BOARD EXAMINATION
and COASTER'S ASSISTANT. With a List of Lights, and the Bearings and
Distances of various Ports and Headlands     ...        ...        ...        ...        2s. 6d.
KEY to ditto, containing the working of each Question ...        ...       2s. 6d.28
James Imray and Son's Gatalogx
REED'S SEAMANSHIP. Containing Questions and Answers on Taking in
Masts, Rigging, Management of a Ship under Sail, at Anchor, and Ashore;
Stowage of Cargoes ; Dangers in tbe English Channel; Leading Lights in the
English, St. George's and Bristol Channels, and on the East Coast of England,
and other Information useful to Seamen.        ...        ...        ...        ...        Is. Od.
SEAMANSHIP and RIGGING. By James B. Moffatt, Boatswain in the
Royal Navy                Is. 6d.
SEAMANSHIP and NAVAL DUTIES. By Lieut. A. H. Alston, R.N.
With 200 Illustrations        10s. 6d.
SEAMANSHIP.     With 320 Illustrations of Knots,
Rigging.   By Lieutenant George S. Nares, R.N.
Splices,   Masts,  Sails, and
         £lls.
Its principal contents are:—Names of the principal parts of
-Fitting
Names of Masts, Sails, and Yards—Parts of a Mast, Bowsprit, Yard, and Sail—The
Standing Rigging—Bends and Hitches—Lead and Log Line—Use of the Running
Rigging—Knots and Splices—Seizings and Lashings—Rope Making—Fittings of and
Placing the Standing Rigging—Rigging of the Masts, Yards, and the Bowsprit—
Fittings of Blocks and Tackles—Setting up and Questions on Rigging—Reeving the
Running Rigging—Tanks, Ballast, Provisions—Berthing—Rule of the Road and
"Vessel's Lights—Sea Terms—GettingTops, &c. over Mast Head—Pules forManaging
Sails—Making-up, Bending, Reefing, and Furling Sails—Crossing Top-Gallant Yards
—Working Studding Sails—Boat Sailing—Fittings and Stowage of Anchors and
Cables—Working Anchors and Cables—Shifting Sails and Spars—Mechanical Powers
—Manoeuvring—Why a Ship moves forward under Sail—Why a Ship carries Weather
Helm—Effect of a Rudder in Tacking—To Tack a Ship, &c.—To Unmoor and proceed to Sea—Trimming and making §ail—Down Top-Gallant Yards and Masts—Furl
Mainsail and Fore Topsail—Making Sail—A Heavy Squall to Windward—Ropes and
Spars carried away—Man Overboard—Life Buoys—Table showing the Steady and
Working Strain to which a Cable, Chain, or Rope may be put—Table showing whether
a Vessel gains or loses by keeping away—Instructions on the Management of Boats
in a Surf, &c.—To Communicate between a Wreck and a Lee Shore—Cunningham's
Method of Reefing Topsails.
Legal Works.
LAWS   of  SHIPPING and INSURANCE:   with a copious Appendix,
containing the existing Statutes, Custom-house and Pilots' Regulations, forms of
Deeds and Writs, &c. &c.   By James Lees   ...        ...        ...        ...      12s. 6dL
LAWS Of the CUSTOMS, with the Tariff, or Customs Table and Customs
Forms; and an Appendix containing the Customs Acts, and the Rules and
Orders of the Commissioners of Customs.    By James Lees ...        ...        6s. Od.
MERCHANT   SHIPPING  ACT of 1854.   A practical digest of the Act,
methodically arranged, and with notes illustrating the operation of its various
By James Lees ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ..
clauses.
3s. Od.
LEES' MANUAL.    Consisting of a series of Letters addressed to Master Mariners,
upon the different situations they may be placed in during the course of a voyage.
6s.  Od.Minories, Londor
29
MERCANTILE MARINE ACT. For. improving the condition of Masters,
Mates, and Seamen, and maintaining discipline in the Merchant Service, with
other information relative thereto                8s. Od.
CONSULS. The British Merchant's, Shipowner's, and Master Mariner's practical
Guide in all their Consular transactions. By E. W. A. Tuson, of the Inner
Temple, Chancellor of the Imperial Austrian Consulate-General, in London.
7s. 6d.
PILOTAGE, The charges for Pilotage of the various ports of the United Kingdom,
with the roles and regulations by which the Pilots are governed     ...     6s. Od.
THE LAW AND PRACTICE OF THE HIGH COURT OF ADMIRALTY OF ENGLAND, in Two Volumes. By William Tarn Pritchard.
With Notes from Text Writers, and the Scotch, Irish, and American Reports.
Second Edition, omitting Prize and Slave Cases. By Robert A Pritchard,
D.C.L., of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law, and William Tarn Pritchard.
With Notes of Cases from French Maritime Law. By Algernon Jones, Avocat
[ a la Cour Imperiale de Paris     ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        £3 Os.
THE LAW OF MERCHANT SHIPPING. By David Maclachlan, M.A., of
the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law. This work exhibits the Law of Maritime
War, Contraband, and Right of Search applicable to merchant ships of enemies
and neutrals        ...        ...                         £1 16s.
ABBOTT'S (now Charles Lord Tenterden) TREATISE OF THE LAW
RELATING  TO  MERCHANT SHIPS   AND  SEAMEN.   In Six Parts.     By
W. Shee, Sergeant-at-Law               £1 12s.
THE LAW RELATING TO MERCHANT SEAMEN, arranged chiefly for
the use of Masters and Officers in -the Merchant Service. By E. W. Symons,
late Chief Clerk of the ThamesPolice>Court   ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. Od.
A PRACTICAL LEGAL GUIDE FOR SAILORS AND MERCHANTS
DURING  WAR, with Appendices,    containing the Orders  in   Council,   and
other Official Documents.    By William Adam Loch ...        ...        ...        9s. 6d.
Miscellaneous Works,
ACCIDENTS (FIRST HELP IN) \ being a Surgical Gu de in the absence of
immediate Medical Assistance, including Bites, Bleeding, Broken Bones, Bruises,
Burns, Choking Cold, Dislocations, Drowning, Exhaustion, Hanging, Poisoning,
Scalds, Sprains, Suffocation, and other accidents where instant aid is needful.
By C. H. Schaible, M.D.  With Illustrations         2s. 6d.
BAROMETER. Manual on the Mercurial and Aneroid Barometers, By John
Henry Belville, of the Royal Observatory, Greenwich                 Is. Od.
BRITISH PORT CHARGES. The Port Charges at nearly 600 Ports, Sub-
Ports, and Creeks of Great. Britain and Ireland, and the islands belonging
thereto.    By James Daniel      ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. 6d.
CHARTERER'S GUIDE. Being a Guide to Merchants, Shipowners, Shipmasters, Shipbrokers, &c, in Chartering Ships, containing Tables and Rules for
finding the quantity of cargo which a ship can carry, and, consequently, the
freight she will earn ; the rules being founded on the exact proportionate rates
of freight, and not on the London printed rates, which are proved to be, in many
cases, very erroneous. Containing, also, an introduction on Freight, Charter-
parties, "and Bills of Lading, and a section on Exchange, giving Tables of
tbe various Weights, Measures, and Moneys of all the principal kingdoms.
With an Appendix, containing the'Passengers' Act.    By James Gordon, A.M.
5s. Od.30
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
COMPASS (DEVIATIONS Of the). Practical Hlustrations of the necessity
of ascertaining the Deviations of the Compass, with explanatory Diagrams, and
some account of the Compass System now adopted in the Royal Navy; Notes on
Navigation, &c. &c. By Captain E. J.Johnson, R.N., F.R.S., Superintendent
of the Compass Department of the Royal Navy ...        ...        ...      9s. Od.
COMPASS (ELEMENTARY MAGNETISM), toi the local attraction of
Ship's   Compasses adapted for the use of navigators.   By  George Parson.
Is. 6d.
COMPASS (PRACTICAL INFORMATION ON THE DEVIATION OF
THE COMPASS).    For the use of Masters and Mates of Iron Ships.
Thomas Towson, F.R.G.S ;        	
By John
3s. Od.
COMPASS (ADMIRALTY MANUAL ON THE DEVIATION OF THE
COMPASS). By Captain J. F. Evans, R.N., F.R.G.S., and Archibald
Smith, M.A., F.R.S         4s. 6d.
DICTIONARIES in FOREIGN LANGUAGES. English into Danish, French,
Dutch, Swedish, Italian, Russian, Spanish, &c, and vice-versd...from      5s. Od.
to     8s. Od.
FOREIGN EXCHANGES. The Shipmaster's Manual for the Exchange of Monies
in every port of the world, bywhich the relative values of money can be ascertained with the greatest faeility.    By W. H. Rosser ...        ...        5s. Od.
A smaller edition of this work suitable for Shipmasters frequenting the Baltic, and
ports in the North and West of Europe ...        ...        ...        ...        3s. 6d.
HARRISON'S FREIGHTER'S GUIDE, and Com Merchant's Assistant, with
Tables of First and Second Class Goods on a Decimal Scale, of which Wheat is
the Standard, forming a complete Analysis of Grain and other first-class Goods.
5s. Od.
HORN-BOOK (SAILOR'S). A Treatise on the Law of Storms, being a
complete practical exposition of the Theory of the Law of Storms, and its uses to
Mariners of all classes in all parts of the world, shown by transparent cards and
useful lessons. By Henry Piddington, Esq., President of Marine Courts,
Calcutta       10s. 6d.
INSTRUCTIONS for MARINERS (TAYLORS), respecting the management
of Ships at Single Anchor, and General Rules for Sailing; also Directions for
crossing the North Sea, with an address to Seamen ; to which is prefixed a
Memoir of the Author's life      ...        ...        ...        ...        ... ...        Is.  Od.
KEDGE ANCHOR I or, Young Sailor's Assistant. A work appertaining to the
practical evolutions of modern seamanship, rigging, knotting, splicing, blocks,
purchases, running-rigging, and other miscellaneous matters applicable to ships
of war and others ; illustrated with seventy engravings. Also Tables of risrerine'.
spars, sails, blocks, canvas, cordage, chain and hemp cables, hawsers, &c,
relative to every, class of vessels.    By William Brady, U.S. Navy ...      16s. Od.
■KNOTS (THE BOOK OF), showing the manner of making every Knot,
Splice.    By ' Tom Bowling'
LIGHTS AND TIDES OF THE WORLD.   A complete list of the Light-
houses and Light-vessels in the world; particularly describing the nature of the
lights exhibited, and the distances from which they are visible. Also, the time
of High Water on the days of full and change of the Moon, and the rise of
spring-tides, at all the principal headlands, ports, and rivers; to which is added
a Tidal Chart of the World, showing at a glance the motion of the Tidal Wave.
By W. H. Rosser and Jas. F. Imray ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        5s. Od.
LORIMER'S LETTERS. Being a Series of Letters addressed to a young Master
Mariner on some subjects connected with his calling.    By Charles Lorimer.
6s. Od.
Tie,
2s.
and
6d.Minories, London.
31
MAGNETISM (Elementary), and the local attraction of Ships' Compasses,
adapted for the use of Navigators.   By George Parson       ...       ...       Is. 6d.
MANUAL (SEA OFFICER'S). Being a Compendium of the Duties of a Commander; First, Second, Third, and Fourth Officer ; Officer of the Watch ; and
Midshipman in the Mercantile Navy. By Captain A. Parish, of the East India
Merchant Service, and late of the Honourable East India Company's Service.
5s.  6d.
MARINE and NAVAL ARCHITECTURE.    A Treatise on the theory and
practice of Ship-bui
John W. Griffiths.
ling.      Illustrated with more than 50 Engravings.      By
Bound in cloth               £1 lis. (id.
MARRYATS SIGNALS.
in the Merchant Service.
A Code of Signals for the use of Vessels employed
By Captain Marryat, R.N  12s. Od.
MASTING, MAST-MAKLNG, AND RIGGING OF SHIPS.   A Treatise
upon these subjects, with Tables of Spars, &c, relative to every class of vessels.
By Robert Kipping       ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       Is. 6d.
MATE and hia DUTIES. Containing remarks on Discipline, causes of
Mutiny, erroneous treatment of Young Mates, Forecastle Bullies, duties towards
the Master, Duties of the Watch, &c. &c.    ...        ...        ...        ... 2s. Od.
MEDICAL GUIDE (SEAMEN'S). For preserving the Health of a Ship's
Crew, containing plain Directions for the Use of the Medicines in the Cure of
Diseases, &c, with full instructions for the treatment of Fractures and Dislocations ; also the best Method of restoring suspended animation from drowning,
&c. Illustrated by numerous engravings. The Admiralty scale of medicines
according to the Act 7 and 8 Vict. cap. 112, is also given  ••■        ...       2s. 6d.
MEDICINES (the Scale Of 1, with which Merchant Vessels are to be furnished,
by command of the Privy Council for Trade ; with observations on the means of
preserving the health of Seamen ; directions for the use of the Medicines, and
for the treatment of various accidents and diseases. By T. Spencer Wells,
F.R.C.S., formerly Surgeon in the Royal Navy ; Chief Surgeon to the British
Hospitals at Smyrna and Renkioi during the Russian War ... ...        2s. 6d.
MEDICAL GUIDE (The SHIP CAPTAIN'S). Compiled by Mr. H. Leach,
the resident medical officer of the hospital ship "Dreadnought," and inspector
of Limejuice for the port of London.   Sanctioned by the Board of Trade      Is. Od.
MERCANTILE MARINE MAGAZINE, — Containing Sailing Direc-
tions—Meteorological Observations at Sea—Board of Trade Reports—Rewards
and Testimonials to Merchant Officers, &c. &c.—Nautical Notes—Monthly
Notices of Lights and Buoys—Rocks and Shoals—New Charts and Nautical
Publications, &c.   Published Monthly, price 6d., and in Yearly Volumes (bound
in cloth)      ...               7s. 6d.
Vols. I. to XIII. may be had.
NAVY LIST. The Mercantile Navy List, and annual appendage to the Commercial Code of Signals for all Nations. Edited by J. H. Brown, Esq., Registrar-
General of Seamen and Shipping.    In two parts             10s. Od.
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY of the SEA.    A work descriptive of various
natural phenomena, the Winds, Tides, Currents, &c. With illustrative charts
and diagrams. By Lieut. M. F. Maury, LL.D., U.S. Navy ... 8s. 6d.
An English edition       ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       5s. Od.
REED'S SHIPOWNERS' and SHIPMASTERS' HANDY-BOOK.   Con-
taining Goods proportioned in Stowage, Newcastle Coal Measure converted into
Weight, Proportionate Rates of Freight on Coal per Ton and per Keel, Lloyd's
Scale of the Minimum Weights of Anchors, and Sizes and Lengths of Chain
Cables, Hawsers, &c. j East India Tonnage Schedule, New York Rates of Freight,
Baltic and Archangel Rates of Freight, Baltimore and Bahia Tonnage Scales,32
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
Corn Measures of the different Ports of Europe, Black Sea Rates of Freight,
Proportionate Freight Table for Tallow and Wheat, or Indian Corn, from the
Black Sea and the principal Ports of Europe, Proportionate Rates of Freight for
Leghorn, Genoa, Trieste, Marseilles, Comparative Rates for the Black Sea on
the New and Old Grain Scales, Instructions for the Stowage of Grain Cargoes,
Value of Foreign Monies in British Currency, Sizes and Weights of the best
Hemp Rope and Wire Rope, Periodic Winds in the Eastern Hemisphere, Sizes
and Contents of Sugar Hogsheads, &c, and other valuable information   Is. 6d.
SAILMAKING (ELEMENTS Of). A Treatise on Cutting-out Sails according to
the most approved methods in the Merchant Service, with draughting, and the
centre of effort of the sails. Illustrated with engravings; and containing Tables
of the full and accurate dimensions for Jibs, Mainsails, &c. &c. By Robert
Kipping                    ...       2s. 6d.
SEAMAN'S   FRIEND.      Containing   a   Treatise   on   Practical   Seamanship,
with Plates ; a Dictionary of Sea Terms; Customs and Usages of the Merchant
Service; and the American Laws relating to the Practical Duties of Masters and
Seamen.    By R. H.Dana.    (The American Edition) ...        ...       5s. Od.
An English Edition by James Lees      ...        ...        ...       5s. Od.
SIGNAL LIGHTS.
signals
The new Admiralty Regulations respecting
Light and Fog-
Is. 6d.
SIGNAL LIGHTS. A Treatise on the law relating to Sea-lights, and the rule of
the road at sea ; with numerous Cases to the present time ; foreign ordinances
and translations ; and an Appendix containing the new Admiralty Regulations
respecting Ship-lights and Fog-signals. By Frederic Thomas Pratt, D.C.L.,
Advocate, Doctors' Commons ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        9s. Od.
SOUNDINGS,    The use of the Lead, or how to correct the Soundings; with an
explanation of the general set of the Tides in the Irish Sea, the English Channel,
. and North Sea ; with directions for making an allowance for them.   By Admiral
Beechey, R.N.         2s. 6d.
STORMS (LAW Of). A work giving a full exposition of the Theory of the Law
of Storms, with Rules for avoiding Hurricanes, &c. Illustrated with numerous
explanatory woodcuts.    By W. R. Birt, Esq. ...        ...        ...        5s. Od.
STORM-WARNING SIGNALS. Pocket Companion to the Board of Trade
Storm-Warning Signals, together with Remarks on the use of Instruments in
foretelling Weather                       ,..       ... 3d.
STOWAGE.   A Treatise on the Stowage of Ships and their Cargoes, in which full
instructions are given for stowing away various kinds of goods.    By Robert
White Stevens.    For every port in the World ...        ...        ...     21s. Od.
Asmaller edition of this work, for the ports of Europe     10s. 6d.
THERMOMETER. Manual on the Thermometer, with some Remarks upon its
history and use as a meteorological instrument.    By J. H. Belville Is. Od.
TIDES. Tables showing the direction and rate of the Stream throughout the St.
George's or Irish Channel. Adapted to Holden's Tide Tables. By Admiral
Beechey, R.N         2s. 6d.
TIDES and TIDAL CURRENTS. An essay on the Tides and Tidal Currents
of the Irish Sea and English Channel, being the substance of a Lecture delivered
by the Rev. Samuel. Haughton, M.A., Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, at
the Sailors' Home, Liverpool, on the 13th June, 1857. With an Appendix,
containing numerous carefully-constructed Examples, for the use of Masters and
Mates intending to pass their examination in the Tides before the Local Marine
Boards.      Published by request ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        3s. Od.
TIDE TABLES (DAILY), for 24 British and French Ports with Constants for
280 other places of the United Kingdom and Coasts of Europe. By Staff-
Commander J. Burdwood, R.N. ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        Is. 6d.Minories, London.
33
REED'S TIDE TABLES and BTantical Almanac, with the Times of High
Water and the Depth of Water at the River Bar, and the Sea Outlet of tbe
South Dock at Sunderland; Times of High Water, daily, at London Bridge,
Hartlepool, Tees Bar, Hull,.- and Yarmouth Roads ; and a General Tide Table
for England, Scotland, Ireland, and the principal Ports in Europe; Tables of
the Moon's Southing, Sun's Declination, and Equation of Time; and other
Information of Interest.    Published annually ...        ...        ... ...   6d.
TONNAGE Of SHIPS (TABLES Of the). Calculated according to the Rules
prescribed by Law, including every description of Vessels from 12 to 600 tons,
together with a complete Explanation of the Methods of Admeasurement, both
by the New and Old Methods         4s. Od.
WINDS and their COURSES. A praetical Exposition of the Laws which govern
the Movements of Hurricanes and Gales, with an examination of the circular
theory of Storms as propounded by Redfield, Sir William Reid, Piddington, and
others.   By G. Jinman.    Illustrated by Diagrams   ...        ...        ...        3s. 6d.
Sailing Directories.
INDIAN OCEAN DIRECTORY. The Seaman's Guide to the navigation of
the TtifliftTi Ocean, including the principal Ports on the South and East Coasts
of Africa, the Arabian Sea, the Bay of Bengal, the North-West, West, and
South Coasts of Australia;, together with special Descriptions and Sailing
Directions for all the Islands, and Notes on making Passages, extensively illustrated with Diagrams of Hie Winds, Current, and Track Charts, plans of Harbours, Islands, &c. &c.    By W. H. Rosser, and James F. Imray, F.R.G.S.
21s. Od.
INDIAN OCEAN and CHINA SEA DIRECTORY.   The same work as the
foregoing, but with an Addenda containing instructions for passing through the
various Straits met with when traversing the Eastern and Western Passages in
the East India Archipelago. With numerous plans (about forty in number) of
harbours.    By W. H. Rosser and James F. Imray, F.R.G.S.       ...     25s. Od.
INDIAN OCEAN.    Short Notes on the Winds, Weather, and Currents, together
i with General Sailing Directions, and remarks on making Passages ; to accompany
a chart of the Indian Ocean.   With illustrative charts.    (See No. 119a, page 18'.
By W. H. Rosser          2s. 6d.
NORTH ATLANTIC DIRECTORY. Notes on the Physical Geography and
Meteorology of the North Atlantic, with Sailing Directions for the Principal
Ports. Being a complete Directory for the Navigation of the North Atlantic.
By W.' H. Rosser. This book contains full particulars as to the Wind and
Weather, Currents and Tides of all parts of the North Atlantic, together with
Remarks on the Variation of the Compass, Deep Sea Soundings, and alTthe
Rocks and Shoals that have at various times been reported ; ample Instructions
' respecting making Passages from Port to Port; notes on Tropical and Extra-
Tropical Hurricanes, and on the use of Meteorological Instruments at Sea;
copious Directions for making and leaving all the principal Ports and Harbours,
the character of the various Anchorages, &c, and all other Information useful for
the Navigation of this. Ocean             10s. 6d.
NORTH ATLANTIC. Short Notes on the Winds, Weather, and Currents,
together with General Sailing Directions, and remarks on making Passages ; to
accompany a chartof the North Atlantic. (See No. 49a, page 9). By W. H.
Rosser               Is- 6d.
SOUTH ATLANTIC DIRECTORY. Notes on the physical geography and
meteorology of the* Sonar' Atlantic, together witii Sailing Directions for the
principal Ports of Call, and-for the Islands ; to which is appended a Catalogue
of all the doubtful Islands, feocks, and Shoals. With numerous charts illustrating the Winds and Currents.    By W. H. Rosser         6s. Od.
C34
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
SOUTH ATLANTIC. Short Notes on the Winds, Weather, and Currente,
together with General Sailing Directions, and remarks on making Passages ; to
accompany a Chart of the South Atlantic. (See No. 51a, page 10). By W.
H. Rosser          .,        Is. Od.
ATLANTIC DIRECTORY. The two works (North Atlantic Directory and
South Atlantic Directory,) bound together, in one volume       15s. Od.
EAST INDIAN ARCHITELAGO. Short Notes on the Winds, Weather, and
Currents, together with General Sailing Directions, and remarks on making
Passages; to accompany Charts of the China Sea, Indian Archipelago and
Western Pacific. With charts illustrating the subject. (See No. 152a, page 21).
By W-H. Rosser          5s. Od.
ATLANTIC AND INDIAN OCEAN. Handy Notes on the Navigation of the
Atlantic and Indian Oceans, together with the China Sea and Western Pacific ;
including a Summary of Winds, Weather, and Currents, &c, remarks on making
Passages, brief Sailing Directions, list of the reported Rocks and Shoals, the
Navigation of the Western Pacific between China and Australia, &c. &c. With
illustrative charts.    By W. H. Rosser          8s. Od.
BAY OF BENGAL DIRECTORY*. Containing Sailing Directions for the
principal ports in the Bay of Bengal, and particularly describing the Andaman
and Nicobar Islands. To which are added a description of the Currents prevailing during the South-west and North-east Monsoons, an account of the
Monsoons, some remarks on Passages across the Bay, and a Table of determined
Positions. With numerous plans of Harbours and charts of the Currents. By
W. H. Rosser and James F. Imray    ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        6s. Od.
BRITISH and FOREIGN COASTER'S GUIDE. Containing complete
^Sailing Directions for the East Coasts of England and Scotland, the Orkney and
Shetland Islands, the Coasts of France, Holland, and Jutland to the Skaw Point,
those of Norway and the White Sea, the Kattegat, Baltic, and Gulf of Finland,
and the English Channel, particularly describing the Soundings, bearings of
the lighthouses, beacons, and buoys, &c, from the rocks, shoals, and other
dangers, with the prevailing winds, tides, and sets of the currents, and illustrated with several views of the lighthouses, plans of Harbours, &c. &c. Compiled from the latest surveys made by order of the British, French, Danish,
Prussian, Swedish, and Russian Governments ...        ...        ...       7s. Od.
Or, with the addition of a Directory for the St. George's Channel, and coast round
Ireland               ,.      10s.  Od.
HORSBURGH'S DIRECTORY. A directory for the Indian Oceans; containing
full instructions for visiting the various ports of India, China, and Australia.
By James Horsburgh      ...        ...        ...        ...       ...        ...        ...       £4 6s.
The same work, bound in two volumes      ...        ...        ...        ...        ...     £4 10s.
SOUTH PACIFIC DIRECTORY.    A directory for the navigation of the South
Pacific Ocean, with descriptions of its coasts,  islands,  &c. ;  its winds,  tides
currents, and other phenomena.    By Alexander G. Findlay, F.R.G.S.      £1 4s.
BAHARIE'S COASTING GUIDE. For the East Coast of England and Scotland, and the English Channel; containing the questions, remarks, and instructions to candidates' for the situation of Masters and Mates of Ships. By Alexander
Baharie    ...                5S. od.
COASTS OF BRITISH AMERICA AND   THE  UNITED* STATES.
Complete Sailing Directions for all the Bays, Harbours, Roadsteads, &c. &c.
Compiled chiefly from the surveys made by order of the British, French and
United-States Governments.     Bound in cloth ...        ...        ...        7g. od
DIRECTIONS FOR THE EAST COASTS OF NORTH AND SOUTH
AMERICA.    By G. W. Blunt.   Published in New York:        25s. Od.
ISLANDS OF THE WEST MDLES ANty COAST OF COLUMBIA,
containing particular instructions for frequenting each Harbour, and important
remarks on th6 Winds, Tides, Currents, &c'.    Bound in cloth        ...        7s. Od.Minories, London.
35
COASTS OF CALIFORNIA, OREGON, AND CENTRAL AMERICA,
being a Sailing Directory for the various Bays, Harbours, Roadsteads, &c,
along the Coast from Panama to Queen Charlotte Islands. (See No. 113a, page
17.)    With many Plans of Harbours. By James F. Imray, F.R.G.S.    10s. Od.
SOUTH AFRICA, AND ISLANDS OF REUNION, MAURITIUS, AND
RODRIGUES, folly describing the coast of South Africa from Table Bay to Port
Natal, and the principal Harbours in Reunion, Mauritius, and Rodrigues. By
James F. Imray, F.R.G.S         ...        3s. Od.
ENGLISH CHANNEL PILOT.    Published by the Admiralty.    In two Volumes.
10s. Od.
NORTH SEA PILOT.    Published by the Admiralty.   In four Volumes.    10s. Od.
Christiania Fiord to Wardo-
        3s. 6d.
NORWAY PILOT.    Published by the Admiralty,
huus, near the North Cape.    In two Volumes
DANISH PILOT.   Published by the Admiralty
GULF and RIVER ST. LAWRENCE PILOT.
In two Volumes  ...
WEST INDIA PILOT.
SOUTH AMERICA PILOT
Panama.    In two Volumes
CHINA PILOT
Okhotsk    ...
Published by the  Admiralty.
Published by the Admiralty.
...       4s. 6d.
Published by the Admiralty.
         7s. Od.
Published by the Admiralty.  In two Volumes.   10s. Od.
Maranham   to
...      10s. Od.
Canton River to the Sea of
       10s. 6d.
GULF Of SIAM DIRECTIONS.    Published by the Admiralty       ...        Is. Od.
AUSTRALIA DIRECTORY.    Published by the Admiralty.    In three Volumes,
about 5s. each volume.
NEW ZEALAND PILOT.   Rushed by the Admiralty             5s. Od.
ENGLISH    CHANNEL   PILOT,   containing   Directions   for  navigating the
English- Channel, the Bristol Channel, South Coast of Ireland, and Coast of
. France from Calais to Brest, including the Scilly Islands, and the Islands of
Jersey, Guernsey, Alderney, Sercq.
4s. Od.
5s. Od.
ind Herm
Or, with "an Addenda extending to Liverpool and Dublin
RIVER THAMES, from London to the Nore and Sheerness, and thence
through the Swin and King's Channels, and through the Queen's, South,
and Prince's Channels, to Margate and the Downs; to which are annexed
Tables of the New Rates of Pilotage        .2s. Od.
ST.  GEORGE'S and BRISTOL CHANNELS, together with the WHOLE
COAST ROUND IRELAND, particularly describing all the Sands, Shoals,
Rocks, and other Dangers in this navigation ...        ...        ...       4s. Od.
DIRECTORY for the SOUTH,   WEST,   and   NORTH   COASTS  of
IRELAND, from Carnsore Point to Lough Foyle, particularly describing the
various Harbours, Anchoring Places, Rocks, Shoals, &c, compiled from the
surveys made by order of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, by
Commanders Mackenzie, Huddart, Mudge, Martin White, Vidal, J. Woolfe,
&c. &&             2s. 6d.
ST. GEORGE'S and BRISTOL CHANNELS, and part of the West Coast
and Islands of Scotland  *j       3s. Od.
BRISTOL CHANNEL, in which are described all the Shoals, Rocks, Buoys,
Lights, &c        2s. Od.
EAST COAST Of ENGLAND, from the South Foreland to Flamborough
Head, in which are described the Headlands, Bays, Harbours, Rocks, Sands,
Buoys,.Beacons, Light-vessels, &c.     ...       ...       ...       ...       ...       2s. 6d.36
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
EAST COAST of ENGLAND, from Orfordness to Flamborough Head, describing all the Rocks, Shoals, Buoys, &c        2s. Od.
EAST COAST of ENGLAND, from Orfordness to the Biver Tyne, particularly
describing all the Harbours, Anchoring Places, &c.   ,                2s. 6d.
EAST COASTS Of ENGLAND and SCOTLAND, from Flamborough Head
to the Orkneys and Shetland Islands, including the most recent alterations
and notices made and issued by the Honourable Corporation of Trinity House,
and other important official publications        ...        ... ...        ■•■        2s. od.
EAST COAST Of ENGLAND, from Dungeness to the Tyne 3s. Od.
NORTH SEA (Sonth part Of the), south of Flamborough Head on the west
side, and south of Skaw Point on the east side ...        ... ...        3s. Od.
FIRTHS Of FORTH and TAY, including the Coast from St. Abb's Head
to Buttonness, particularly describing the Harbours, Sands, Shoals,'Lighthouses,
Buoys, Beacons, &c         Is- Od.
WEST COAST of SCOTLAND and the HEBRIDES, partSeuMwtjr describing
all the various Islands, Loughs, Harbours, Lighthouses, Shoals, Rocks, &c.
8s. Od.
NORTH SEA PILOT J particulariy describing the Coasts of England and Scotland, from Orfordness to Cape Wrath, with the'Orkney' and Shetland Islands,
and the opposite Coasts of France,, the Netherlands, &c, from Capt Grisnez
to the Skaw                4s. Od.
NORTH COAST of HOLLAND, particulariy describing the rivers eart-of the
Texel to Hamburg and Horn's Reef    ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       2;. Od*
KATTEGAT.  From Skagen to the Soun<3
Is   6d.
KATTEGAT, SOUND, and BELTS, from the Skagen to Helsingor, the
Harbours on the Swedish Coast, the East Coast of Jutland, the Groat and Little
Belts, and the ports of Holstein and Mecklenburg    ...        ...        ...       2s. 6d.
BALTIC or EAST SEA, from Helsingor (Elsinore) to the Gulf of Bothnia,
and the entrance to the Gulf of Finland ; including a general description of its
Coasts, Harbours, Islands, Rocks, Sands, Shoals, Beacons, Buoys, Lighthouses, &c.                         2s. Od.
GULF of FINLAND, including a particular description of the Coasts, Harbours,
.islands, Shoals, Rocks, Lights, Buoys, Beacons, &c.         2s. Od.
GULF Of BOTHNIA. A general description of the various Bays, Harbours,
&c, contained within the Gulf ... ... ... ... ...     </2s.  Od.
WHITE SjSA, to Arkhangel, Onega, Gulf of Kandalax, and Bay of Messen,
with general directions from England to the North Cape      ...        ...        Is. Od.
BAY of BISCAY, from Ouessant Island to Cape Finisterre, compiled from the
most recent surveys        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        2s. Od.
COASTS of SPAIN and PORTUGAL, from Cape Ortegal to the Strait ef
Gibraltar j ...       ...       ...   sftta*. *j    ...   <mb» h   ...       ...       2s. Od.
WEST COASTS of FRANCE, SPAIN, and PORTUGAL, from Ouessant
Island to the Strait of Gibraltar
3s. Od.
MEDITERRANEAN NAVIGATOR, containing Sailing Directions for the
Mediterranean Sea, Gulf of Venice, Archipelago, Black Sea, and the North Coast
of Africa, with a full description of the Winds, Tides, Currents, &c.        5s. 6d.
The same work, bound in cloth ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        7s. Od.Minories, London.
37
MEDITERRANEAN SEA, (PART I.), containing a Nautical description of
all the Bays, Harbours, Anchoring Places, &c, on the Coast of Europe, from
Cape Trafalgar to Cape Spartivento, in Italy; and on the Coast of Africa, from
Cape Spartel to Cape Bon          2s. 6d.
MEDITERRANEAN SEA, (PART II.), containing a Nautical description of
the Coasts and Islands of the Grecian Archipelago, the Seas of Marmora and
Azov, the Black Sea, Levant, and Coast of Africa, from Alexandria to Cape Bon.
3s. 6d.
MEDITERRANEAN SEA (Central Portion of) particularly describing the
Island of Sicily' •         2s. Od.
ADRIATIC and GULF Of VENICE, particularly describing the various
Bays and Harbours in that Sea ...        . .        ...        ...        ...       2s. Od.
BLACK SEA,  and SEAS   of MARMORA and AZOV, containing full
instructions for navigating those Seas, and for visiting the Ports of Odessa and
Galatz, &c.         2s. 6d.
LEVANT, or Eastern portion of. the Mediterranean Sea ; an elaborate description
of its Islands and Coasts, as also directions for its Harbours, &c. &c.      2s. Od.
ISLAND  of NEWFOUNDLAND and BANKS, with the adjacent coast
of Labrador, extending to Sandwich Bay        ...        ...        ...        ...        2s. 6d.
COAST of NORTH AMERICA (Part 1), from the Strait of Belle
Isle to Cape Canso; including the island of Newfoundland and Banks, with the
adjacent coast of Labrador to Sandwich Bay, and the Gulf and River St.
Lawrence ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        3s. Od.
COAST of NORTH AMERICA (Part 2), from Cape Canso to New
York; being a nautical description of the various bays and harbours contained
within those limits. Compiled, principally, from the surveys made by order of
the British and United States'Governments ...        ...        ...        ...        4s. Od.
COAST  of NORTH AMERICA (Part 3),  from New York to  the
Strait of Florida.   A work similar to the foregoing ...                2s. Od.
COAST Of NORTH AMERICA, comprehending the entire navigation from
Nova Scotia to the Gulf of Florida                       5s. 6d.
WEST   INDIA    DIRECTORY,    containing   directions   for   Navigatir.g   the
Islands of Porto Rico, Haiti or St. Domingo, Jamaica, Cuba, and the Bahamas,
together with the Mona and Windward Passages, with the Gulfs of Florida and
Mexico, Bays of Honduras and Mosquito, with the adjacent Islands        5s.  Od.
With an Addenda, containing a description of the Caribbee Islands    ...       6s. Od.
COAST Of COLOMBIA and CARIBBEAN SEA, containing particular instructions for frequenting each Harbour, and important remarks on the Winds, Tides,
Currents, &c         2s.  6d.
COAST Of BRAZIL, from Maranham to Cape Frio and Rio Janeiro, including
Remarks on the Winds, Currents, Seasons, &c, and Instructions for the
Routes from Europe and the United States to the principal Ports ...       2s. 6d.
COAST Of BRAZIL, from Cape Frio and Rio Janeiro to Cape Santa Maria.
Compiled mainly from the Surveys made by Baron Roussin, and M. Barral of the
French Navy                Is. 6d.
BRITISH SHIPMASTER'S HAND-BOOK to RIO GRANDE DO SUL
(BRAZIL). By the Honourable Henry Prendergast Vereker, LL. D., British
Consul at the Port                  2s. 6d.38
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
Log Books, <fc.
Mots.—Each book contains instructions for the use of the Log Boot, remarks on Certificates,
on the Deviation of the Compass and various causes of error in the Ship's Course; directions in
Cases of Wreck; management of Boats in a broken sea; directions for restoring persons apparently
drowned; remarks on Hurricanes and the Law of Storms; extracts from the Passenger Act; Scale
of Provisions for British Merchant Ships; Scale of Medicines; Hole of the Road; extracts from the
recent Merchant Shipping Act; ruled form for List of Passengers and the Ship's Company.
Plain Paper, superfine "Writing- quality.
s.   d.
No.   1.    For 3 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Cloth backs and stiff blue )   „    «
sides 92" pages /
„     2.     ,,   6 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Bazil backs and stiff blue Jog
sides 184 pages )
„     3.      ,,    9 months, 1 day's work- on a page.—-Half-bound, 276 pages      5    0
,,    4.      ,, 12 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound, 368    ,, 6    0
Ruled beading- and faint lines.
,, 5. For 3 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Cloth backs and stiff blue )
sides 92 pages )
,, 6. ,, 6 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Bazil backs and stiff blue j
sides 184 pages "j
,,     7.      ,,   9 months,, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound, 276 pages     6
,,     8.      ,, 12 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound, 368    ,, 6
2    6
4    0
)?
9.
>f
10.
11.
12.
"Ruled in form, for one day's -work on a page.
For 3 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Cloth backs and stiff blue )
sides 92 pages j
,, 6 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Bazil backs and stiff blue I
sides 184 pages j
„   9 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound, 276 pages      6
,, 12 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound, 368   „ 8
4    6
6
0
*A»..'I       —
,, 13.
„ 14.
„ 15.
,, 16.
.   Printed in form.   One day's work on a page.
For 3 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Cloth backs and stiff blue ]
sides 92 pages i
„   6 months; 1 day's work on a page.—Bazil backs and stiff blue ]
sides 184 pages«
„   9 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound, 276 pages
„ 12 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound, 868    ,,
5   0
7   0
9   0
Printed in form.   Two days' -work on a page.
17. For 6 months, 2 days' work on a page.—Cloth backs and stiff blue )   „    .
sines 92 pages \
18. „ 12 months, 2 days' work on a page.—Bazil backs and stiff blue |   .    „
sides 184 pages j
19. ,, 24 months, 2 days' work on a page.—Half-bound   . 368   „ 9   0Minories, London.
39
Printed in form for STEAM-SHIPS.
No. 20. For 3 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Cloth backs and stiff blue )
sides 92 pages (
„ 21. ,, 6 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Bazil backs and stiff blue )
sides. 184 pages j
,,'  22.      ,, 9  months, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound  276 pages
s. d.
4   0
8    0
23.      „ 12 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound, 368   „        10    0
Printed in form for ENGUffEEES.
,,   24.   For 3 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Cloth backs and stiff blue "^   . «
sides        92 pages ^
„   25.      „    6 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Bazil backs and stiff blue I    e a
sides       184 pages )
,,   26.     ,,    9 months, 1 day's  work on a page.—Half-bound, 276 pages      8 0
,,   27.     „ 12 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound, 368   ,,        10 0
Printed   in   JUffiERICAET   Form.
One or two days on a page.
„ 28. For 3 months.—Cloth backs and stiff blue sides     .    .    92 pages 3 6
„ 29. „   6 months.—Bazil backs and stiff blue sides     .    . 184 pages 5 0
„ 30.      ,,   9 months.—Half-bound 276 pages 7 0
„ 31.      „ 12 months.—Half-bound 368   „ 9 0
Printed in form.   One day's -work on a page.
„ 32. For 3 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Cloth backs and stiff blue log
sides         92 pages )
,, 33. „ 6 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Bazil backs and stiff bme j g „
sides 184 pages )
,,    34.      ,,    9 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound, 276 pages        7    0
,,    35.      ,, 12 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound, 368     ,, 9    0
The above are with special columns for the names of the persons on the Look out,
and the hours during which the Lights are exhibited according to the Merchant Shipping Act.
LOG BOOK for keeping a Daily Record of the "Winds and Currents; the
readings of the Barometer and Thermometer, and Deviation of the Compass, &c; in accordance with Lieut. Maury's Plan.
No. 36.    For 3 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Bazil backs and stiff blue )   a q
sides 184 pages J
„   37.      ,,   6 months, 1 day's work on a page.—Half-bound    . 368    ,,        12 0
„   38.      „ 12     „     ' „ „ „ . 736    „        24 0
SHIPS' JOURNALS.
1 qr.—printed, one or two hours        	
2 qr. „ „        half-bound	
8 qr. „ ,, ,,	
s. d.
2 6
5 6
7 040
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
CARGO BOOKS.—Printed in Porm.
Inches *■   d.
No,  1 For Captains' use 54 x   8i bonnd in leather  2    6
„    2   ,,    Mates'      ,,   64 x 104 half-bound  16
„    3   „       „ „  61 x 104        „   10.
,,    4   „       ,, „   54 x   84        „   10
„    5   „      „ „   5   x    8 „   0   8
,,    6   ,,        „ „   5   x   8  (much used by Coasters)  10
Cargo Receipt Book, a book of Receipts of Cargo delivered from the ship 3    6
With instructions for receiving Cargoes on Board, and Bills of Lading, &c. &e.
SEAMEN'S WAGES BOOKS.—Printed in Porm.
Half-bound 	
For 12   mer
99
18     „
M
24     „
»J
30     ,,
99
36     ,,
99
42      „
ti
48      „
if
54      „
a.
<7.
1
6
2
0
2
6
3
0
3
6
4
0
4
6
5
6
Appended to these is an extract of the Law relative to the payment of Wages, also
two Tables for the calculation of Wages, by means of which any fractional part of
a pound can be calculated* per day or month. No other Wages Book that we have
seen gives such information.
SHIPS' PROVISION BOOKS.
With Wines.—Printed in Form.
».
For   6 months.—Half-bound          2
>) 12      „ ,,   3
))   io      „ „  o
>>  24      „ „   7
Without Wines.—Printed in Porm.
For   6 months.—Half-bound          16
,.   12     „ „   2   6
„   18     „ „   4   0
>.   24    „ „   6   0
d.
0
6
6
0
CAPTAINS' ACCOUNT BOOKS.
1 qr.—plain, in marble paper	
2 qr.        „    half-bound	
1 qr.—ruled faint, in marble paper	
2 qr. ,, half-bound	
1 qr.—ruled faint and £ s. d., in marble paper	
2 qr. ,, ,, half-iwund-	
9.
d.
1
6
3
6
1
6
3
6
1
9
4
0Minories, London,
41
LOG SLATES, folding.
».    d.
No. 1 Very superior and strong, Ruled in form Hi x 14 inches   ...        40
„    2 „ Plain     „       114 x 16     „        ...        36
7,    8 „ „ „        104 x 144 „       •    •    ■        3   0
4 9   x 13     ....        2   6
„    5 Single Slates,'11 x 16 in., Is'.' No. 6'.'l0i x 144 in., 9a- No. 7. 9 x 13 in., 6d.
These slates are of a very superior description, slates of better quality cannot be obtained.
CHART CASES.   In Tin (Japanned), with lock and key.
(For preserving publications from damp.)
No. 1
o
»    a
,7      3
„    4
42 inches in depth, and 6 inches in diameter
52
£    ».
d.
0    7
6
0 10
0
0 12
0
0 15
0
MARRYAT'S COMMERCIAL SIGNALS—Roped and toggled
complete.   In painted boxes.
No.
l
2
3
4
5
6
7
No. of Flags.
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
Of the best Bunting Manufactured.
Size
4 ft. 6 in.
5 ft. Oin.
5 ft. 6 in.
6ft. Oin.
6 ft. 6 in.
7 ft. 0 in.
8 ft. 0 in.
3 ft. 0 in. broad.
3 ft. 9 in. „
3 ft. 9 in. ,,
4 ft. 6 in. ,,
4 ft. 6 in. ,,
5 ft. 0 in. „
6ft. Oin. „
Pennants 11 ft.
12 ft.
13 ft.
14 ft.
„ 15 ft.
„          16 ft.
17 ft.
£
3
4
5
5
5
6
I
d.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BOARD OP TRADE COMMERCIAL SIGNALS,—Roped and
toggled complete.   In painted boxes.
Of the best Bunting Manufactured.
•To.
No. of Flags.
1
19
Size
4 ft. 6 in.
x 3 ft. 0 in. broad.
Pennants 11 ft.
4 10
0
2
19
5 ft. 0 in.
X 3 ft. 9 in.    „
99
12 ft.
5 10
0
3
19
5 ft. 6 in.
X 3 ft. 9 in.    ,,
J)
13 ft.
6   0
0
4
19
6 ft. 0 in.
x 4 ft. 6 in.    ,,
99
14 ft.
6 10
0
5
19
6 ft. 6 in.
x 4 ft. 6 in.    ,,
97
15 ft.
7   0
0
6
19
7ft. Oin.
X 5 ft. 0 in.    „
Q
16 ft.
7 17
6
7
19
97
8ft. Oin.
X 6 ft. 0 in.    ,,
fi
17 ft.
9 10
0
ADDITIONAL PLAGS IN BAGS.
TheseFlags are intended to accompany Marryat's Signals, to enable communications to be made corresponding with the system of signals adopted by the Board of
Trade.    The sizes are similar to those attached to the numbers above.
No. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
Five Flags  20s.       26s.       32s.       35s.       38s.       42s.       55s.
Seven Flags     27s.       35s.       42s.        50s.       54s.       57s.       72s.42
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
COBJTEK Or TBLNITX BQTJABB, TOWER  HILL.
Nautical and Mathematical Instruments,
d.
Sextants of Pillar and Double Frame Pattern, best make, divided on
Silver to 10 Seconds, with extra power to the inverting
Telescope, and reflector to the Nonius     	
,, With solid cast limbs of approved patterns, from...^5 5s. to
„ Medium size, bronzed ditto,   with extra power telescope,
neutral tint shades, divided to 10", strongly recommended,
and warranted of best quality	
„ Oval Limb, Silver Arc, with inverting Telescope, &c.
,, Circular Limb,    do. do. ...   -_
,, Dollond limb with silver arch, divided to 30", inverting tele
scopes, mahogany case, &c., to supersede the wood frame
sextant'        	
,, Ditto   Do. with Ivory Arc       do	
Quadrants.—Brass, Silver Are,, Telescopes, &c, and Back Shades, in
Mahogany Case, best             ,	
Ivory Arc, in Mahogany Case, best     	
Ebony Handle, Ivory Are, in Mahogany Case, best	
Single Observation, Ivory Arc, plain and common     	
„ with Double Tangent	
,, ,, and Vertical Screws
,, ,, and Back Shades...
Telescopes to any of the above    extra     0   8   0
Artificial Horizons, with parallel glasses and mercury, complete       4   4    0
13
IS
0
12
J2
0
10
10
0
7
10
0
6
10
0
^
10
0
5
0
0
5
K
0
4
4
0
8
15
0
1
15
0
a
5
0
o
10
0
2
18
0Minories, London.
43
Binnacles.—Dolphin Pattern, large size, with Lamps and Shade, crown
.top™    _     £14 14s. Od., £15 15s. Od., and
,, Skylight.Pattern, crown top ...£4 4s. Od., £6,6s. Od., and
„ . .OctagonPattern, wood, £6 6s. Od., £8 8s. Od., £9 9s. Od., and
„ .. Pillar, crown top        £7 7s. Od., £9 9s. Od., and
N.B.—Binnacles of any pattern made to order.
Compasses.—Plain Azimuth, with Sight	
„ ,,    Azimuth        ,, 	
,, Best Prismatic Azimuth, with Sights 	
With Tripods, £1 5s. extra.
„ Mast Head Compasses, for avoiding the Local Attraction, of
any size. With Cylinder Shadeand Lamps.   Variovsprices.
Amplitude,
Stand for the above        	
Brass Steering, 8, 9, 10, and 11 in.
Wood ditto       	
Brass Hanging ditto        	
Every variety of Brass Boat ditto1 P.
Wood ditto       	
Pocket ditto, in brass     	
£1 0s. Od. to
 extra
... from 13s. to
...from 6s. 6d. to
from £1 to
lf?.x¥from 10s. to
...from 3s. 6d. to
 from
8. d.
17
17
0
6
6
0
11
11
0
12
12
0
3
o
0
5
5
0
6
6
0
2 10    0
1 5
1    1
0 10
1 5
1 1
0 6
0    1
Barometers.—Best rosewood, marine, with Sympiesometer and Thermometer    £5 5s. Od. to
„ Best rosewood, with' arm and Thermometer, circular front,
ivory scales, and rack motion £2 10s. Od. to
,, Ditto, with round head, and improved tube and cistern,
common       •*•'& •'•«•"*-4ik*-.	
,, Plain ditto, with Thermometer on the door in front   	
„               Wheel Pattern, various sizes, and mounting, from £1 5s. Od. to
Aneroid Barometers, do    from £2 10s. Od. to
SlMPIESOMETERS
.from
Thermometers.—8 inches long, with box scale	
„ 8, 10,  12, and 14 inch Brewers' ditto, in Japan or Copper
cases            from 3s. 6d. to
,, Night and day, for registering the greatest degree of heat or
cold during the absence of the-observer, from 12s. 6d. to
„ Marine, in a strong copper case, principally used for taking
the soundings, and ascertaining the temperature at the
bottom and at the surface of the Sea...       from £1 5s. to
Telescopes.—One, two, and three draw      	
„ Of superior quality, large object-glasses.
.from £1 0s. Od. to
.    ... £2 0s. Od. to
Double Glasses, especially adapted to the use of captains and pUgts, &c,
at night...    ...     ~ ... £2 2s. Od. to
Lo.G Glasses, 14 and 28 seconds, common each
,, In brass frame	
,, Half-hour solid Glasses   	
„ One-hour       ditto    	
,, Two-hours     ditto   	
Bar and Compound Magnets      from 1£.J. Od. to
Tape measures, from one pole to six poles in length, divided for land surveying, or the measurement of timber, in leather boxes, &c.... 6s. to
Brass Speaking Trumpets       from 5s. 6d. to
Storm Glasses, or Prognosticators from 6s. 6d. to
Steel Joint Dividers, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 inch    per dozen, 12s. Od. to
„    with Shifting Leg £1 10s. Od. to
Brass Joint Dividers, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 inch     per dozen    ...    9s. to
,,   with Shifting-Leg     „       18s. Od. to
6    6 0
3   3 0
2 10 0
2 0 0
6    6 0
3 10 0
2   2 0
0   16
10 0
15 0
4 4 0
2 10 0
6    6 0
5 10 0
0 1
6
0 2
6
0 2
6
0 4
6
0 5
0
2 2
0
0 15
0
0 18
0
0 14
6
1 10
0
3 0
0
0 18
0
1 16
044
James Imray and Son's Catalogv
Compasses with Pen and Pencil Points, and box scale, in case.	
,,    with Steel Joints         ...    ...    —-    ...
Set of Instruments, with Scale, in fish-skin case	
„     with Steel Joints	
,,     and Bow Pen	
„     Steel Joint Instruments, with Bow Pen, Ivory Scale, Sector, and
Brass Protractor    7s. 6d., 12s., 16s. and
,,     Turned Check Instruments, and Ivory Protractor	
„     Pound Shank ditto, with Lengthening Bar      	
Ebony Parallel Rules, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, and 24 inch     ...     from Is. to
Two-feet Box Gunter's Scales	
„     improved by Don	
,,     Sliding Gunter's Scale	
10, 12, J5, 18, and 21 inch Globes, in black frames ...from £2 12s. 6d. to
„     in high mahogany frames     from £4 4s. Od. to
£ s. d.
0 4 6
0 6 6
0 8 6
0 10 6
0 12    6
1    2
1 15
2 2
0 4
0 2
0 5
0   7
10 10   0
21 10    0
Captain Smallman Toovey's Azimuth Dial.
This Instrument for determining the error of the Compass {variation and deviation combined) at sea, is a modification of what is called the Dumb Card ; it is used
in connexion with Godfray's Time Azimuth Chart, and the two will be found very
useful auxiliaries to all who are in command of iron ships and steamers. Price, with
tripod stand     £5 10s. Od.
ADJUSTMENT Of IRON SHIPS' COMPASSES.
. This branch of the business is conducted by Mr. W. H. Rosser, who has for
some years past paid speeial attention to- the ■ adjustment of Compasses on board
Iron Vessels; during which period he has adjusted the Compasses of many of the
largest vessels in the principal Ports of -the United Kingdom, a list of which may be
had on application.
IMBAT and SOW'S NEWLY-INVENTED
SPRING-COMPASS.
This Compass is particularly adapted for Iron Screw Steam-ships, or "Vessels that
have much vibratory motion. The invention can be applied to any Compass already
in use, at a charge of £2 2s.
IMRAY and SON'S IMPROVES FLOATING COMPASS.
Price, Four Guineas.
PATENT   SELF-REGISTERING    LOGS.
Friend's	
Walker's (Liverpool)
Walker's (Birmingham)
Massey'B... a
,,        Propeller Log
Tyssen's...
Reynold's. (A very superior, instrument, which.only needs to be seen to be
appreciated. . The index is protected, and the flange is not liable
to be caught by weeds)   .        ...        ...        	
£
*.
d.
4
4
0
2
2
0
3
10
0
2
10
0
Q
O
Q
O
0
5
5
0
3 10    0
MBMinories, Londo
45
PATENT    SOUNDINO    MACHINES.
Friend's ...        .
Walker's (Liverpool)
Walker's (Birmingham)
Massey's
Reynold's
£  i. d.
4    4 0
2   2 0
2 5 0
8 10 0
3 0 0
LANTERNS, HELLS, FOG-HORNS, 4.C.
Lamps for Sailing and Steam-vessels fitted np according to the New Regulations
of the Board of Admiralty. These are of various sizes and patterns, and can be had
either in tin (japanned) or in copper. Those with reflecting dioptric lenses are
strongly recommended, as they give light of unusual brilliancy, and are but little more
expensive.
Bells and Fog-Horns are kept in stock, as the Regulations oblige vessels to carry
them for use in thick weather.    They are of various sizes and prices.
CHRONOMETERS.
A large number of these Instruments is kept in stock and constantly rated. Purchasers may freely inspect the Rate Book; thus they have the opportunity of making
such a selection as will give them confidence in the correct performance of the instrument.
If not approved after a twelvemonth's trial, the Chronometer may be exchanged for
another.
CHRONOMETERS re-sprung, re-adjusted, rated, bought, or exchanged.
Best Chronometers, going two days     	
„ V, ••    eight days	
„ ,, for the Pocket, in gold cases     	
Second-hand CHRONOMETERS kept in stock, at various prices.
Chronometers lent on hire,
...from
£30
0
0
...from
35
0
0
...from
35
0
0
WATCHES.
The following is our List of Prices of Watches, which are all of superior quality,
and particularly adapted for the use of seafaring persons ;—■
Patent Detached Lever Watch, capped
silver cases	
„      in gold cases   	
,, ,,      in silver hunting cases
,,      in gold hunting cases   .
Chronometer Balance
and jewelled, in >     £6   0   0   to £U   0   0
-i
12 0 0 to 18 0 0
10 0 0 to 15 0 0
22 0 0 to 27 0 0
21 0 0 to 27 0 046
James Imray and Son's Catalogue,
Messrs. IMRAY and SON
Beg leave to inform Owners and Shipmasters, that they are prepared
to supply every description of INSTRUMENTS, CHART, or BOOK
.—English or Foreign—which may be desired for Sea use or for
Ship purposes. And they "will undertake that they shall be of the
best quality, which their long standing in the Trade, and their extensive
connexion, enable thenvto offer on the most reasonable terms*'Minorie/S, London.
47
ATLASES.
The following Atlases, published by Messrs. G. Philip and Son, contain all recent
geographical discoveries. The maps are elegantly and clearly engraved, and the
system of colouring adopted very much increases their usefulness. Being publications
of considerable excellence, we recommend them with confidence :—
THE   IMPERIAL  LIBRARY  ATLAS ;  a series of new and authentic Maps,
engraved from origipal Drawings, by John Bartholomew, F.R.G.S.    Edited by
• William Hughes, F.R.G.S.    Accompanied by a valuable Index of Reference.
Complete in one handsome volume.    Half-bound russia> gilt edges, £5 5s.
THE NEW GENERAL ATLAS OF THE WORLD; a series of new and
authentic Maps, delineating the Natural and Political Divisions of the Empires,
Kingdoms, and States of the World, £3 3s.
THE CLASSICAL, HISTORICAL. AND SCRIPTURAL ATLAS, illustrating
the Ancient Classics, Historians, and Poets ; a series of Forty-nine Maps,
engraved in the best style, and forming a complete vade mecum to the Classical
Student, and an interesting book of reference to the lover of General Literature.
Complete in one large volume, £3 3s.
THE FAMILY ATLAS OF PHYSICAL, GENERAL, AND CLASSICAL
GEOGRAPHY; Fifty-seven ,Maps ; accompanied by illustrative letterpress,
describing the soil, resources, and chief natural productions of each country ;
with a copious Consulting Index. Bound in cloth,.*gilt edges, £1 15s.; or half-
bound Turkey morocco, gilt edges, £2 2s.
THE LIBRARY ATLAS, comprising forty-two modern and five ancient Maps,
Ulusfcratiye of the important events in ancient history. Accompanied by a
copious Consulting Index. Bound in cloth, gilt edges, 15s. ; or, with the Maps
interleaved, half-bound Turkey morocco, cloth sides, gilt edges, £1 Is.
THE POPULAR ATLAS OF THE WORLD, in a series of forty-two Maps,
constructed from the most recent Authorities. With a copious Consulting
Index, carefully compiled.    Bound in cloth, 12s. 6d.
THE CABINET ATLAS, in a series of thirty-four Maps, embracing the principal
countries of the world. With a copious Consulting Index. Bound in cloth,
10s. 6d.
THE POPULAR ATLAS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY ; a series of beautifully
engraved Maps and Plates, illustrating the natural features of the globe, the
geographical distribution of natural phenomena, and their connection with the
industrial pursuits of mankind.    Bound in cloth, gilt edges, 12s. 6d.
THE COUNTIES OF ENGLAND ; ,,a~series-of Maps reduced from the Ordnance
Survey, and embodying tin amounPof detail and accurate delineatmn not to be
obtained in any similar work. The railway information is brought down to the
latest date.   £2 2s.
THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES; a series of Maps, on a large scale, of the
separate Colonies, including a general map of Australia, and Maps of New
Zealand ami Tasmania. The whole constructed from Government Surveys and
other reliable authorities. The routes of the different explorers are accurately
laid down, and the information contained in the Maps is brought down to the
present date.    £1 lis. 6d.
JAMES   IMRAY AND   SON,  MINOEIES,   LONDON,   E.48 James Imray and Son's Catalogue, Minories, London.
THE   PALINURUS.
(Invented by Messrs. Reynolds and Wiggins.)
This valuable Instrument determines the deviation of the Compass on Even Keel or
at any Angle of Heel. Its simplicity and accuracy will, on inspection, be found a
great recommendation. For Iron sailing Ships going on Southern voyages it is
■specially adapted, as it is well known that corrections for one Hemisphere are
frequently useless in another.
By the use of this Instrument the position of the Ship's head may be found at any
time the Sun is visible, in any part of the world, without calculation.
Price, without the Klinometer, £i 4s. ; with the Klinometer, £5 5s.
TUB FOLLOWING ABB ALL THB IKSTBUCTIOIfS FOE USUTG THE  HfSIEUSreST THAI AE"E  EEQUIEED: —
1. Set for variation by turning tbe Screw at the South point.
2. Set the Latitude Pointer to Ship's latitude at time of observation.
3. Find the apparent time at ^hip (say within 5 minutes) and turn the Instrument by means of
the knobs at East and West, until the shadow of the edge of the Sector cuts the time on the Hour Circle:
The point now at "Ship's Head" is the course the ship is on (Magnetic), the difference between
which and the Binnacle Compass is the deviation of that Compass on that point.
A pair of Sights are supplied which can be fitted to either end of the Sector, for the purpose of
taking bearings of the Mo6*a and Stars, or the Sun, when not bright enough to cast a shadow.
When using them (having set the Latitude Pointer), set the tail piece to the time?on the Hour
Circle and turn the Instrument as directed in Rule 3, until the object is observed through the slits.
In high latitudes, and also when using the sights, i: will be necessary to lift the Hour Circle, JSs'i
out of the bowl by means of the ends projecting at East and West,. ■
By placing the Sector upright, the Sights may also be used for taking Magnetic bearings.
THE IMPROVED SPIRIT COMPASS.
(Invented by Messrs. Reynolds and Wiggins.)
This valuable instrument is a great improvement upon the Spirit Compasses hitherto
in use, the card being made buoyant by means of a hollow copper globe attached to it,
by which means the serious oscillation of the card, so frequently complained of, is
overcome. It is almost indispensable on board Screw Vessels and Yachts, and
while more particularly intended for those vessels, it is equally available for Sailing
Ships, being so constructed as to be of service either in fine or stormy weather;
it can also be converted into a complete Azimuth Compass.
Price £5 5>., to £8 8s. ■
S.nitii-f^,iiittllW|i,U i   JiVK 9^/
IS70