THIS MONTH-THE EAST KOOTENAY OF YESTERDAY  AND  TO-DAY, ETC.
VOIv.   V.
JUL/Y,    1899.
Mo    7.
GEO. e. HINTON & COMPANY.
BRITISH COLUMBIA AGENTS FOR ROYAL ELECTRIC COMPANV.
... Electrical Construction and Supplies...
ELECTRIC HOISTS, BLOWERS, FANS, MOTORS AND DYNAMOS.   "S.K.C." TWO PHASE TRANSMISSION
SYSTEM.    ELECTRIC MINING APPARATUS.
VICTORIA.   B. C. VANCOUVER,   B. C.
The Royal Electric Company
MONTREAL, QUEBEC.        | g
 MAKERS OF	
Electrical Mining:  Machinery
MOTORS
Adapted for Operating Stamps, Compressors, Hoists, Trams, Drills, Pumps.
Lighting Plants for Mines and Buildings.
OUR   S. K. C.   SYSTEM
RENDERS DISTANT WATER POWERS AVAILABLE
FOR ALL CLASSES OF Mr NINO WORK.
Write Our British Columbia Branches at
Rossland.
62 Government St., Victoria.
BULLIVAIMT & CO. Ltd.,
-MANUFACTURERS OF-
WIRE   ROPE.
—CONTRACTORS FOR
WIRE   TRAMWAYS
-■$) OS JLLL SYSTEMS,
MINING   |   AND   g HAULING   -    PLANT.
 SOLE  AGENTS FOR BRITISH COLUMBIA.	
WALTER A.ANDERSON &C0. Ltd., Mackinnon Building, VANCOUVER, B.C.
PRICE,    20    CENTS.L
BELTING
Users of this article would do well to
examine our stock in this line. We carry
a larger assortment than any other dealer
in the Province.
The Electric Brand of Rubber Belting
we stock is not excelled by any other
make. It is used by all the large mills
in the Province. We carry it in stock up
to 22 inches, and Leather Belting up to
16 inches in width.
McLennan, McFeely & Co.
(JLIMITBD,
WHOLESALE HARDWARE
VANCOUVER, B.C.
DAWSON CITY, N.W.T.
Agents for the Giant Powder "Co., San Francisco.
Agents for the Majestic Steel Range Co., St. Louis.
gates!
Ironworks
Not only build Mining Machinery,
but
Cement
Machinery.
Modern Plants Designed and Built.
Crushers, Barrel Pulverizers, Rotary Kilns, etc.
WE ARK UP TO DATE  ON THIS
Address:
Dept, SS. 650 Elston Ave., Chicago, III.
V
ED KRUPPGRUSONWERK
Madgeburg-Buckau (Germany).
MINING - MACHINERY
ORE  CRUSHING:
Stone    Breakers   of   especially  strong
construction.   Roller Mills, Chilian
Mills,   Ball   Mills, for dry and   wet
crushing—mors than 1,800 at work.
Stamp   Batteries—Shoes   and    Dies   of
Krupp's Speclsl Steel.
AMALGAMATION :
Amalgamation Tables and Pans, Lasrlo's
Gold Amalgamators, Settlers, etc.
SEPARATION AND CONCENTRATION :
Separators,   Exhausters,   Hydraulic
Classifiers, Percussion  Tables, Jig.
gsrs, Rotating Round Tables.
LEACHING PLANT     ■ —
COMPLETE  GOLD   ORE   DRESSING   PLANT.
I (a)  For Treating by the Wet Method with Stamp Batteries, Amalgamation and Concentration-
rarifj-——-'' (b)  For Dry Crushing by Ball Mills, Dust Extraction and Leaching
COAL   WASHING   PLANT—Large Testing Station for Crushing and Dressing Ores at the Works.
(AGENTS;
For   CANADA—Jas. W. Pyke & Co., 85 St. Francois Xavier Street, Montreal.
For, the UNITED STATES—Thos. Prosser & Son, 15 Gold Street, New York.
For MEXICO—Pablo Bergner, Apartado 549, Mexico.
For SOUTH AFRICA—United Engineering Company Ltd., P.O.  Box 399, Johannesburg, S.A.R.
■THE MINING RECORD.
GENERAL,  MINING   MACHINERY.
HOISTING
CRUSHING
AND
Mining
Machinery.
RAPON9'    Double  Drum
Winding Engines.
BACON'S Under-a
-Ground
Winze Hoist.
Earle C. Bacon, Enginee.
Havemeyer Building   NEW YORK.
^^Jb. Send for Completely
Illustrated  Cata-
"   1T-.MMAI   »' Ore and  Rock ,ogues-
-Ml^el— Crusher.
Standard of the World.
BACON'S
DOUBLE CYLINDER
Single Drum Winding   Engines  for
Mine Shafts, Slopes, etc.
Link-Belt
ELEVATORS '<
AND
CONVEYORS.
Conveyor 328 feet centers, handling 4 tons
ANY   MATERIAL.
Steel Coal or Ash Cars.
" run of mine" coal per minute. ANY   CAPACITY
Electric Coal Mining and Haulage Machinery,
Link-Belting, Sprocket Wheels, Malleable Iron Buckets
Shafting, Pulleys, Gearing,  Clutches,
Patent Machine-Moulded Rope Sheaves, etc.
THE LINK=BELT MACHINERY CO., Engineers, Founders, flachinsts, Chicago, U.S.A.
WM. R. PERRIN & CO., Chicago, ill, u.s.a.
MANUFACTURERS
FO -m ■   ^ For Cyanide
liter Presses _r_
WRITE    FOR   CATALOGUE.-*
THE  MINING RECORD.
HSSftYERS' SBPPLTES HND ENGINEERING INSTRUMENTS.
No. 034 Button Balance—io=inch Beam.      Brunton's Patent Pocket Mine Transit.
Sensitive to 1-100
milligramme.
This is a double-
column Button Balance with all In test
improvements including our new adjusting
device ami rider iou
^<W- j
11 is accurate and as
rapid as a beam of
this length can be.
For an office doing a
moderate amount of
ifrork it is' the be*t
Balance to be bad for
both gold and silver.
For complete description aud prices
of t h is and other Balances send for catalogue A to
* This illustration
shows an operator
Uking. an incline
:above the horizontal
with Brunton's Patent Pocket Mine
Transit.
The instrument is
made especially for
mining engineers,
mine managers and
r-uperiniendents, but
its light weight and
the ease with whieh it
can be Bandied render it admir&bly adapted to the taking of
tOpograpBy and for
geological field work.
Write for catalogue
B giving full description of t ne instrument
and all Its uses, to
WM. AINSWORTH & SONS, successors to WM. AINSWORTH, Denver, Colorado j U. S. A. 5
Agents for British Columbia, MACFARLANE & CO, Vancouver and W. F. TEETZEL & CO., Nelson.
ftSSfly, MINING
AND
Write for Catalogue.
MILL SUPPLIES*
WE are Manufacturers and direct Importers, and Garry a large
Stock of Balances,  Furnaces, Fire Clay Goods, Scientific!
and Practical Books, Glassware, Platinum Goods, Acids, Chem-I
icals, and all other Assayers' and Miners' requirements.
SOLE AGENTS for Morgan Crucible Company, Battersea.
Becker's Sons' Balances, Etc.
MacFarlane & Co.,
^IffiSSS?.^ "'Assay'"     #   P.O. Box 552 VANCOUVER, B.C.
HEARN & HARRISON.
(Established 1857.)
MANUFACTURERS AND IMPORTERS OF
MINING, SURVEYING
^ENGINEERING
INSTRUMENTS.
Office Instruments and Materials.
Repairs and a Iterations executed  promptly.   .
CORRESPOSDENCE SOLICUCED.-
Catalogue sent free on application.
1640-1642 Notre  Dame St.,
tfSiP^ MONTREAL, CAN.
THE DENVER FIRE CLAY CO
1742 to 1746 Champa St.,  DENVER, COL
Established during the first gold discoveries in California..
J©HN THYLOR & (2©.,.
63 MUST ST., SAN FRANCISCO,
mporters and   Manufacturers  of-
Incorporate!'. 189
CAL.
Assayers Mine and Mill Supplies, Chemicals and Chemical Glassware and Apparatus.
Agents for the Pacific Coast of The Denver Fire Clay Co. and Morgan Crucible Co., Battersea England.
All,articles required for a chemist or assayer and for fitting up a quartz
mill. Nofie*but the best chemicals, crucibles and other appliances, such hb
our long experience assures us to he the best, are kept in stock,and all furnished at reasonable prices.
Borax, Bone-Ash, Cyanide Potass., Manganese from our own min
for working sulphurete and gold ores, in ton or car lots;-.and other articles c
Callfornlan production at manufacturers' prices.
Our new Illustrated catalogue and assay tables sent free on application   9THE MINING RECORD.
GENERAL  MINING   MACHINERY.—Continued.
147 FULTON ST., CHICAGO, ILL, U.S.A.
—HEADQUARTERS FOR-
Mining Machinery.
Hoisting
Engines for
Deep Mines.
Prospectors
Hoists.
Gray's
Patent
Chairs.
Cars,
Cages.
Sederholm
Boilers.
Corliss
Engines.
Reidler
Pumps and
Air Compressors.
Adjustable
Comet
Rock and -
Ore
Crushers.
Perforated
Metals
for all
Purposes.
(We are pleased to send
screen samples to intending purchasers.)
Improved
Crushing
Rolls.
Smelting
and
Roasting
Furnaces.
Stamp Mills & Concentrating Mills
And equipment of every kind. Our machinery in these lines is more largely used than that of any other manufacturer. It is in
use on all gold fields and is recognised everywhere as the best. The Whitewater Deep Concentrator is a recent example of our work
Ball Pulverizers such as used at the Republic Mine and the Helena & Livingstone Mill are of our manufacture. Write for Catalogue
-REPRESENTED   BY—
MENNO UNZ1CKER, SPOKANE HOTEL, SPOKANE, WASH.
Exc.usive Manufacturers of Riedler Pumps aud Air Compressors for United States, (Canada, Mexico, South
America, England, South Africa and Australia.
J>«
THE MINING RECORD.
BOILERS, WATER WHEELS AND COMPRESSORS.
Robb-Armstrong Automatic Engines.
CENTRE OR SIDE CRANK.
In our side type up to 100 h.p.
the outboard bearing is connected
with the frame by a wing and is
kept perfectly in line. This allows
of its being satisfactorily used for
portable purposes and is a great
advantage for stationary plants.
ROBB ENGINEERING CO. Ltd.
AMHERST, N.S.
The Pelton Water Wheel Company
Gives exclusive attention to the development and utilization of Water Powers bythe most
modern, economic and improved methods. An experience of more than fifteen years, involving
both the theory and practice of hydraulic engineering as relates to power development in its
widest range of application, is at the service of customers.
NINE THOUSAND WHEELS NOW RUNNING—Aggregating some 700,000 h.p.
ELECTRIC POWER TRANSMISSION—Pelton Wheels afford the most reliable and
efficient power for such service, and are running the majority of stations of this character in
the United States, as well as most foreign countries. Highest efficiency and absolute regulation
I guaranteed under the most extreme variations of load. Pelton Wheels are running every
water power plant in British Columbia. Parties interested will be furnished with a catalogue
on application. Address	
PELTON WATER WHEEL COMPANY, 121 Main Street, SAN FRANCISCO, CAL..
AND
Cascade
WATER WHEEL
Adapted to all Heads from
3 Feet to 2000 Feet
Onr experience of 33 YEARS
building Water  Wheels en-J
ables us to suit every require-1
ment of Water Power Plants. |
We guarantee satisfaction.
Send for a Pamphlet of
either Wheel and write
roll particulars.
James Leffel & Go.
SPRINGFIELD, OHIO, U.S.A.
WATER POWER
Plants Developed and Installed.
The Stilwell-Bierce & Smith-Vaile Co.
DAYTON, OHIO, U.S.A..
-MANUFACTUBB8 OF-
The - Victor - Turbine
HYDRAULIC MACHINERY and AIR COMPRESSORS.
30 YEARS BXPERIENGE.
Recent plants installed:—Lachine Rapids Hydraulic & Lanij
Co., Montreal, Que., 12,000 h.p.; Chambly Manufacturing Co.
Montreal, Que, 20,000 h.p.; West Kootenay Power & Light Co.
Rossland, B.C., 3,000 h.p.
j}| Compressed Rir from Falling Water.
H HIGH TESTIMONIAL.^ =
THE DOMINION COTTON MILLS, Ltd., MAGOG, QUE., JUNE 7th, 1898.
THE TAYLOR HYDRAULIC AIR COMPRESSING CO., Ltd., Montreal, Que.
DEAR SIRS:—
We have had your Air Compressor in successful operation for over twelve (12) months
in our Print Works, where it has replaced steam to drive the engines in the Printing
Department. Your Compressor runs.without attention or expense, and is saving the
cost of fuel formerly employed to drive the same engines by s,team.
I am pleased to certify to its successful operation as a most efficient motive power.
Yours truly, W. T. Whitehead, Manager.
TAYLOR AIR COMPRESSING CO., SPOKANE, WASH.THE MINING RECORD.
CABLES, HOISTS AND ©RE CARS.
THE
BLEICHERT
Wire Rope Tramway
AND OTHER SYSTEMS OP
AERIAL TRANSPORTATION
MANUFACTURED BY	
Bleichert Tramway ofthe Solvay Process Co., transporting rock.
new York OFFicE-Cooper, HewMtt 4. Co.,1T BURLING SLIP.
THE TRENTON  IRON CO.,
TRENTON, NEW JERSEY.
Engineers and Contractors and sole licensees in North America for the Bleichert System.   Also, Wire Rope
Equipments for Surface and Underground Haulage, etc.
Ohioago Offxce-1114 MONADNOCK BUILDING
. BEATTY & SONS,
WELLAND, ONTARIO,
Dredges, Ditchers and Steam Shovels,
For Dredging, Ditching, Dyking, Gold Mining, Etc.
Of various styles and sizes to suit any work.
.Mine Hoists, Hoisting Engines, Stone Derricks,[Horsepower
Holsters*   Suspension   Cableways,   Submarine   Rock
Drilling Machinery, Gang Stone Saws, Centrifugal Pumps for Drainage Works, Pumping Sand, Gold Mining, Etc.
We also furnish WIRE ROPE at Lowest Prices.
THE TRUAX PATENT IMPROVED
AUT©MATie ©RE CARS!
 SOLD   BY	
H. BYERS & 6©., *
Sandon, Kaslo, and Nelson, B.e.
Agents,
t-^»<:-i<*
Send for Catalogue
and  Price.
-Infringements   will he
prosecuted  to the full
extent ol the law.
Patented Jan. 5,1892;  Aug. 27,1895;
July 19,1898.
Patented In Canada, June 21,1898.
.BUY NO OTHER BUT THE '98 IHPROVED.
HYDRAULIC   PIPE.
WHTER   .*   WORKS   /   ©R   .*   MINING   /   PLHNTS.
The largest and best equipped rivetted Steel pipe-making plant on the Coast
ESTIMATES   FURNISHED. LARGE   ©R   SMALL   QUANTITIES.
N©   DELAY   IN   DELIVERY. SATISFACTION   GUARANTEED.
WRITE   US
ARMSTRONG & MORRISON"
VANCOUVER,   B.C."TjHifE'MINtH'G RECOR©. '
flHSeELLftNEOUS MSeHINERY, ET0.
Hoisting aND Winding Engines
Mining, Milling and Concentrating
Hn/amiwcpy
Thoroughly Modern in Type; Substantially Constructed, and Convenient and Efficient in Operation. ±
Contracts for Complete Steam and  Water  Power Plants
a Speeialty. General Mill and Mine Supplies.
F. R, Mendelhall, | The JEN6KES MACHINE C©,
ESTIMATES SUBMITTED  PROMPTLY. ....agent, 32*40 Lansdowne Street,
*   tm~   Catalogues and Prices on Application. ,/ r ROSSL21R1D, B.e. & SHBRBROOKB. ODE. _
m
Joshua Hendy Machine Works,
Nos. 38 to 44 Fremont St„ SAN FRANCISCO, Cal., U.S.A.
 MANUFACTURERS  OF  AND  DEALERS  IN	
Hydraulic / Quartz Miming / Miffing Machinery
COMPBISIHG-
HYDRAULIC GIANTS,
WATER GATES,
SHEET IRON and
STEEL PIPE,
STAMP MILLS,
ORE CRUSHERS,
•^R-E FEEDERS,
CONCENTRATORS,
SMELTERS,
HOISTING and
<PSPMiPI»G PLANTS*-
SAW MILLS,
MINE and MILL
SUPPLIES, Etc., Etc.
Catalogues and Prices Furnished
TTpon Application j
HOISTING ENGINE.
IMPACT WATER  WnEEL.
X'X-uk.TXiTTTavC  BEPIITBES   N-TiSrSiTibeety steeet.
W
 I      I      I      I      I      I	
E are always in the market for    :    :    :
:    :    :   CRUDE OR NATIVE PLATINUM.
BHK6R St CO.
NEWHRK, «MU
THEODORLEXOW
195 BROADWAY, JEI I0RK,
(WESTERN UNION BUILDING.)
IMPORTEB   OV
CARBONS (Black Diamonds).
FOR DIAMOND DRILLS AND ALL MECHANICAL
PURPOSES.
HENRY   DBMMBRT.
E. H. HEAPS &, CO.,
Machinery, Mining and Investment
BROKERS.
506 Cordova St.    VANCOUVER, B.C. !
MANUFACTURERS' AGENTS AND DEALERS IN
New    and    Second-Hand    Machinery,    Diamond   Drills,    Canning   and
Saw Mill Machinery, etc., etc., eto\
RaPRESENTiNQ-^Cowan  & Co., A. R. Williams, M. C. Bullock Manufactftr- j
ing Company,   Clayton Air   Compressor  Works,  and   other
first-class manufacturers.    . . .
f§ HK7VYIL.TON   PGWDEk   CO'Y.
(Incorporated 1861.)   Manufacturers ot
High Explosives, Blasting, Mining and Sporting Powder.
DEALERS IN ELECTRIC BLASTING APPARATUS, SAFETY FUSE,  DETONATORS,  TC.
Head Office.-   MONTREAL.
BRANCH OEEIGE: LOCAL OFFICES: WORKS:
VANCOUVER AND NELSON.
VICTORIA.
NANAIMO.THE MINING RECORD.
EtEeTBPgaL   MACHINERY.
CANADIAN GENERAL ELECTRIC
COMPANY, Limited.
Head offices, Toronto, Ont. CAPITAL, $1,500,000. Factories, Peterboro, Ont
BRANCH OFFICES:
Halifax, N.S.,    Montreal, Que.,    Winnipeg, Man.,     Nelson, B.C.,    Vancouver, B.C.
MANUFACTURERS OF
Electric » Mining - Apparatus
Hoists, Pumps, Blowers, Fans, Blasting
Apparatus, Dynamos for Lighting and
Power and Motors for all Purposes ..
Electrical Transmission of Power Successfully Operated up to 50 Miles
BY   OUR
THREE PHASE TRANSMISSION SYSTEM
.WRITE US..
BRANCH OFFICES IN BRITISH COLUMBIA
NELSON.
VANCOUVER.IUI
8 THE MINING RECORD.
MISCELLANEOUS. ;■ ■ 	
noersoll-Sergeaiit rock Drills 13
For   TUNNELS     MINES   and   QUARRIES.
Straight Line Duplex and Compound nIF 60h1Dr6SS0rS
COMPLETE   MINE   EQUIPMENT.
JAMES COOPER MANUFACTURING COMPANY, limited
^ MONTREAL    I* o ^,|
Branch   Office-ROSSLAND. B.C.  ' JAMES D. SWORD, Manager.
elephant j Why Certainly! I
DiaMIiU \ Easily knocks otlt all comers.     It has held the championship of the world '
< for nearly 50 years.   We will never let it take a second place to any com-.
DC A nV < peting grade.   It will always be  THE LEADER, THE WINNER,
BLHUT \ :'• THE  FIRST,   AND  BEST.   Others may cost more bnt none can
> beat it.   Insist on "ELEPHANT," made in 69 beautiful shades,_ for any
FU| I V C r\ > description of inside and outside work.   Izuraire for Liquid "Ironite" for
If 11 ALU '  l floors and oilcloths.
PAINT. • • The Largest Paint, Color and Varnish Factory in Canada.
THE^eftNADH   PRINT  COMPANY.   LTD.
MONTREAL.    TORONTO.    ST. MALO.    ST. JOHNS.    VANCOUVER AND VICTORIA.
J. H. WILLIAMS A CO.,	
$&        < with  Flat Link Chain. ^^kF     J«   S ®©-
^<<>>- ' "VULCAN" ^MM        Va
aX^    >\»   6«,.        j Patent Drop Forged Chain Pipe Wrench, ^ **q,    4f
S^rJSr IS Cable Chain
For Sale by
BOYD, BURNS & CO.
Engineers and  Plumbers Supplies.  VANCOUVER,    B.C.
BANK ©F BRITISH  NORTH  AMERieH.
BSTABUSHED 1836.     INCORPORATBD BY ROYAL CHARTER 1840.
phid dp enpiTRL,  ...7777777" 77....  ai.ooo.ooo sterling.
RESERVE FUND, K  300,000 "
LONDON,  ENG., OFFICES. 3 CLEMENTS LHNE.  LOMBARD STREET.
BRANCHES   AND   AGBNCIB8 :
HALIFAX, N.S. MONTREAL, P.Q. HAMILTON, Ont. WINNIPBO   Man
ST. JOHN, N.B. OTTAWA, Ont. BRANTFORD, Ont. BRANDON, Man.
FREDBRICTON, N.B. KINOSTON, Ont. LONDON, Ont. NBW YORK   N Y
QUEBEC, P.Q. TORONTO, Ont. MIDLAND, Ont. SAN FRANCISCO, Cal.
BRANCHES   IRtVBWPrTsH  COLUMBIA :
VieTORIH, VANCOUVER, ROSSLAND, TRAIL^JKASLO, ASHCROFT, GREENWOOD.
Also at the Gold Fields—ATLIN,  BENNETT and DAWSON CITY,
Highest Prices Paid for Gold Dust and Amalgam. G.   H.   BURNS,  Mgi\,  VICTORIA,   B.CThe Mining; Record.
Vol. V.
JULY, 1899.
No. 7
BRITISH COLUMBIA
MINING RECORD
Devoted to the Mining Interests of British Columbia.
PUBLISHED BY
The Mining Record Limited Liability.
ADVERTISING RATES ON APPLICATION.
H. nORTIMER LAMB, managing Editor,
•  London Office : 24 Coleman Street, E.C.
Vancouver Branch Office : Cowderloy & Ure
Montreal : Gray's Agency.
Denver, Col.: National Advertising Co.
San Francisco : Dake's Agency.
Ca
Gr
All
of the
All
of the
the
SUBSCRIPTION TERHS:
nada and the United States, one year -   -   $2.00
eat Britain and Foreign, "       "    -   -     2.50
communications relating to the editorial department
British Columbia Mining Record to be addressed to
The Editor, B.C. Mining Record,
P.O. Drawer 685, Victoria, B.C.
communications relating to the business department
British Columbia Mining Record to be addressed to
Business Manager, B.C. Mining Record,
P.O. Drawer 685, Victoria, B.C.
ONE of the most bare-faced and impudent swindle
ever attempted in this country is the promotion
in Boston by two adventurers named respectively.
Crosbie and Beach, of a concern which is described as
the " Boston and British Columbia
A barb-faced Copper Mining and Smelting Com-
SWiNDLE.     pany," with a capital of three million
dollars.    But in  order that the full
facts of this glaring instance of fraud may be placed
at the disposal of the public we print the prospectus
of this precious promotion in full:
" This corporation is formed under the laws of the
State of Maine, and registered in the Province of
British Columbia, Canada.
" This company owns the valuable copper properties
known as the Standard Group of copper mines, consisting of seven full mining claims, containing
approximately 375 acres of mineral land, all located
in the Revelstoke mining district of British Columbia,
Canada.
" Each of these seven properties are 1,500 by 1,500
feet in extent.
'' Title is absolutely perfect.
" There are five distinct parallel copper lodes running through these claims ; the narrowest ledge averages 14 feet in width, and the widest ledge at the
Standard mine will run from 45 to 75 feet in width.
There are about 3^ miles of copper lode matter on
this property owned by the company.
'' A large amount of money has already been expended on development work. This work has been
carried on for the past two years, and has been continued up to date. Present development in the tunnels, shafts, cross-cuts and winzes discloses several
huge veins of mineral of great value in copper; refer
ence to the work done is made to the map accompanying this statement.
'' The ore bodies have been thoroughly sampled on
the surface, and in the different levels as the work
has progressed, and the value of copper to the ton of
ore has been learned from time to time by assays and
mill tests, and you will notice by reference to these
assays, tabulated herewith, that the veins and lodes
grow richer in copper as depth is attained.
RESULTS OF ASSAYS AND   MILL TESTS.
Sample.
No. I.
No. 2.
No. 3.
No. 4.
No. 5.
No. 6.
No. 7.
No. 8.
No. 9.
No. 10
Copper
per Ton.
$ 15 80
14 00
17 00
16 00
36 00
151 90
39 77
42 50
83 90
68 80
Per
Cent.
Gold.
Silver.
7
7
8
8
18
75
19
21
4i
34
I 4 00
Trace
4 35
1 65
2 20
Trace
1 5°
Trace
1 80
2 10
$ 3 00
Trace
Trace
1 20
Trace
Trace
2 20
Trace
1 65
Trace
" In computing the value of the copper in the above
tables, copper has been figured at 10 cents per pound,
but as the market price of copper to-day ranks from
ijj4 to 18 cents per pound, far larger values ought to
be considered.
"The quality of copper is excellent, being peculiarly ductile, and equal, if not superior to any copper
produced elsewhere.
'' The numerous assays and mill tests amply
demonstrate the fact that one hundred tons of average
ore will produce at least twelve tons of metallic copper, at present prices worth $4,200. It is expected to
work about 100 tons per day at first, and to largely
increase the amount. It can be mined, transported to
the company's reduction works and treated for $5 per
ton. Our by products will pay all expenses, leaving
the ingot copper produced net profit. A profit of
$4,200 per day, $1,500,000 a year, and capable of
great increase in proportion as the plant is enlarged,
is entirely reasonable from the beginning, and absolutely assured.
" Copper mining is one of the safest and most profitable industries in America. One need only call
attention, to prove this statement, to the Calumet and
Hecla, Anaconda, Boston and Montana, the Parrot,
Osceola, Quincy, Tamarack, and the United Verde
copper mines. The enormous dividends paid by
these corporations and many other copper properties
of immense value is well known. Enormous fortunes
have been made by Boston and New England people
in copper stocks. The principal copper stocks dealt
in on the Boston market have risen $100,000,000 in
value, and the end is not yet.
" One may fully understand what the enormous
mineral showing  on the  properties owned by thisIO
THE MINING RECORD.
company means when the fact is set forth that the
ores of the- greatest of all of the copper mines in
America averages not over 4 to 5 per cent, in copper.
" The history of these great corporations and the
millions of dividends these companies have paid, is
well known to the business world.
" Contrast these facts with the enormous ore bodies
in the Standard Group of copper mines owned by this
company.
" With permanent veins and rich lodes, as large as
shown on the map, at a depth of a hundred feet, a
general sample of the ore body shows an average of
copper of 23^ per cent, to the ton. In estimating
the profits of the company as shown previously, we
have figured only on a basis of 12 per cent, copper.
" Our Mr. George W. Beach, the well known mining expert, of British Columbia, in his report to the
directors of this company, makes the following important statement :
''' The Standard Group of copper mines has every
evidence of being a magnificent copper proposition.
The geological formation of the Standard Basin, where
these mines are located, is an ideal one, and is a formation in which mineral lodes carrying high percentages
of value are usually found. All veins are contact,
that is, the ore bodies are found in contact between
formations of different geological ages. The ore
shutes are permanent, and where sampled in the
deeper levels shows a higher percentage of copper and
gold values than on the surface.
" ' From actual measurement, I have computed that
there is 750,000 tons of copper ore in sight.
''' There is another special advantage that I desire
to call your attention to, and it is this : that I never
saw a mining property better located for obtaining
deep levels, and cutting the ore bodies at great depth
by short tunnels. With a smelter and reduction
works operating in conjunction with the mines, as you
contemplate, there is no question but what your
stockholders will receive enormous dividends from
their investment in the shares of the company.'
" In the properties of this company, we have every
advantage that the earth can give us. Enormous
veins, rich in copper ore at such a height that the
present generation could never hope to win the millions of tons of copper ore above water levels, any
quantity of water power for mining and all other purposes, estimated to be 5,000 miner's inches at the
Standard mine, and unlimited quantities of timber for
all purposes.
'' Copper has a ready cash market. The demand
for copper is greatly in excess of the supply. Increased cost of production in some localities, and the
probable decrease of ores in others, makes it possible
for this demand to continue indefinitely. Prices have
advanced some 5 to 6 cents per pound in the last few
months, and the consumption of copper is increasing
at an amazing rate all over the world.
'' A contract has been entered into by the corporation for the erection of a smelter and reduction works,
with a capacity of not more than 500 tons per day,
large enough for our own output and that of the
mines in the vicinity of Revelstoke. This absolutely
assures large dividends on our entire capital, leaving
our own ingot copper surplus profits.
I' We unhesitatingly state that we can produce
ingot copper as cheap if not cheaper than any other
copper mining company in America.
"Further information of the company's properties
and operations may be obtained at its offices at Bos
ton, where maps of the mines and specimens of the
ore may be seen, and every opportunity offered for the
fullest investigation, which is cordially invited.
'' The shares in this company are the safest and
best paying investment offered to the public to-day.
" For the present a limited number of shares of the
capital stock of the corporation, par value, $10 per
share, fully paid and non-assessable, are offered to the
public for sale at $2.50 per share, in order to raise a
fund for additional machinery, smelting and reduction
works.
" All checks should be made payable to George W.
French, treasurer of the company, 82, 83, 84 International Trust Company Building, Milk and Devonshire
streets, Boston, Mass."
So far as our British Columbia readers are concerned, to comment on or criticise the many truly
astounding statements contained in the foregoing
quite remarkable document would be merely a waste
of time and space, but at the present time investors in
Eastern America, and notably in New York and
Boston, are so favourably disposed towards anything
in the shape of copper mines, that it is not at all
unlikely that many will be found ready to bite at just
such skillfully disguised baits as that with which this
so-called Boston & British Columbia Copper Mining
& Smelting Company are angling.
It is gratifying, meanwhile, to learn that New York
has been officially cautioned by our Provincial Department of Mines that investigation in this case is necessary, and that Mr. J. M. Kellie, M.P.P., as member
for the district, has, in a letter to a local newspaper—
the Kootenay Mail—in a commendable manner, taken
steps to expose the nefarious scheme of the men,
Crosbie and Beach. In passing, it may not be out of
place to suggest that if other members of Parliament
in British Columbia will profit by the example set
.them by Mr. Kellie, in publicly exposing swindles
and frauds such as the Boston & British Columbia
Copper Mining & Smelting Company, the like of
which must only too frequently come under their
notice, they will assuredly earn the gratitude of those
among their constituents interested in promoting the
welfare of legitimate mining in the Province, and at
the same time do the country a valuable service.
But to return to the prospectus before us. In the
opening paragraphs it is stated that the Boston &
British Columbia Copper Mining & Smelting Company "is registered in the Province of British
British Columbia," and.that the Company owns '' the
valuable copper properties known as the Standard
group of copper mines," or approximately three
hundred and seventy-five acres of mineral land. Both
of these statements are untrue. The Company has
not been registered in British Columbia, nor does
it yet own the mineral claims mentioned, a bond upon
which the first payment of three thousand dollars has
been made, alone constituting its right to the property.
Space in the prospectus is next devoted to a "description " of these valuable copper mines, and as an
example of imaginative skill the result is certainly
very brilliant. We are told that there are in all five
distinct parallel ledges, the narrowest of which does
not average less than fourteen feet, and the widest
ledge is from forty-five to seventy-five feet across ;
that these ledges aggregate three-and-a-half miles of
"lode matter," that a large amount of money has
been already expended in development work, and that
it has been thus shown that the veins and ledges
" grow richer in copper as depth is attained." Here
follows   the table as  above published,   giving theTHE MINING RECORD
11
results of assays and mill tests, but the names of the
persons who made them are by an oversight evidently
omitted. It is strange, too, that the British Columbia
Department of Mines, which is supposed to be well
supplied with all information appertaining to the
mines of the Province, has no knowledge of this wonderful three-and-a-half miles of copper reef near
Revelstoke, insomuch as no mention is made of it at
all in the recently published Report of the Department
for 1898; but this also may probably have been an
oversight on the part of the Provincial Mineralogist.
Notices have, however, appeared of late in the Revelstoke newspapers, from which it is gathered that the
Standard claim has been developed by a forty-five-foot
tunnel and a fifty-foot shaft, that no assays of the ore
have been obtained, but that a very promising copper
vein has been exposed, the width of which is probably
four feet. Mr. George W. Beach, " the well-known
mining expert of British Columbia," from actual
measurement, computed that on this prospect '' there
is 750,000 tons of copper ore in sight," and the
prospectus promises a profit on the working of $4,200
per day, or $1,500,000 per annum. We should
imagine that there was quite sufficient evidence here
on which to prosecute Messrs. Crosbie and Beach for
fraud should they have the temerity to register the
Boston & British Columbia Copper Mining & Smelting Company under the laws of the Province.
WE have before us the prospectus of the Cariboo
Consolidated, Limited, a company recently incorporated in London with a capital of £350,000
in £1 shares. Of the total capital 100,000 shares are
appropriated to provide working
the cariboo capital, and of the 200,000 shares
consolidated comprising the present issue to which
limited. the public are invited to subscribe,
80,000 are to be at once set aside for
the purpose above stated. The Directors, however,
promise that "they will not proceed to allotment unless at least one-half of the shares offered are subscribed for." In perusing this prospectus, which, by
the way, is a quite voluminous pamphlet of a dozen
pages or more, one cannot help being immediately
struck with the somewhat curious similarity between
the name given to this concern and that of the big
Cariboo undertaking with which so many prominent
men in Canada are associated; we refer to the Consolidated Cariboo. On the Consolidated Cariboo,, as
everyone knows, very large sums of money have been
expended with the result that the property, now
thoroughly equipped and well developed, is at length
in a position, so it is stated, to hereafter pay fair returns on the capital invested in it. This coincidence
of name must, of course, have escaped the attention
of the London promoters of the Cariboo Consolidated, Limited, but we feel sure that when it is
brought to their notice, and when they, moreover,
learn that under our registration laws, they will be
unable to obtain a license permitting their company
to carry on business in British Columbia under the
title of the Cariboo Consolidated, Limited, they will
promptly find another and, may we suggest, a more
strikingly original name by which to designate their
enterpris'e. We quite admit that "a promoter must
necessarily meet with almost the same difficulty in
the choice of an appropriate and "fetching" designation for a new flotation as it is said a novelist finds
in christening a work of fiction before sending it to
the publishers. It will, however, be conceded, that
speaking generally, authors display more originality,
at least, in the choosing of names than your company-
promoter, for while one rarely comes across two
books written by different persons, bearing the same
title, it is no uncommon thing to find a new company enterprise called after an old and successful
company enterprise, or rather, the christian names,
so to speak, of both will be identical, while the difference, such as it is, will be noticed only in the surname. Patriotic parents very frequently and laudably enough, bestow upon their offspring the cognomen which some great warrior or statesman has
made distinguished, but when this complimentary
style of paying tribute to eminence and success is introduced from domestic into stock exchange
circles, cynics are apt to awkwardly misconstrue or
question motives. Hence, with the Cariboo Consolidated, Limited. And in view of the wide area over
which its properties are spread, how much more appropriately might it not have been styled (say, for instance) the Cariboo "Scattered," Limited?—a title at
once, distinctive and suitable. But this after all is a
matter of detail and we pass to the more important
consideration of the prospectus itself. We find the
company has been formed to acquire from the Gold
Lands Corporation, Limited, who are the vendors
and promoters, nineteen claims in the Lillooet and
Cariboo districts, comprising an approximate area of
12,000 acres, exclusive of five miles of dredging
rights. At the instance of the vendors these properties have been reported on by Mr. Rathbone, the
South African engineer; Mr. W. J. Newall, a mining
engineer recently from Mexico; Senator Campbell,
Mr. J. B. Hobson, Mr. W. Thompson, formerly Government Mineralogist in Queensland; Mr. James
Champion, C. E.; Mr. J. J. Nickson, M. E. (sic);
Mr. W. E. Brett, M.E. (sic), and Mr. J.
Cobeldick. Messrs. Campbell, Hobson and Thompson are well known in British Columbia as
highly qualified authorities on hydraulic gold mining.
Of the capabilities in this direction of the other gentlemen mentioned nothing is really known in this
country, though we can cordially congratulate both
Mr. Nickson and Mr. Brett upon their sudden elevation to the dignity of mining engineers, the one from
being a Vancouver carpenter and contractor and the
other a Lillooett prospector. Mr. Cobeldick, we
note, is the only expert in the list quoted, to whose
name no distinguishing initials have been appended,
an omission doubtless attributable to that gentleman's presence in London, and his refusal to be described as a mining engineer in the company's prospectus. Be this as it may, an extract from Mr. Cobel-
dick's report, in which he says, "I have examined, as
requested, Lowhee Creek property and Lightning
Creek property, and advise you strongly to purchase
both," is specially quoted in the prospectus, and if
Mt. Cobeldick is not a mining engineer it would be
interesting to learn in what capacity he makes this
strong recommendation. However, we quarrel not
so much with the selection that has been made of
properties this company propose to acquire, but with
the manner in which their merits have been described
in the prospectus. We submit that to quote from
engineers' reports short extracts without giving the
context is a dangerous practice, unfair to the engineers themselves, and calculated to deceive the
public. This practice has been followed entirely in
the present case, and it is   needless to   say that inTHE MINING RECORD.
I Hi
IpjS
every instance the reports appear favourable, even
though not always convincing. Thus reporting on
Cunningham Creek properties, Mr. James Champion says :
" Having lived in this district for twelve years I
am personally acquainted with all the miners working on Cunningham Creek at present, and the lowest
estimate they gave me was 50 cents per cubic yard,
and the majority of them said they were positive it
would pay $t per cubic yard."
This, therefore, is not the report of Mr. Champion, but of miners working on the creek. Then
again, Mr. J. J. Nickson, "M.E.," states of the same
ground: "The gravel has been prospected, and
values of $1 to the cubic yard have been found on
benches up to 100 feet high, and above that 45 cents
per cubic yard.   The quantity of water available for
hydraulic work is more than required  This
property handled carefully would become one of the
greatest revenue-producing hydraulic mines in the
world."
It is not evidently thought worth while to mention by whom the "gravel was prospected," which
surely is here the only matter of importance. In
fact, Mr. Nickson appears to have a penchant for
making statements of this nature, for he also reports
on a Cariboo Lake dredging lease:
" The cost of dredging such material as we have
will not exceed 3 cents per cubic yard. While I believe many parts of the bars will pay probably $5 to
the yard, I think that 50 cents per cubic yard would
be a reasonable estimate." "He considers," it is
added, "that with such an immense deposit, if the
estimate were only 20 cents to the yard, an immense
revenue would accrue, namely, $59,500,000 after deducting 3 cents per cubic yard for operating expenses."
But what tests have been made in support of these
assertions?
Then reporting on three claims on French Creek,
Mr. Champion is quoted as follows:
" I do not consider this a mere prospects, nor a
partially developed property; the records in the Gold
Commissioner's Office will show that hundreds of
thousands of dollars have been taken both above and
below the property, now referred to, in fact some of
the richest that have been in Cariboo are adjacent to
this  property   By taking   advantage  of  the
work that has been done   I think there will
be no difficulty in finding the channel, and when once
found there is no doubt whatever as to its richness."
We, however, are quite at a loss to understand how
a claim that has in no sense been developed, can be
anything else but a prospect, even though Mr. Champion "thinks" there will be no difficulty in finding the
channel.
We could easily give many more examples of a
similar character, but exigencies of space forbid.
Meanwhile, it is sufficient to say that even Mr. Campbell and Mr. Thompson qualifv every one of their
statements with "ifs" and "wh'ens" They "think,"
and "are informed," and "consider," but there is
hardly an extract from any of the reports quoted in
the prospectus of a definite or emphatic nature,
showing that opinion is based on actual tests. Great
stress is laid on the fact that the properties being
practically within a radius of twenty miles can be
economically controlled by one central management,
but when it is remembered that this implies a distance of forty miles between some of the claims in a
country where travel is difficult, we imagine that it
will be at least found necessary, in the event of the
acquisition of these properties by the Cariboo Consolidated, Limited, to have a well-paid official, responsible for the gold output, in charge at each of
the claims.
In estimating the profits of the venture, the directors of this company consider that when the properties are "fully equipped and in working order, the
claims will speedily arrive at a position to return:
handsome profits upon the capital of the company."
This capital is roughly one million, seven hundred
thousand dollars, of which one million and a quarter
is to go into the pockets of the vendors and promot-"
ers. A balance of half-a million dollars theref.re r -
mains with which to "thoroughly equip" and put
" in working order" an approximate area of
miners ground of over twelve thousand acres,
exclusive of five miles of dredging rights.
A well-managed Canadian Company, the Consolidated Cariboo has taken several years to equip one
property, and the cost thereof to date has been con- .
iiderably over a million dollars.
The 8-hour law question still takes precedence of
all others in the Slocan, and a speedy adjustment of
the point of disagreement between employers and
employees still seems most doubtful. All unprejudiced
people will agree that the Unions are behaving most
unreasonably, for when the Slocan Star Mining Company offered the men the liberal and proportionately
higher wage of three dollars and a quarter for an
8-hour working day, it was unhesitatingly refused.
No one, we opine, under such circumstances, would
call the Slocan mine-owners to account if they decide
to seek elsewhere for mine-workers. There is, however, one way of settling the difficulty to the satisfaction of both sides, and the suggestion has not
previously, we think, been made. At the Hall Mines
work has not been suspended, because much of the
labour there is done by contract. The system of
working a mine by contract has many advantages,
and in many cases where it has been tried in this
country the result has proved eminently satisfactory
to both the mine-operators and the miners employed.
In one mine on Texada Island, where this system has
been recently introduced, drifting that cost $16 per
foot by day labour is now done for $8, and at the same
time the men earn no less than formerly. In many
mines in other countries even the '' mucking '' is carried on under contract. If the Slocan miners are prepared to preve their statement that a man can do as
much work underground in eight as in ten hours, the
contract system should certainly meet with their
approval. Since the above paragraph was put in
print we observe that two or three mines in the
Nelson district have adopted the contract system in
employing labour, and others will follow suit.
Meanwhile the Union organizer in the Slocan, Mr.
Wilkes, has stated, as the representative of the miners,
his views on the question, which briefly are : That
it is unreasonable of the mine-owners to reduce wages
for an eight-hour day to $3, because fist) the men will
accomplish more '' in proportion to the hours worked
in an eight-hour day than they will in a ten-hour day;"
(2nd) that under, the old system the men did not
actually work more than nine hours ; (3rd) that the
'' eight-hour day will only reduce the working hours
of any mine—two shifts—from 19 to 16 hours, instead of from 20 to 16 hours as generall supposed ;"THE MINING RECORD.
i3
(4th) because coal miners only work eight hours;
(5th) because the War Eagle mine management
adopted the eight-hour system before compelled to do
so ; (6th) because, in Mr. Wilkes' opinion, " $3.50 is
not too much to pay good miners in this country ;"
(7th) because nowhere else in the British Empire " is
there a precedent for ten hours' work by miners;"
(8th) because the miners "believe that the mines can
stand a reduction in the hours of labour without hurting them." Will it be believed that a strike has been
organized on such lamentably feeble grounds as these ?
Of all the reasons Mr. Wilkes advances, is there a
/single one that could be seriously regarded as showing
just cause why mine owners should suddenly be called
upon to pay their employees higher wages for less
work ? Taking his own statement: With two ten-
hour shifts the men formerly worked 19 hours, for
which they received $7 per day, under the eight-hour
system they would work 16 hours for $6 per day ; the
average pay per hour for the former is rather under
37 cents and for the latter rather over this amount.
This is the only one of Mr. Wilkes' " arguments " at
all worthy of consideration, the others are simply not
to the point. For instance, coal miners, it is true, do
not work under ground more than eight hours, but
they work under contract; miners in the War Eagle
mine work no more than eight hours, but only machine
men are paid the $3.50 per day wage. If Mr. Wilkes
desires to prove that a miner should not continue to
work longer than eight hours underground, that is
another matter and we are quite prepared to endorse
his views, but this should be the subject of arrangement
between the employer and employees. We maintain,
however, that no legislature has the right to dictate
to an able bodied man of mature age how many hours
he may or may not labour at his trade or calling, and
by gratuitiously introducing a law having this effect,
the British Columbia Legislature have committed a
very grave error and the whole responsibility for the
present unfortunate state of affairs in the Slocan rests
entirely with them.
Another argument—we use the word for want of a
better—advanced by those who champion the cause
of the miners in their demands for the old rate of
wages while working shorter hours, is that the mines
of the Slocan are so rich that the owners can well
afford to pay high wages ; and it is asked why should
alieu shareholders be allowed to sit quietly at home
and take without effort all the profits from our rich
silver-lead mines at the expense of the poor miner ?
For Heaven's sake, if the question is to be discussed
at all, let it, at least, be done in a half rational manner. The world must grow many years older before
it is educated up, or down, to the acceptance of
socialistic doctrine. Because capital has developed a
mine or any other enterprise until it is on a profit-
earning basis, is labour to demand a bigger share, and
if so, are the men employed in our Slocan mines,
which are not yet in a position to earn dividends, and
these are at present greatly in the majority—to be
paid less than their more fortunate fellows engaged as
miners in dividend paying mines ? That is the conclusion to be deduced from the premises.
But for a gem in its way a resolution passed by the
Silverton Miners' Union, on the subject of the eight
hour law, is really quite unique, and we cannot refrain from publishing at least the gist of it.
'' Resolved, that while struggling for the co-operative commonwealth and the establishment of justice
and equality among men we favor, for temporary relief, the reduction of hours of labor as our best defensive weapon.
" Resolved, that it is an improvement of our conditions that we are seeking ; that we do not feel called
upon to maintain that as much work can be done in a
few as in many hours or that it is right for us to continue doing as heretofore in order that we may justly
demand the same pay. We assert that we have done
too much work for the money, that we are not getting
ten hours' pay for ten hours' work ; and we deny that
we are asking ' ten hours' ' pay for eight hours'
work.
' '' And whereas, it is wise for us to vigorously use
every resource at our command in order to speedily
effect the ends we are seeking.
Resolved, that those who oppose us are our enemies
and that those who aid us are our friends, and that we
treat them accordingly.
" Resolved, that we will not love our enemies, that
we will not ' turn the other cheek ;' that we believe
that retaliation is right.
" And therefore, it is resolved that we denounce as
unworthy of our patronage such papers as the Spokesman-Review, of Spokane ; The Miner, of Nelson ; the
Mining Record, of Vancouver; and all others that,
like them, delight in special sophistricalandpharasiti-
cal pleading for those who despoil us and support
them from a small portion of the spoils.
" And to the business man, the merchants and hotel
men; to the professional men, the lawyers doctors and
preachers, all of whom, at periods of intenser struggles betweem employer and employee, usually affiliate
with the former and deplore the agitation that discourages investment—to you we have this to say :
' We know that the rich would become richer if we
would consent to give them a larger rake-off. But
not only is a juster and wider distribution of wealth in
our interest, it is in the interest of the state and
country, and we are therefore your best citizens.
We seek to '' encourage'' men to hope for the largest
possible share of what they produce and are entitled
to. You ask us to " enconrage " capital to come in,
by promising to give it rich rewards. You ask us to
"encourage" men with a hundred thousand dollars
to see that they can here increase it to a million. But
we deny that it is desirable to have any man in possession of a million, and maintain that we rightfully
refuse to aid you in encouraging capitalists to come
here with such greedy hopes. The higher wages and
fewer hours that we favour would fill this country
with the most intelligent, effective and happiest workmen of the world, a citizenship to be -proud of. The
dollar a day labourers that would most encourage the
capitalist would drive every self-respecting citizen
out of the country, and leave only cabins here for
houses, while palaces would be built in Spokane,
Butte, Salt Lake and London. And we say to you
business and professional men that we propose to
" encourage " business and professional men who do
not give aid and comfort to our enemies.
'' Resolved, that we do not consider ourselves any
better than the miners of the Coeur d'Alenes. Outrageous and arrogant wrongs have ever provoked and
should provoke violence. The history of no country
needs to be closely searched to find records of violent
resistance to tyrants. Good citizens of America, disguised as Indians, threw overboard the sacred prop-xwm
i4
THE MINING RECORD.
erty of the capitalist on the occasion of the Boston Tea
Party.
'' Cromwell and other good people of England cut
off the sacred head of Charles the First.
'' Caesar had his Brutus.
" The Capots had their guillotine.
" The Coeur d'Aleners blew up the Bunker Hill
mill.
'' Let tyrants take warning !
" In conclusion we firmly declare that we are good
and true citizens, organized to secure justice, and not
to wrong any man. But we are not fools, and we
will not reject the use of means effectual, just because
they may not be conventionally popular.''
The '' bears " have been assiduously depreciating
temporarily the price of the Payne Mine stock on the
ground of the Eight Hours law. Their reason is,
however, inadequate for the Payne has already resources enough available to continue its average dividend payments for several months and it is to be
hoped long before these are exhausted q. settlement of
the present labour difficulty will have been certain.
However, Payne Mine stock values had previously
reached too high a point and were consequently certain
in any case to decline.
From all recent accounts Atlin has been very much
over-boomed, and instead of being a Tom Tiddlers'
ground for poor men, the press correspondents now
tell us that all previous reports regarding the shallowness of the diggings were incorrect, that it is necessary to sink deep shafts to get to bed-rock on most
of the creeks, and that from all appearances hydraulicing will prove the only profitable method of mining
in this territory. All of which may or may not be
true; but as this information has no more authorative
or scientific source than the other, said to be reliable,
wise men will be content to await further developments.
Apropos of the eight-hour question the following
paragraph from the New York Sun is of more than
passing interest:
" The first protest on record by trades unions
against the eight-hour workday was made to the
Dock Board yesterday by the Ship Carpenters' and
Caulkers' Unions. These unions ask the Dock Board
not to enforce the eight-hour law in its department.
The reason given is that the men are paid by the
hour and are therefore anxious to put in as long a
day as possible. Surprise was expressed by the Commissioners at receiving this protest, as the labor
unions have been demanding the eight-hour workday for years and there have been more strikes to
enforce it than from all other causes put together.
The Dock Board, according to the present law, cannot employ the men more than eight hours a day."
Meanwhile, it may be noted that at several Colorado mine's and smelters the system has been adopted
of making an hour instead of a day the unit of payment. It is alleged, however, that this change is not
at all popular with either the mine or smelter workers.
A New Zealand newspaper publishes the following
interesting piece of intelligence:
" Mr. John A. Wanchope, F.R.C.S., who, with his
wife, left New Zealand some twelve or fifteen months
ago, and after spending a few months in the Old
Country went out to British Columbia to develop on
behalf of a Scotch company a supposedly very valuable gold mining property near Harrison Lake (some
one hundred miles from Vancouver), has just returned to London. He has come back with a good
opinion of I'.ritish Columbia as a country, but does
not seem to think much of it as a gold-producing
area, whilst for the inhabitants he has an utter contempt. Whilst in charge of the Harrison Lake property, which proved a duffer and was shut down in
October last, Mr. Wauchope had a somewhat unpleasant experience. The miners he had at work for
him were not miners in the true sense of the word;
They could handle a pick and shovel, but were, as a
rv\e, utterly unfamiliar with even the ABC of gold
jilting. Moreover, they were mostly utter blackguards. Mr. Wauchope's foreman, a queer scrt of
creature, holding the tenets of the Mormon creed
and a powerful prayer, arranged; with two other men
that when the manager next went down the shaft he
should be welcomed at the bottom with a blow on the
head. This pretty little conspiracy, luckily for Mr.
Wauchope, proved too much for one of .the parties.'
concerned, and he 'blabbed.' Next day the foreman
requested the manager to 'go and 'ave a look at
things below.' Mr. Wauchope consented, but took
with him a revolver and a small pick, which weapons
ostensibly displayed prevented any attempt on his
person. A few days later he got the foreman on some
pretext to go down with him to Agassiz, the nearest.,
township owning a police force and a court of justice,;
and handed the chief conspirator over to the authorities. At the trial the would-be assaulter wept bitterly, and Mr. Wauchope, foolishly perhaps, made a.
strong appeal to the magistrate to deal leniently with
the prisoner. They did so, only binding him over to
keep the peace for twelve months. At the same time
they gave Mr. Wauchope permission to carry firearms. After shutting down the Harrison Lake 'wild
cat' Mr. Wauchope made a move to the Lilloaet-.
River, where he managed six claims for a local company. These did not pan out to his satisfaction.
B< th he and Mrs. Wauchope being tired of the cojii-
try and in poor health they decided to come to England again for a spell."
We have gone to some little pains to find out
whether this truly remarkable story has the slightest
foundation in fact, with the result that we have recently received from our correspondent at Harrison
Lake—a gentleman in whose reliability we have the
utmost confidence—some interesting information in
connection with the affair to which Mr. Wauchope
so pitifully alludes. Mr. Wauchope, a typical "yelloV-8
legger," it appears, arrived at Harrison Lake about
a year ago, ostensibly to open up a mineral claim at
a spot on the Lake known as Six-Mile Bay. He
employed two miners, and for some time was wonder-
frlly enthusiastic. He had never seen so promising
a mineral country, and was quite certain that the
"Mother Lode" of the district, that on which the
"Providence" was located, ran through his ground.
The "Providence" was situated at least ten miles distant; but that of course is a mere detail. Our correspondent believes that the three claims at Six-Mile Bay
were owned by a man amed Nicholls, and the arrangement was made that Mr. Wauchope's company
should develop the properties in exchange for one
of them, and at the same time Nicholls stipulated
that he should be engaged as foreman on the work$
Shortly afterwards Mr. Wauchope located a propertyTHE MINING RECORD.
10
on Lillooet River, spending a great deal of his time
in this locality. Nicholls appears then to have entertained suspicions, which he confided to his fellow
workman at Six-Mile Bay, a man named Ward, that
Wauchope was spending the money intended for the
development of the Harrison properties on this
Liilooet claim, and Ward, when the worse for liquor,
informed Mr. Wauchope that Nicholls meant to do
bin, an injury. This so alarmed Mr. Wauchope that
he proceeded post haste to Agassiz, and on Ward's
evidence—the man was still in a drunken condition—
induced two local magistrates to bind Nicholls over
to keep the peace. At this time Nicholls was in Lillooet, and.was most astonished when he subsequently
learnt of what had taken place. Mr. Wauchope
never returned to the Harrison claims, but left
shortly afterwards for England, where, on the
strength of his experience in the Harrison and Lillooett district, he poses as an authority on mining in
British Columbia, which "he does not think much of
as a gold-producing area," but notwithstanding
strongly advocates the treatment of its low grade ores
by the "Beam" process. After such an opinion from
such a source there is naturally nothing for it but to
abandon all hope, but those of us who believe in the
efficacy of prayer can at least have the solace of adding to the Litany one more clause, which shall read:
"From all Jim-Crow experts, yellow-leggers and like
visitations, Good Lord, deliver us!"
Some time ago we commented on the length o"
time—fifteen days—occupied in the treating of the
Dorotha Morton ores by cyanide before the extraction
was completed. This difficulty, we now learn, has
been recently overcome. Mr. Lang, the Fairfield
company's manager, having discovered that by crushing coarser and using a screen of thirty mesh instead
of as formerly—twenty mesh—extraction is limited
to seven days, and at the same time a higher percentage of values is recovered. Thus last month's operations show a nearly 90 per cent, gold and an 80 per
cent, silver extraction, a very material gain over previous returns. As will be seen by our statistical
tables in another column, this mine is making a very
remarkable showing, the value of the output last
month being $13,138 as against $9.536 in April, and
$3,363 in December last. The bullion returns for the
six months aggregate $48,245. The cost of working
which includes mining, transportation, crushing and
cyaniding, have been $6 per ton, but these co.<ts, it is
confidently affirmed, will be considerably reduced
directly the mine is developed sufficiently to warrant
an increase of the crushing and treating capacity.
The success that has attended cyaniding operations at
the Dorotha Morton mirfe should certainly stimulate
and encourage mining enterprise in the Mainland
coast districts.
The end of the Golden Cache fiasco is seemingly in
sight, for ere these lines are published, the sheriff will
have sold under writ of execution issued on behalf of
Dr. Carroll, of Vancouver, a former trustee of the
company, the machinery and plant of the undertaking.
It is doubtful if the property will ever be worked
again, though it is said that one of the leading officials
of the company is still not without hopes, that further
development may, if it can be arranged, reveal some
gold-bearing ore, now obscured by faults, but capable
of profitable working. Most of those originally connected with the enterprise, however, some time since
practically abandoned it to its fate after realisation in
some cases of very considerable profits, doubtfully
gained. The downfall of the Golden Cache has
naturally given a bad set-back to other Lillooet free
milling gold concerns, some of which are in consequence quite unable to raise sufficient working capital.
One result of the "boom " and general inflation of
prices in the metal market has been to greatly increase
the cost of mine machinery. Thus the price of boilers
is over 200 per cent, higher than at the beginning of
- the year, and in the last month boiler plates have
advanced in price 30 per cent. Messrs. Wm. Hamilton & Co., the great Canadian machinery manufacturers, have now a large number of contracts in hand,
chiefly for stamp mills, but to obtain iron from the
United States they are obliged to pay a big premium
over and above the market price, to get their orders
filled or even recognised.
1 f things go on as at present much longer the War
Eagle, from all appearance, will for a time at least
occupy the proud position of being the largest dividend paying mine in West Kootenay. It is fast overhauling the Le Roy, and the Payne, if the labour
difficulties are not speedily adjusted must certainly
look to its laurels. By the payment of the last regular monthly dividend the War Eagle has now returned to its shareholders no less a sum than $335,-
250.
But if the War Eagle is making a very creditable financial showing, it is earning a very unenviable
reputation as an unsafe mine, or rather, one in which
accidents are becoming of altogether too frequent occurrence. Again this month a fatal accident is reported
as having taken place in the War Eagle, and like that
of a few weeks back, due entirely to carelessness or
want of proper supervision on the part of the management. It appears that while five men were drilling in the 625-foot level of this mine, about 11 o'clock
of the 23rd inst, one of the drills struck a missed hole
and the blast that had failed to go off the previous
evening, exploded, with the result that of the five
men, two were instantly killed, two fatally and one
seriously injured.
It has been stated that a number of the Cape Breton
miiers, engaged by the Crow's Nest Coal Company
to work in the Last Kootenay collieries, have returned with their families to Nova Scotia, giving as a
reason that while certainly wages are higher in British Columbia, the unhealthiness of the Crow's Nest
climate and the poor quality of the food supplied to
them more than counterbalanced any advantage to be
gained in the way of increased pay. It appears, however, that there is very little truth in this story, eight
only of the one hundred miners from Nova Scotia
having left their employment at Fernie, and these
even not for the reasons alleged.
The strike a week or so ago, at the Crow'sNest
collieries was of short duration, the coal company
having compromised matters with the miners—and
the Crow's Nest colliers, by the way, are as fine a
class of men as any manager ever had to deal with.
The dispute arose on the question of the stoppage of
the allowance of 15 cents per ton for "stone." This
allowance was granted in December, but on the contention of the men that there was an average of from
six to eight inches of stone in each room.   This stoneIfi
1
'*&
n
16
THE MINING RECORD.
however, having practically disappeared the management decided that the allowance should cease; and
that the men were to be paid merely for the coal at
the rate of 55 cents per ton. The miners contended
that they could not earn a fair day's wage on the
basis of 55 cents per ton of coal, and consequently
went out on strike. The coal company then offered
sixty cents per ton, and the miners agreeing to this
price as a fair compromise, work at the collieries was,
without further delay, resumed..
A Major Haider, acting as special commissioner
for Reuter's Press Agency, has recently given his
opinion through interviews with local newspaper representatives, on our mining laws, the condition of
labour in our mines, and also on other points. Major
Haider has been in British Columbia barely two
months, and we believe we are correct in stating that
he has remained for the greater port of that time in
Vancouver, and has certainly not visited any of our
important mining centres, fie, however, poses as an
adverse critic, for which he has been thanked by that
sapient body calling itself the Mining Committee of
the B.C. Board of Trade. This certainly ought to be
rebuke enough for any man. But to return, Major
Haider's chief contention is that miners in this country are too highly paid, and he advocates as essential
to the profitable working of our mines the employment of cheap Asiatic in substitution of white labour.
Mine-owners and even Canadian shareholders in Brit-
is  Columbia  mining companies  will  thank   Major
tlalder for nothing for this piece of advice, both on
grounds of patriotism and political economy. We
have modelled out mining system a good deal after
that of the United States, and we anticipate therefrom
equally good results. The United States is at present
the greatest mining country in the world, and, there,
from the first mine labour has been paid for at a high
rate. Is an imaginary line demarking the interna-
tic nal boundary going to affect the future of our
mines, other things being equal, as they undoubtedly are. As to our mining laws, with only one or two
exceptions appertaining perhaps to the locating of
ground, they have so far been found to cover all requirements, but in any case Major Haider is not
likely to be consulted with regard to any changes
considered necessary. Meanwhile, we observe, with
a great deal of pleasure, that Mr. J. D. Kendall, the
resident partner of the firm of Bewicke, Moreing &
Co., in Vancouver, has taken up the cudgels in defence of our mining system against this recently imported and self-imposed critic, and in an interview
Mr.  Kendall,  while  pretending   to   disbelieve  that
Major Haider has made the statements attributed
to him, directly challenges him to do so in writing
and over his own signature. Mr. Kendall thus remarks: "I know that people from the Old Country
very often allow themselves to criticize before they
have time to understand, and I have a very vivid recollection of the severe rebuke that was administered
by the director of the Ontario Bureau of Mines to an
engineer of this class from the other side o.f the Atlantic, who had scarcely arrived in Ontario when he
began to criticize the laws, etc., of the Province and
compare them unfavourably with what he knew of
South Africa. The director, in his report for 1898,
after showing that the would-be critic could not have
read the mining laws he seemed so anxious to criticize, concluded with these words: 'A man who will
not qualify himself by information to express an in
telligent criticism is not one to be depended 011 as
counsellor of guide in the business affairs of men,
but I cannot imagine that any one occupying the
responsible position of Reuter's correspondent could
be gfuilty of any similar act of rashness."
And now "Governor" Mackintosh has been dubbed by General Warren of Spokane and Rossland,
the "Cecil Rhodes of Canada." It is to be hoped
for Mr. Mackintosh's sake that the incident is not an
evil omen. A previous mining promoter of B.C. ventures who was similarly styled by enthusiastic
friends, Mr. E. Grant-Gowan, of London, England,
cannot be said to have realized the high expectations
thus raised.
It is not surprising to learn that the unfortunate
Goldfields of British Columbia, Limited, has decided
to abandon some, and is doubtful about others of
the Coast district claims, which were acquired by it
from the Chanue Mining Company. Those who
should know, stated at the time of the English company's purchase, that the Channe undertaking had
got rid at sufficient advantage to itself of some properties of very doubtful worth. This fact the Gold-
fields of British Columbia, Limited, is now tardily
discovering, as it would seem. Nor has that company acquired the Albert Canyon townsite, a hole in
the mountains of little real value, which was boomed
as of big prospective worth, if we are not mistaken,
in the company's glowing prospectus. There has,
it is said, been found some deficit in the title. In
any case the real loss involved in the failureof trans^
fer cannot be regarded as great. The company has,
however, abandoned some of its mining properties, as
the auditors reluctantly report, and the prospects of
its subsidiary companies are dubious indeed. The
titled Canne, the Earl of Essex, evidently a more or
less ornamental figure-head of the company, cannot
be congratulated on the results obtained, or likely to
be obtained by a concern at the heart of which he
was placed by Mr. Grant-Gowan—since retired—and
his promoting collapse. And. now the reports from
the Waverley and Tangier mines (?) are unsatisfactory.    Oh, what a fall was there!
A great deal of quite unnecessary trouble has been
created by the somewhat ambiguous wording of section 4 of this year's Mineral Act Amendment Act. The
clause reads as follows: "A free miner's certificaiisf
shall run from the date therefore and shall expire at
midnight on the thirty-first day of May next after its
date, or some subsequent thirty-first day of May."
A. good many people construed this as meaning that
their licenses issued prior to the 31st of May must be
renewed on that date and in consequence the MinihW
Recorders' offices in many districts were recently
besieged by applicants seeking renewals. The Attorney-General has stated that persons having thns
acted simply contributed gratuitously to the Provincial Treasury, for it was quite clear that the enae't-
ment was not intended to affect free miners' certifij-
cates issued previous to the 31st of May of this ve.ir.
Of course, those studving the Act closely would at
once see that the saving clause in section 20. suffi-'
ciently protected their interests until the coming
into force of the Act on the Tst of Mav. but this, notwithstanding, all will agree it is most important that
the wording of our Acts of Parliament, especially
those relating to mining, should be so distinct and'
clear as to afford no opportunity for uncertainty
with regard to their meaning;.THE MINING RECORD.
17
THE EAST
KOOTENAY  OF YESTERDAY
AND TO-DAY.
(By Wm. Baillie.
" Full many a glorious morning have I seen
Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy.''
—Shakespeare:   "The Sonnets.''
STANDING one morning last July on the
verge of the high and precipitous cut
b&nks of the Kootenay River at Fort Steele
and watching the rising of the sun as its
brilliant beams were shot through the jagged outline of the peaks of the Rocky Mountains, the
Cronbrook, still on to the Moyie Lakes—paradise of
the angler—and still farther on till the mountain
range that hems in Kootenay Lake thrusts up its
rugged snow-peaked bulk against the horizon, eighty
miles at least away. Clear blue are the skies, crisp
is the air, and everywhere the luxuriant verdure of
the valley, weighted down with heavy dew, each drop
of which presently shall sparkle with diamond brilliancy in the rays of a glorious morning sun! Charming, is it not?
" Where every prospect pleases,
And only man is vile."
But I shall take the liberty of correcting the poet,
and say only "lazy," for the inhabitants of Fort Steele
(Photo by
crow's nest mountain,   crow's nest pass branch, c. p. e.
Steele & Co., Macleod.)
above splendid lines from the sonnets of the immortal bard came rushing into my mind with a joyous thrill that I shall never forget. Charming was
the scene, beyond any possible effort of description!
The contour of the Rocky Range silhouetted here
against the eastern sky, is serrated like a saw, and
with the sun rising from behind but not yet visible,
the profile is outlined with ruins of fiery gold, which
stand out in magnificent contrast to the dark shadows
lying on the westward slope of these giant hills. I
am standing on the edge of a cut bank, perhaps 150
feet high, at the bottom of which flows the noble
Kootenay. To the westward the eye travels over a
flat valley a mile wide at this point, then onward over a
an open parklike country, past the little village of
—a thousand at that time, or thereabout—are still
slumbering. They say—that is, those who are a bit
malicious, which I am not—that if the citizens of
Fort Steele had been wont to cultivate the habits of
the early bird they might have "wormed" the Crow's
Nest Railway into their town, instead of having it
sweep by five miles distant. This en passant. Fort
Steele has a history, and a stirring one, too. Thirty-
five years ago there were five thousand miners
camped there—the time of the famous rush of
miners to Wild Horse Creek, which flows into Kootenay River at Fort Steele. These placers were for
two years the mining sensation of Western America,
and before going on with a description of the East
Kootenay of to-day—it will be interesting perhaps toTHE MINING RECORD.
say something of the old days and the excitements
thereof.
Wild Horse Creek flows into the Kootenay River
at Fort Steele and forms the southern boundary of
that townsite. The discovery on Wild Horse was
made in 1864 by miners who had come up from the
States, attracted by reports of gold on Findlay Creek,
at the head waters of Columbia River, and in the
Big Bend country. These miners all had their starting point from Walla Walla, in what is now the
State of Washington, and the stories that are told of
the hardships encountered in making the journey in-
evard rival those of the famous gold-seekers of the
Cariboo.   Jack Fisher and Bob Dore, the latter still
gaged in drawing up a code of laws for the government of the camp. In these arrangements Mr.
Haynes at once interfered, nor was his interference
resented, for the miners promptly abdicated the lawmaking functions they had usurped, and cheerfully
obeyed regulations as prescribed by the Colonial
Agent. The result was that the camp became one of
the quietest and most orderly in the early mining
history of the.West; disputes were quietly and effectively settled, and the pistol and knife went completely out of fashion. During 1864-65-66
it is estimated that there were 5,000 people on Wild
Horse Creek, and gold to the value of something
like $15,000,000 was taken out.   This at least is the
(Photo by
RIVERSIDE AVENUE, FORT STEELE, B.C.
Steele* Co., Maeleod.%
a resident of the district, have the honour of making
the first discoveries, but as often happens in such
cases, they were by no" means the largest participators
in the great wealth which the creek yielded. So
rapidly did the news of these placers spread that by
August of the same year upwards of 1,500 miners
were at work on the creek. They were nearly all
Americans, and in the absence of any British Columbia official there, the camp for a time was rife
with those lawless proceedings so characteristic of
the mining camps from which they had come. In
July, however, something like order had been restored, and when the B.C. agent, Mr. Haynes, arrived from New Westminster (which was then the
Capital of the Mainland colony) he found them en-
current estimate, although of course no .definite
statistics are obtainable.
As a matter of comparison with the conditions prevailing at the present day in similarly remote placer
fields it will be interesting to cite some data of the
returns from the Wild Horse diggings, and the cost
of provisions. In a report of Mr. Haynes to the
Colonial Secretary at New Westminster, dated September 3rd, 1864, the following list is given, showing the "amounts taken daily from ten of the best
claims in this district" :
No. 1.—Six men employed; yield per day, $400;
during week ending 3rd September, 134 oz.
No. 2.—Twelve men working; yield per day, $200;
during week ending 3rd Sebptember, 158 oz.THE MINING RECORD.
19
No. 3.—-Thirteen men employed; yield per day,
$4/4; during week ending 3rd September, 143 oz.;
amount of gold taken from this claim during the
month of August last, 719J oz., or $12,948, at the
value of gold here.
No. 5.—Twelve men employed; yield per day,
$1,044; 4 days' sluicing, $4,176.
No 6.—Nine men employed; yield per day, $108;
during week ending 3rd September, 36 oz.
No- 7— Fifteen men employed; yield per day,
$600; during week ending September 3rd, $3,600, or
200 oz.
No. 8.—Seventeen men employed; yield per day,
commend to the perusal of those looking into the
history of British Columbia, entitled "Vancouver
Island and British Columbia; Their History Resources and Prospects," written by Matthew Macfie,
F.R.G.S., and published by Longman's in London
in 1865, there are to be found some valuable references to the East Kootenay, excitement of 1864. The
author gives the following:
"List of prices of provisions at Wild Horse Creek,
District of Kootenais: Flour, 40c; bacon, $1; beans,
50c; sugar, 70c; coffee, $1; tea, $2.25; beef, 30c;
dried apples 60c; butter, $1.50; lard, 80c; tobacco,
$2.50; candles, 75c."
Olel timers of Cariboo's golden days will remem-
F"<Photo by
Steele & Co., Macleod.)
THE CROW'S^ NEST RAILWAY—GENERAL  VIEW  FROM  ST.   MARY'S BRIDGE SHOWING FIVE  BRIDGES.
$720; .during week ending 3rd September, $4,320, or
240 oz.
No. 9.—Twelve men employed; yield per day,
$200; during week ending September 3rd, $1,200, or
66£ oz.
No. 10.—Four men employed, rocking; yield per
day, $133; during week ending September 3rd, $798,
or 44J oz.
Ordinary claims pay from $20 to $30 a day to
the hand.
Such was the report made by the Colonial Agent
at the time, and it will be agreed that returns^ of this
kind were amply sufficient to inflame the mining adventurers of the day.
In a curiously interesting book, which  I would
ber that these prices were very little if any lower
than prevailed at the same time in the northern country. Times on Wild Horse, even for laborers, were
pretty good, the prevailing wages in 1864 being $7
per clay, and the price of provisions enabled them to
live well for $1.50 per day. But those times have
passed, and the miner of to-day, while earning less
than half the wages, has a more permanent job on
hand and a better supplied camp.
In the fall of '65 the Blackfoot excitement caused
something of a stampede from Wild Horse, and
many more of the miners were attracted to Big
Bend in 1866 by the reports of rich discoveries there,
but these placers have continued to be worked steadily ever since.    The silent and lamb-like Chinaman,20
THE MINING RECORD.
with the "smile that is childlike and bland" is ever to
be seen plodding away, content, as he will tell you,
to make his 'two bittee" a day at his diggings,
though it is shrewdly suspected that they pick up a
good deal more than two or four bits a day, for the
"Heathen" is always credited with lying when he
tells you the product of his "washup." Of recent
years, however, the work on the Creek has been
chiefly done by hydraulic appliances, and works of
considerable magnitude have been put in. Among
the illustrations given in connection herewith is a
photograph which gives a very clear idea of the'
general appearance of Wild Horse in the locality
where the bulk of the gold was taken out in the early
tremely picturesque, and one can scarcely conceive
of a more delightful spot for a mining camp.
The construction of the Crow's Nest Railway from
Lethbridge in the Northwest Territories to Kootenay Lake, has opened up a great mineral country,
and mining development in the future will go on
with leaps and bounds. The railway itself presented
fewer natural obstacles from an engineering point of
view than any other railway line that crosses the
great mountain ranges of the west. The gradients on
the road are extremely light, and the roadbed for the
greater part of the distance as perfect as would be
found on the open prairie. The primary object of the
construction of the road at the time it was com-
(Photo by
Steele & Co., Macleod.)
CHOO CHE WAH COMPANY,   (CHINESE)  HYDRAULIC PLACER MINING,   WILD HORSE CREEK, NEAR  FORT STEELE,  B.C.
sixties. The scene shown in the photograph lies on
the east banks of the creek, and shows the workings
of the Quong Yung Tong Company, a Chinese enterprise, which is being carried on with a good deal
of vigour and energy. Just below these workings
are those of the Nip and Tuck Gold Hydraulic Mining Company, of London, Eng., and on the opposite
or west bank of the creek lies the property of the In-
victa Gold Mining Company, the most extensive
operation on the creek. There are other works
being carried on, notably a big contract of tunnelling
some distance further down the stream, where it is
believed the original bed has been filled up by a
deep accumulation of drift from the adjacent mountain side.   The scenery on Wild Horse Creek is ex-
menced was the opening up of the great coal measures of the Crow's Nest Pass—a coal area whose extent is scarcely surpassed in the world. This coal
was needed for the promotion of the smelting industry in the interior parts of the Province, and when it
is known that coal and coke from the Crow's Nest
mines are now being supplied at' the smelting centres of Nelson and Trail for about one-half of the
previous cost, the importance of this railway to the
mining industry generally will be apparent. The extent of the coal measures is enormous, the quantity
of coal contained in them far exceeding the powers
of human comprehension. The coal seams, so far as
explored, lie chiefly on Coal Creek, a tributary of
Elk River, and on Michel Creek.    On Coal CreekTHE MINING RECORD.
(where the measures are known as the "Elk River
Series") there are twelve seams of coal lying one
above the other, aggregating a total of about 150
feet in thickness in 900 feet vertical coal measure.
It is computed that in this series alone there is an
available supply of 18,000,000,000 tons. That
amount of coal would fill railway cars enough to
make up a train that would girdle this world of ours
three hundred times. And that is only a part of the
coal resources of the Crow's Nest Pass. It is clear,
therefore, that the Province is not likely for some
time to suffer from a scarcity of fuel.
The Dominion Government granted a subsidy of
$11,000 per mile to the Crow's Nest Railway so that
coal measures) lies at the junction of Elk River and
Coal Creek, about four miles up the valley of which
latter stream the present workings of the coal company are being carried on. Most of the mine employees live at Fernie, thus centreing quite a population at that point, and the town is building up rapidly.
A spur of the railway runs from Fernie to the mine,
the men going out in trains in the morning and returning in the evening. At Fernie some fifty beehive coke ovens have been built, and the number is
to be increased to 200 or more as the demand for the
product is increased. Each of these ovens has a
capacity of one long ton of coal. The coal is precipitated into the ovens by drop-bottom cars, which
(Photo by
Steele & Co., Macleod.)
CRANBROOK,   B. C,   FROM  COL.   BAKER'S  GROUNDS.
this fuel supply might be tapped, but when it was
giving the people's money away it made a wise provision that the people's interests both in the operation
of the coal mines and the railway should be safeguarded. The coal company is bound to sell its
coal for $2 per ton at the mouth of the mine, and the
Government reserves for itself the right to fix the rate
for transportation—both freight and passenger. It
needs, therefore, only a Government that is willing to
do its duty to avoid the irritation on the part of
the people on account of excessive and discriminatory railway charges that have occurred in other parts
of the Province.
The town of Fernie (so called in honour of Mr.
Wm. Fernie, one of the original discoverers of the
carry it directly from the mine, thus minimizing to
the greatest degree the cost of handling. The seams
of coal at the mine lie flat, and in the most advantageous position for cheap working. The mining
analyses of both the coal and coke that have been
made and published show that so far as quality is
concerned it ranks equal to any similar product in the
world, and si equalled by only a few others.
Volatile
Matter.
No. 2 Tunnel—Coal Creek... 21.02
" ... 25.00
Peter Seam—Martin's Creek 34.70
Jubilee    " " 31.70
The coal that is at present being mined is strong
and stands handling and    transportation well.      It
Fixed
Total
Carbon.
Ash.
Fuel.
76.25
2.73
97.27
72.5°
2.50
97-5°
58.30
7.00
93-00
68.50
4.10
95.80THE MINING RECORD.
might almost indeed be called a semi-anthracite.
The coke produced is pronounced of first-rate quality, equal to British and superior to any produced
elsewhere in the West.
But the chief hope of the country—and indeed the
prospect is a rosy one—is in its quartz or lode mining. It is not my intention to go into any lengthened
technical description of the various properties that
have been more or less opened up, but generally to
indicate the character of the mineral deposits, and to
describe in brief outline the work that has been done
and the "showings" increased on those properties
which have undergone the greatest amount of development. The present year is bound to witness a
great deal of activity in South-East Kootenay, and
St. Mary's River from Fort Steele. It was located in
1892 by Joe Bourgeois, who is famous also as the
locator of the War Eagle, Centre Star and others of
the great mines of the Rossland Camp. The one is
a galena, which lies in great masses and has now
been considerably explored by shafts, drifts and cuts.
The assay value runs about 50 oz. silver to the ton
and 20 per cent. lead. Some 7,000 or 8,000 tons have
already been sent to the smelter, being transported
in waggons or sleighs to a landing on Kootenay
River, near Fort Steele, whence it is taken by steamer
to the railway at Jennings, in Montana. A small
force of men has been kept working constantly for
development purposes, while the main body of the
ore has been left standing awaiting cheaper transpor-
(Photo by
BULL HEAD,  B. C, LOOKING WEST FRC
no sooner will the snow have left the hills (which will
be ere this article appears) than the agents of capitalists will be flocking into the country to see what its
capabilities may be, and to pick up desirable properties
wherever they may be found. I may say generally
that there is scarcely a mountain or hill, scarcely a
stream or rivulet, west of Fernie, where mineral locations have not been made, and in many place immense areas have been "staked" and are now on record. Gold, silver, copper and lead are the prevailing minerals, but the silver-lead "propositions" are
those which have been so far most actively worked,
though prospects of great copper properties exist in
numerous localities.
The most famous mine of the district is the North
Star.   This mine lies some twenty odd miles up the
Steele & Co., Macleod.)
3M SUMMIT LAKE, CROW'S NEST PASS.
tation. A branch of the Crow's Nest Railway is to
be run in to the mine this year, which will provide
the necessary facilities. This great mine is owned by
a company of Canadians, who also own 10 or 12 of
the adjacent claims. It is popularly believed that the
North Star will prove one of the greatest silver-lead
mines in British Columbia.
Another promising silver-lead property is found in
the Sullivan group, consisting of the Hamlet, Hope
and Shylock claims, situated on Sullivan Hill, about a
mile and a half from the North Star, on the northeast
side of Mask Creek. It is owned by a Spokane Company, and recent rich strikes that have been reported
nave brought it prominently into public attention.
A considerable force of men are now at work on the
property.   The assay value of the ore is not as greatTHE MINING RECORD.
23
as that of the Star, but immense bodies of it are reported recently to have been uncovered.
The St. Eugene mine, situated high on the hills,
back of Moyie City on Moyie Lake, is recognized as
unquestionably a great silver-lead property, one that
will rank probably with the biggest in the province
This mine, as well as a neighbouring one, the Lake
Shore, have already become shippers.
The original discoverer of the St. Eugene was an
Indian, who brought samples of the glistening galena
to Father Cocola, who for many years has been
in charge of the Roman Catholic Indian Mission in
the district. The Indian conveyed the Rev. Father
to what has now turned out to be a great mine, and
and completeness of equipment as would be a credit
to any city in the Province. It is open to receive
patients of any religious denomination throughout
the whole district, the nursing being done by the
Sisters of the Mission. The Mission lands are extensive, and by means of a system of irrigation excellent
crops are obtained. The Dominion Government Indian Industrial School is located on these grounds,
the Sisters officiating as teachers.
Of the multitude of mines, or rather mining prospects, which dot the hills and valleys of this .district
from one end to the other it is impossible to speak in
detail in an article such as this, which is intended
simply to take a passing glance at the salient features
(Photo by
THE FALLS ON ELK RIVER,  NEAR ELKO,  B.C.
the ground was staked and recorded. The Indian
was preserved in his share and Father Cocola in his.
When the property was eventually sold to the present owners, Father Cocola received $7,000 as his
"divvy," and this sum, with a zeal and self-denial
worthy of the man, he has since expended in the
building of an extremely pretty church edifice at the
Mission grounds on St. Mary's River, eight miles
west of Fort Steele.
I cannot withhold a word in praise of this faithful
and self-sacrificing missionary. He has obtained the
confidence and even affection of the Indians to a remarkable degree, a result of course of his devotion to
their interests. His industry and perseverance in
their behalf is unflagging. At the Mission he has
not only provided large and comfortable buildings,
but last summer succeeded, with the aid of the railway people, in erecting a hospital of such proportions
Steele & Co., Macleod.)
CAVE  FALLS,   SOURCE   OF CROW'S  NEST LAKE,  C. N. P. RY.
of a great district which is now being opened up and
made readily accessible to the energy and enterprise
of the people.
Our illustrations indicate in a most vivid manner
the natural beauty of the landscape. Could anything
be more delightfully romantic than the scene on Elk
River, and it is a scene characteristic of the whole
district. The writer and a companion, one lovely
morning last summer, each mounted, as the "Riders
of the Plain" would say, on the "hurricane deck of a
cayuse," started on a ride from Fort Steele to Elko,
situated adjacent to the view on the Elk River shown
in the engraving. The route via Wardner (where the
railway crosses) on the west side of the Kootenay
River over a road of twenty miles was selected,
thence, crossing the stream on a cable ferry, 35 or 41
miles on to our destination. It is a parklike country
the whole way, the roads are  almost perfect,  and24
THE MINING RECORD.
nothing could exceed the beauties that were spread
out on every side. We were out on a fishing expedition and our journey was rewarded with the finest
basket of mountain, silver and rainbow trout I have
ever seen. It is ideal water for the angler. Down it
comes tumbling and breaking and eddying, swirling
into the loveliest pools imaginable, and each of them
apparently alive with fish. There is little or no undergrowth on the banks to interfere with the free play
of the rod, and often before the fly had really touched
the water it would be snapped up by eager trout,
darting a foot or more into the air to seize the treacherous bait. The average weight of the fish would
be fully a pound and a half, while some would scale.
the beautiful Moyie Lakes, some thirty miles west of
Port Steele. Here the sportive trout are found in
great abundance; boats and other accessories to a
pleasurable outing are to be obtained, and excellent
hotel accommodation is to be had at the pretty little
town of Moyie, situated at the western end of the
lakes. The Crow's Nest Railway skirts the water,
and a little steamer is constantly plying from one end
of the lakes to the other.
Now, a word about the game of the country.
Grouse, ducks and geese are plentiful almost everywhere, and to those who are looking for big game
there is abundance to draw out the hunter's adventurous spirit.   The black bear, the cinnamon, and also
(Photo by
DEWDNEY PACK  BRIDGE,   ELK  RIVER  CANYON,   NEAR  ELKO,   B.C.
Steele & Co., Macleod).
three and three and a-half pounds. The Elk River,
over almost the whole of its course, including. the
upper lakes, of which our illustrations give an idea,
is a veritable angler's paradise. Returning to Fort
Steele from the particular excursion which I have
mentioned, we spent a day on Bull River, which
flows into the Kootenay at a point fourteen miles or
thereabouts south of Steele. Whipping this stream
for a distance of five miles upward from its mouth
we found the sport almost equally as good as on the
Elk, though the fish were smaller, a condition attributable, no doubt, to the fact that it has been more
frequently visited by anglers. While on the subject
of fish, I should mention that perhaps the most favourite resort of the devotees of the rod and line are
the ferocious grizzly, all have their habitat here and
m the rocky fastness of the hills is to be found the
coy and illusive mountain sheep and goat. In years
gone by it has cost an arduous journey by boat and
on horseback, or on foot over the trail, to reach the
hunting grounds of this great district, but now an
easy and pleasurable journey over the Crow's Nest
Railway carries the sportsmen into the very heart of
it, and little or no hardship need be undergone and
at a sacrifice of comparatively little time to enjoy
oneself to one's heart's content in the forests and rn
the trout streams of South-East Kootenay.
Of the splendid future of all that country along the
line of the Crow's Nest Railway from the western
prairies, beyond the Rockies, to the shores of Koote-THE MINING RECORD.
25
nay Lake, there can be no question. It has already
been shown to have exceptional mineral wealth,
and what has been shown is only a beginning. Comparisons are sometimes made of the prospective mineral development of the Southern East Kootenay
with the ascertained richness of the mines of her
sister district of West Kootenay. But these comparisons are useless. The Crow's Nest country will
within a few years support a thrifty mining population of many thousands, enjoying a climate and
other natural conditions conducive in as great a
measure as possible to the enjoyment of life.    It will
deed, I may conclude by saying with the poet :
" The future rises fair to view,
Charming with morning's youthful dew,
And bright with coming glory."
WEST KOOTENAY POWER AND LIGHT CO.
(By Horace F. Evans, Rossland, B.C.)
WHEN it was  announced  some  two   years  ago
that a project was organized to harness with
iron bands Bonnington Falls on the Kootenav River
BONNINGTON FALLS PjWER PLANT—SHOWING TAIL-RACK
sr.on equal probably any of the most thrifty of the
mining communities of the United States. That a
great smelting industry will centre itself at some
point along the Crow's Nest Railway is assured by
three natural condition—first, abundance of coal;
second, the presence in close juxtaposition of the
necessary "dry" and "wet" ores to permit of economical smelting, and third, unexcelled facilities for the
shipment to market of both the refined and the crude
products of the mines. Could anything better be
looked for or wished for in a mining country?   In-
it was contended by a considerable number of very intelligent persons as belonging to the class of schemes
that we hear about but never see because it was mentioned that the power represented in the fall was to
be transmitted a distance of thirty miles to Rossland
by electric wires.
It was well known that Niagara Falls had been captured and so utilized, hence why should not Bonnington Falls, or any other falls, be put in harness. What
materially increased this element of doubt at the time
was this:    The names of the parties mentioned in1
@fi
^
26
THE MINING RECORD.
connection with the enterprise, though well known in
relation to mining projects, were not previously identified with electrical ventures. This fact, doubtless,
accounts for the fears that were expressed at the time
of the first announcement.
Now that power and light have been so trammelled
from Bonnington Falls for some months, and that the
system has come to stay, it is jafinecessary to dwell
any further on the query, can it be done? It has been
done and this should settle the matter.
Bonnington Falls are situated on the Kootenay
River, which is 400 feet wide at that point, and the
that company, at Rossland, and Mr. C. R. Homer, of
the Canadian Pacific Railway Telegraph Service. It
was Mr. Largey that first obtained the charter, and he
subsequently transferred it to the West Kootenay
Power and Light Company.
Now it naturally occurs to the unscientific reader
to make some inquiries about this transmission of
water power by means of electric wires a distance of
thirty miles. It does not look reasonable, but it must
be so, because it has been done.
Some years ago Professor was teaching an
"academy" in the wire grass country of South Geor-
)N FALLS—INT
water falls over a granite cliff, a distance of 50 feet.
The conditions are most favourable for the system.
Scenery, which is only sentimental under the circumstances, is, however, not wanting. The Selkirk
Mountains rise to an elevation of upwards of 3,500
feet, and the river itself is about 2,200 feet above sea
level. The snow-clad peaks of this range add very
much to the scenic grandeur of the environment.
The consummation of this scheme of utilizing the
water power at Bonnington Falls is largely due to
Sir Charles Ross, Mr. Patrick A. Largey, late president of the Centre Star Mining and Smelting Company, Rossland; Mr. Oliver Durant, late manager of
gia when he was one morning waited on by the trustees, who informed him that they did not wish the
scholars to be taught " 'stronmy" and stuff like that.
The professor invited these sublunary mortals into his
class-room and draw a diagram on the black-board
representing the solar system. "Now," said he, by
way of explanation," the sun is just ninety-five million of miles from the earth." "Stop," said the chairman of the trustees. "How do ye know that. What
surveyor ever dug his drain over that route? Tain't
so." "We did stop," said the professor, "wiped the
diagram from the black-board with our left coat tail,
advanced the class to Peter Parley's new geographyTHE MINING RECORD.
27
and permitted the sun to rise and set as usual, and
left the district." Had this South Georgian been present when the question of transmitting power over
Bonnington Falls to Rossland was raised he would
have declared that it was not possible. Such men only
make the scientist get along at a quicker rate. Tre vert
says that until the invention of the dynamo, the elec-
tric battery was the only known generator of the electric light and it required a battery of 40 to 50 Grore
cells to produce a strong-light that would last but a
few hours.
Since  1867 electricity in the service of man has
about it, but he pretends he does! How like some
men!
The first surveys of this plant were made in 1897,
but construction did not begin until July of that year.
The present plant, which gives twenty horse power,
is only one-third of that which it is intended to give,
viz.: 60,000.
The power house is located on the west side of the
dam. The foundations are built of cut granite, the
walls are of brick, the roof of wood, and it is covered
with galvanized iron; the station is 40 x 60 feet outside measurement, and gives accommodation for two
4.
■M?#
sar
GENERAL VIEW—BONNINGTON FALLS
made rapid strides, until to-day we see long lists of
motors and dyrtamos, which, to the uninitiated are
very queer looking machines, and we are apt to regard them first at a safe distance, until the electric
engineer assures us that they are "perfectly harmless."
What the majority of persons do not understand is
how these queer-looking black combinations of iron,
steel and copper can transfer the power of water to a
bit of wire and then transmit it a distance of thirty
miles over an extension of that'wire.
To the electric engineer it is as plain as ABC, but
the average man who wants to feel up to date says,
"Yes, I see, etc.," and yet he does not know anything
TOWER PLANT—KOOTENAY RIVER, W.K.
725 K W and one 1,200 K W units directly horizontal
wheels.    Height of building is 40 feet.
The dam extends across the end of the canal for a
distance of 60 feet. The wing dam extends for 120
feet and is constructed of concrete, forming one side
of the fore bay, extending the full width of the dam.
The water after passing through this enters the penstock and from the penstock flows to the water wheel.
From the main water wheel casing there is toffed
a 26-inch pipe, which conveys the water to a 50 horsepower horizontal wheel which is utilized for running
the exciter. The head has a maximum of 42 feet and
a minimum of 34 feet.28
THE MINING RECORD.
WATER WHEEL.
The main water wheels for this plant were furnished
by the Stillwell Bierce and Smith Vaile Company of Dayton, Ohio, and are of the well-known Victor type. There are two pairs of 39" horizontal
wheels in each case, which are connected directly to
each generator shaft. These wheels are designed and
guaranteed to develop 1,180 h.p. per set. In addition
to the wheels just described there are two pairs of 12-
inch wheels of the same manufacture used in operating the exciters for furnishing the exciting current to
the three phase generators in the station. The governors were also furnished by the Stillwell Bierce and
Smith Vaile Company, and are of the Geister type,
driven by a belt connected on a small pulley on the
water wheel shaft. Each governor operates the gates
for each set of two wheels.
APPARATUS.
All the electric apparatus has been manufactured
by the Canadian General Electric Company. In the
generating stations there are two 75 K W three phrase
generators of the revolving field type, having 40 poles
and operating at a speed of 180 r.p in going frequently
approximately to 60.
The pole pieces field coils and armature coils are arranged in such a manner that the windings may be
easily removed without disturbing the amature or the
magnet yoke. The field windings are wound in
biooms and thoroughly insulated with oiled liners.
The bearings are of the self-oiling, self-aligning
type, and the sleeves of cast-iron, lined with genuine
vabut metal. The base frame of these machines is
soon constructed that the armature may be moved
parallel with the shaft in order that the field and armature may be repaired without tearing down. The
approximate weight of the revolving field is 27,000
lbs., the complete weight of each machine being 96,-
000 lbs. The generators are designated as A. T. 725-
180 sunt-wound 1,100 volt generators.
The current is generated under a pressure of 1,100
volts, and is conducted from the generator to the machine panels, and from the machine panels to the transformer panels, it is conducted to the primary side of
the transformer and slipped up to either 11,620 volts
when delta connected or 20,100 volts when Y connected.
From the high tension side of these transformers,
the current is conducted to the high tension switches
on the transformer panel, passing from there to the
line panel and thence to the line.
The transformers are of the of the air-blast type of
242 K W capacity each. At present there are two
sets of them, which is ample for present purposes. As
a means of ventilating two 60" Buffalo blowers are
used, the air from these being conducted through
brick air dints to the transformers. The power house
is fire-proof.
THE POLE LINE
is a very substantial type of construction, being of
round timber of specially selected cedar. The poles
vary from 30 to 40 feet in length, according to location.
They are set 100 feet apart or 50 to the mile, all
corners and curves being properly grouped throughout the whole route, which is heavily wooded. The
construction of the pole line embodies all the best features of the most • improved practices in transmission work.
A single three wire three phase circuit of No. 2
medium hard-drawn copper of Dominion Wire Company's manufacture extends from the power-house to
the sub-station at Rossland, a distance of 30 miles by
the pole line.
The telephone line, placed four feet below the lower
cross-arm, is of the No. 12 B. & S. hard-drawn copper
transferred to every pole. The insulators used are of
the type C and Redland, while the pins are locust
boiled in parafine.
SUB-STATION.
In the sub-station is installed a full complement of
transformers similar to those already described. These
are wound for a secondary voltage of 2,200, it being
the- company's intention to distribute at this voltage
and step down a second time where a lower voltage
is required.
The armature is of the stationary type and thoroughly ventilated by means of air ducts one-quarter
inch wide.
In the sub-station there is installed the necessary
high tension switchboard apparatus, as well as the 2,-
200 volt distributing board. On this distributing
beard is mounted total output ammeter and volt
meters for the different outgoing circuits.
The  sh itch boards throughout are composed of
blue Vermont marble panels of the Canadian General.
Electric Company.
The plant has now being in operation for the past
nine months, and although subject to severe thunder
storms, not the slightest difficulty has presented itself
when working under a pressure of 22,400 volts.
Lightning discharges have frequently entered the
generating and sub-stations, but these intruders were
promptly taken care of by the banks of the well-known
West Lightning arrester installed.
DOUBLE CAPACITY.
The company is at present doubling the capacity of
its plant at Bonnington, which, when completed, will
consist of the following apparatus:
I pair 45" Victor surtine water wheel.
1 12" Victor surtine wheel.
1 1,000 h.p. generator.
1 40 h.p. exciter.
1 3,000 h.p. capacity in step-up transformer, with,-
necessary swtichboard apparatus.
2 2,000 h.p. capacity in transformers at Rossland
distributing station.
The company arc supplying power to the following
capacity of motors at Rossland and Trail:
War Eagle Gold Mining Company 900 H.P.
Bullion Extracting Company 150
Big Three 100 "
Iron Mask 130 "
Gertrude   50 "
B. A. Corporation 600 "
City of Rossland, in lights 300 "
Trail Smelter 450 "
On the ground of the Idaho mineral claim and close
to the line of the Nickel Plate on the east side of Centre Star gulch, a fine brick building, with granite
foundation, about a year ago was erected. It is close
to the new trestle work of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company. This building is the Rossland substation. Its dimensions are 32-! feet high, and is of
the typical character of the West Kootenay Power
and Light Company's power-houses.THE MINING RECORD.
29
MINING MEN OF THE PROVINCE.
MR. J7 CUTHBERT WELCH, chief assayer at the
Trail smelter, was born in Wedinsbury, Staffordshire, and educated at Walsall Grammar School and
at the Midland Institute, Birmingham. After gaining several government certificates for proficiency in
assaying and chemistry, he secured a position of
assistant to Messrs. Allen & Bergley, the Birmingham
metallurgists and assayers, then devotine
much time to experimental work for researches and analysis
of alloys and minerals
containing the heavy
metals. In 1886 he
obtained a studentship at the Royal College of Science, with
which is associated the
the Royal School of
Mines, but in the following year he resigned this charge to
accept an appointment as Research and
Technical chemist to
Dr. E. R. Moritz, of
London. In January,
1888, Mr. Welch, at
the instance of Dr.
Moritz, become chemist to Messrs, H. &
Leemonds, of Reading, also lecturing for
the Berkshire County
Council in 1891-92,
and carrying on a private practice as consulting chemist and
metallurgist. In 1805
he was engaged as
technical chemist to
the Reading Paint
Company, but two
years later, for family
reasons and acting
upon a long unfulfilled inclination,
coupled with the desire to devote himself
entirely to metallurgical work, decided
Mr. Welch to leave
England for British
Columbia. His first
engagement in this
country was as chemist and assayer to the
Kootenay Ore Company's Sampling Works at Kaslo, but upon being offered the post of Research chemist and assayer to the
British Columbia Smelting and Refining company at
Trail, he resigned the former position in August,
1897. On the acquisition of the Trail smelter by the
C.P.R. in the following spring, Mr. Welch was appointed chief chemist and assayer at the company's
works. Mr. Welch has contributed largely to the
chemical literature of the day, among his chief works
being the compilation of a general index to the '' Proceedings of the Society of Public Analysts," Vol. I.,
I
MR.  J.   CUTHBERT WELCH,
and an index to the "Analyse," Vols. I. to XX.,
1876-1896, published by the society in 1897. He is a
Fellow of the Chemical Society, member of the Society
of Public Analysts and Society of Chemical Industry.
GREATER BRITAIN.
(Prom Our London Correspondent).
N THIS great city of London we have come to look forward year by year to the imposing exhibitions at Earls
Courtfas affording possibilities of relaxation to
—I those who are for their
offences compelled ,t o
stew in town during the
hottest months of the
year. Quite apart from
their value as sources of
amusement and entertainment, however,
these exhibitions are
frequently used as a
means of education, and
the one just opened is
especially deserving of
praise, in view of the
enthusiasm with which
the Imperialistic doctrine has been taken up
by every member of the
vast Empire, which
acknowledges as its
supreme head the lady
who has just completed
her eightieth birthday.
For does it not bring us
in close touch with the
farthest points of that
great region which is
proud to call itself
Greater Britain; teaches
the manners of living of
the natives whom we
are called upon to take
into the fold, to show
us in practical form the
various productions of
the many component
parts which make up
the great whole — animal, vegetable and mineral. I have already
sent you a lengthy account of the raison d'
etre of the mining exhibition, and also a map
showing the large area
taken up by the mineral
exhibits, machinery,
etc., and am now by the
courtesy of Mr. Austin
Breveton, the press representative of the Exhibition, enabled to supplement these by fuller
details. Before doing so
let me once more regret
that the British Columbia government were
not able to embrace this
splendid opportunity of
showing us what she
can do as a producer of
both the precious and
baser metals. I know it
is proposed to atone for this by a grand display at the
Paris Exhibition next year, but although there is little
doubt that thousands of Englishmen will visit bha,b fin de
siecle commemorative celebration—if the Dreyfus question
allows it to materalise. Yet it is a mistaken policy, if not
another illustration of the shortsightedness which places
about $1,000 at the disposal of a London agent to properly
advertise the Province for a year—a sum which is the exact
price of a single page of one of our leading financial daily
newspapers. In conducting a government as a business it is often necessary to " throw a sprat to catch a
mackerel." British Columbia's executive apparently thinks
that a sprat is too big, and that a much tinier bait ought to
bring them a much larger fish as a prize, which is a sad3°
THE MINING RECORD.
exhibition of the ways of Canadians. However, 1 suppose
it was all carefully debated, both in the federal and provincial cabinets, and so we must content ourselves with
stating that the Honourary Advising Committee includes
among its Vice-Presidents, the Hon. Sir Charles Tupper,
and a number of other gentlemen not unconnected with
recent Canadian mining developments, and emphasize the
remark by pointing out that the Australasian and South
African colonies have generously supported those who
have been labouring to make the exhibition what it should
be, an object lesson as to the mineral wealth of the British
Empire. Only Canada is officially lacking in enterprise,
and the reflection is on those Canadians who essay to govern Canada. Excessive economy is often well nigh as
harmful as undue podigality ! 1
Greater Britain 1 The words conjure up all kinds of
visions of far off lands, and varied peoples : of tropical
climes, and arctic regions. One feels tempted to run away
from the subject in hand, and launch out on a sea of
speculative problems as to the developments in the next
century of that great Empire on which the sun never sets.
As it is, I remember that this is a mining magazine, and
not a record of colonial ambitions or achievements, and
that while useful in themselves, British Columbians will be
far more. interested in a new mining implement, or a
metallurgical process, than in many pages of statistical
date and phantastic dreams of the future of this country
and her vast possessions over seas.
Although the original intention of the Incorporated London Chamber of Mines—the real originators of the mining
part of the Greater Exhibition—was of course to have all
the exhibits under one roof if possible, it was found convenient to join the Greater Britain authorities, and as the
plan was unfolded, the colonial governments recognising
its utility, decided to organise their own sections themselves.
Thus we have the Incorporated London Chamber of
Mines section, West Australian Chamber of Mines and
International Mining section, Queensland Government
section, Victoria Government section, Rhodesian Government section, Witwatersrand section, Hong Kong exhibits, West African section, Cripple Creek section, Queensland Government Ore Crushing Mill, WorKing Gold Mine.
The efforts pf those responsible for the arrangements of
the mining section (as a whole), have been very ably
seconded by the great British South African Co., by South
African flnancers, and by West Australian companies, and
mining people in the colonies generally, and as a result we
have a vast, if somewhat heterogenous, number of exhibits. Unfortunately it was found impossible to place all
the minerals, machinery, implements, working mine, etc.,
under one roof, and this makes the t;isk of inspection and
classification difficult, but it also prevents those of the public who might be inclined to dodge a common mining
centre from shirking their obvious duty, for no matter
where you go in this vast patch of London saved from the
jerry builder,-you come across something or other which
helps to drive home to your mind the fact that Greater
Britain is a vast producer of gold, ivory, precious stones
as well as silver and the baser—but no less valuable metals!
Entering the exhibition at Earls Court, the representa-
UYf-oi T^he BSITISH Columbia Mining Record finds himself in Prince's Hall, devoted to the section organized by
the Incorporated London Chamber of Mines, an interview
with whose energetic secretary. Mr. E. Jerome Dyer
appeared in a recent issue of the Record. Here one of the
most notable ex hibits is a five-stamp battery, which has
been put up by the British South Africa (The Chartered
Co.), and will treat Rhodesian ores during the continuance
of the exhibition. Mr. C. B. Hale very • courteously took
""' round this battery and explained that it was prepared
■P9£?ush about 200 tons of Rhodesian ores during the six
months Greater Britain will run. The attraction of this
•muling section from an investors point of view is that as
it is intended to treat ores from the various Rhodesian
belts, and these will be announced in due course as well as
the name of the particular company, shareholders will be
able to turn up and inspect their own property at Earls
Court, see it crushed and gold won from the quartz either
in the ordinary way, or if refractory, by the cyanide process. 1 his section is very complete and d eserves the heartv
commendation of those who could expect nothing less from
the great Chartered Company, especiiAly after the recent
burst of activity in the Rhodesian market of the London
Stock Exchange.
Among other exhibitors in this Courtare theFrictionless
Engine Packing Co.; John Davis & Sons, mining imple
ments ; Palsometer Engineering Co., steam pump; Edwin
Chester & Co. (London & Renfrew), various mining machinery ; Ruston Proctor & Co., winding, horizontal and high
speed vertical engines, also flue and table boiler, and portable engines.   The Fraser & Chalmers stand was not by
any means complete, and when I ran through the court
for a second look round before sitting down to write this
first report, I found the stands in many cases still in the
hands of the workmen,   Bowes, Scott & Western show a
Wilfley concentrating table, the chief point in which is its
simplicity and durability.   It is suitable for concentrating
all classes of ore, and by its method of concentration—depending on the laws of gravitation—enables one metal to
be separated from the other in the process.   Robey & Co.
have a working scale model of the Robey  engine, on
wrought iron tank foundations, a working scale model of
horizontal fixed hauling engine, a working model of Chilian
quartz crushing mill, also working model of concentrator,
and 10-stamp head battery.   Lendbeater & Scott show mining tools, wire ropes, rope pulleys, corvie and truck wheels,
etc.   The Tacking Mill Foundry Co., of Camborne, Cornwall, makers of the " Little Hercules " rock drill, are also
represented, as well as Holman Bros., working model of
Morgan's patent traversing winding engines for deep shafts,
with pithead gear.   Messrs. Johnson & Sons, the assayers
to the Bank of England, H.M. mint, etc., display apparatus
and chemicals for use in mines and assay offices.   Not by
any means the least important exhibits in this Court is
that of the Willesden Paper & Canvas Works, of Willes-'
den Junction, viz., waterproof paper for ventilating tubes,
piping an&numerous mining uses, also for permanent and
portable structures;  rot-proof canvas for explorers and
miners' tents, ground sheets and all kinds of covering. The
company has supplied Mr. Stanley, various colonies, as well
as the Home Government, and its specialties are securing
increasing attention at the hands of mining men who require a light,  flexible and reliable substitute for metal
tubing for ventilation tubes, conduits, etc.   The canvas is
water, rot and insect proof.   They also show specimens of
camp furniture, recommended for use with Willesden tents,
made by the Ex-Chair Co., whose, aim is to secure maximum strength and durability.   I make this lengthy reference to the Willesden exhibit, and especially the canvas,
because among hundreds of mining exhibits it is the only
one  which deals with the material welfare of .those who
have to undertake explorating and prospecting work in a
country where you seem to have both the extremes so far
as climatic conditions are concerned.
In the Ducal Hall we find the International mining section, conducted under the auspices of the West Australian
Chamber of Mines, and here will be found exhibits representing nearly every branch of the mining industry in that
go ahead colony. Specimens of ore, models of mines and
works, machinery used, maps and diagrams showing the
output of the precious metal obtained to date are all'snown
in this section. Not the least interesting feature here was
the collection of Jarrah timber. The London & Hamburg
Gold Recovery Co., Calipe Drill & Boring Co., Wilking &
Co.'s wire ropes, Fried Krupp Grusonwerk (Germany),
Davey, Paxman & Co., Sandy croft Foundry, Stern Bros,
(lubricants), Curtis & Harvey (blasting materials), American Pyrites Co., Cape Asbestos Co., Amette & Co., band
sawing machines, etc., were all represented. The Rhodesian Gold Mining exhibits have a Court all to themselves,
and attract a very large amount of attention, as do also the
the splendid illustrations of Canadian scenery lent by the
Canadian Pacific Co. It is also, I understand, the intention
ot the C.P.R. to shortly show at the exhibition a section of
a sleeping car. I was very pleased to see that British Columbia was not entirely overlooked, an interesting collection of specimens of ores, etc., being shown in the International mining section, by the Ymir Gold Mining Co. of
B.C. I also understand that a gentleman recently returned
irom Canada, was so disappointed at finding Ontario unrepresented, that he has decided to take a stand and show
bis own private specimens, but these could not be discovered when 1 paid my second visit to the exhibition on your
behalf yesterday. Altogether the mining exhibits make a
very excellent presentment of mining in all parts of the
empire, but owing to the fact that in some sections the
stands are not yet quite complete I must defer fuller details to my next month's letter.
Meanwhile, hearing the other day that the Dominion
government and several of the provinces are reserving
their energies for the great Exposition at Paris in the last
year of the cent my, it occurred to me it might be useful to
make some enquiries on the subject.   And as when youTHE MINING RECORD.
want to learn anpthing about Canada in the city, you cannot do better than apply at the offices of the C.P.R., I
dropped in and had a chat with Mr. F. W. Flanagan, the
.ver courteous city passenger agent, of the vast trans-
Atlantic service.
I told Mr. Flanagan I was sorry to find Canada an absentee from Earls Court, and could he give me any reasons
for the decision of the federal and provincial authorities
not to take part in this year's show.
" No," he said, " I cannot tell you anything under that
head, but I think you will find Canada well represented at
Paris next year. So far as this exhibition is concerned the
the C.P.R. have sent some big maps, several pictures of
ranching scenes and about a dozen views of B.C. They also
propose to put in a section of a sleeping car. The company
hope that the very fine maps they have lent will help to
illustrate the bearing that the ports of Vancouver and Victoria have upon travelling round the world in any direction."
" And what about Paris ? " " Ah, Paris! well you will
be interested to learn that the C.P.R. is going in for big
licks at Paris, and Mr. Baker has already a considerable
number of designs under consideration for the purpose of
that exhibition. He is now considering whether or no to
have a whole car for Paris. But whatever may be decided
the C.P.R. exhibit will be a most comprehensive one."
And then Mr. Flanagan told me what a lot the C.P.R.
had done of late to help bring B.C. before Europeans.
Picking up several of the bundles of circulars on the counter, Mr. Flanagan said :
"Look at these circulars. You cannot find one in all
those little piles of printed matter which do not in some
way or other bring in British Columbia, whether it is a
pamphlet descriptive of the rolling prairie lands, or a booklet on Klondike, you will find a reference to British Columbia. Look at the back of our letter paper even. There
you have a useful little map with explanatory letter press.
The company is spending a large sum in continental advertising this year, and has attracted a good deal of attention
by its plan for sending out Swiss guides to the Rockies,
which we hope will attract a large number of Englishmen
and Continentals who are fond of mountaineering.
"Emigrants. Well there is a very good class of emigrant going out this year, but the figures are not particularly abnormal. Most of the people we meet here are
going out to British Columbia in connection with mining
interests out there."
A piece of information which will be of interest to those
who have been assisting in exploiting the country during
the past three or four years. In 1896 British Columbia was
hardly a name here, in 1899 it is as well known as the
Witwatersrand or West Australia, and if only the government would advertise a little more it would soon be a
household word.
THE MONTH'S MINING.
CAMP  M'KINNEY.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
OWING to the bad condition of the road on the Summit,
between Penticton and McKinney, the Minne-ha-ha, Water-
loo, Fontenoy, Wiarton and Sailor Companies have been
unable to haul their hoisting and other machinery, and consequently the work on these properties during the last few weeks
has been practically at a standstill. .The very backward
season has had much to do with this state of affairs, for there
has been hardly a day without rain, hail or snow; at the same
time, were a sufficient force of men put on those portions of
the road needing repair, much unnecessary delay might have
been avoided, and a considerable force of men would have
been now working in the above-mentioned properties.
Since my last letter the Waterloo people have had mill tests
made of ore taken from the east and west drifts at the 8o-foot
level, with the most satisfactory results. These working tests
were made by Mr. C. M. Fassett, of Spokane, 90 pounds of
assay ore being taken from the east drift and 145 pounds from
. the west drift, the result showing $37.48 per ore values. A
galerus frame has been erected over the shaft, in readiness for
the hoist. On the Fontenoy similar circumstances prevail.
In the new shaft sunk in this property, close to the Waterloo
line, assays as high as $108 to the ton have been obtained.
An 80 horse-power engine, boiler, and 12-drill compressor have
been at the Penticton Landing about two months awaiting
transportation to the Minne ha-ha claim. This Company
have arranged to put in a 30-stamp mill this summer.
Your correspondent paid a visit to the Cariboo mine the
other day, and saw some very rich ore passing from the
crusher to the stamps. This ore, coming from the lower
levels, is pretty good proof that the old Cariboo is still holding
her own. Preparations are being made on a portion of the
Company's property for a townsite, the very thick timber
having been cleared off and a road laid out to connect with the
Penticton stage road.
A large force of men are engaged in clearing and burning
the timber on the Sailor townsite. This Company intend
making a new and shorter road to Rock Creek, along which
the telephone will be constructed. In all probability this
road will become the stage road to Rock Creek and all points
east of camp, as it will be some five or six miles shorter than
the present road.
The 5-stamp mill on the Granite is nearing completion.
Some good development work has been done on this property.
In addition to two shafts in the vein, a tunnel and open cut
have also been run, and as the vein is from six to seven feet
wide, there should be no difficulty in keeping the mill supplied
with ore. The superintendent informed me that the ore will
average about $26. Should such prove to be the case, this
Vancouver Company will be well repaid for their enterprise.
The Little Cariboo and Shannon & Dolphin are temporarily
closed down. The latter, claim will probably start up in a
week or two. The Cariboo No. 2, north of the old Cariboo
claim, is taking out some good ore, and in the Pandie, to the
north-west of it, a 2^-foot vein of rich ore has been opened.
This claim is likely to be heard of in the near future.
The Ecuador, belonging to a Toronto company, about two
miles east of the Cariboo, is showing some very good ore,
four or five men have been working for the last two months,
and the development has proved most satisfactory. This
claim is situated some 1,500 feet west of the Gold Standard,
belonging to the Lemon Company, of Omaha, on which is a
hoist and a 140-foot incline shaft. Samples of ore from this
property assaying from $50 to $70.
A strike of free gold ore was recently made some three to
four miles east of the camp, the ledge being very wide, over
30 feet, and presumably a continuation of what is known as
the east or back ledge of the Old England claim. The discoverers, Messrs. Hamilton and Gresshin claiming they can
get gold in every pan.
The general outlook of the camp is exceedingly good, and
though doubtless the more rapid development of some of the
properties has been retarded for want of machinery, the work
which has been done during the spring has placed beyond
doubt that there are some valuable properties in the camp,
and this time next year will see more dividend payers than the
Cariboo. The "wild cat" boom which struck the camp during the winter months has flattened out, and none too soon, in
the interests of those having properties showing some merit,
and on which legitimate work has been done. The " wild
cat" promoters appeared sublimely indifferent to development work, surface showings, etc., in fact didn't seem to care
whether the property had a vein on it or not, if only it were
near enough to the Cariboo to enable a good draughtsman by
the exercise of his imagination to show it to be on the same
lead. These gentry have undoubtedly somewhat injured the
reputation of the camp, more particularly among the speculating public, who in racing parlance like to have a '' little bit
on, and invest readily in the "cheap and nasty" stock,
while the regular mining man have let such "sure things"
severely alone. It is presumably the fate of every mining
camp to go through a like experience at some period of its
existence, fortunately for McKinney the principal properties
are in the hands of strong financial companies, who will
thoroughly test their values.
BOUNDARY  CREEK.
(From Our 0^vn Correspondent.)
Although no boom is on at Boundary Creek, there is a deal
of development going on, this latter making for the material
progress of the district. Power plants are being gradually
increased, more men employed, and railway construction is
being pushed steadily forward. It is doubtful though, notwithstanding positive assertions made to the contrary by railway officials, if the railway will be open to Boundary Creek
before winter. Yet the definite assurance that the provision
of adequate transportation facilities can now be only a question
of a few months is having a beneficial influence, with the
result that from twelve to twenty mining properties in the
district are being got into shape for shipping ore. The eight
hours' law has not yet seriously affected the district, for the
reason that the mine-owners where machine drills are
employed decided to continue to pay $3.50 to machine men
and $3 to muckers.    In two or three instances though, work32
THE MINING RECORD.
has been suspended where the decision to pay hammersmen
only $3 has been carried into effect; but as it is unlikely that
work will be resumed upon the several properties affected
until after machine drills shall have been provided, there will
probably be no contention between owners and miners on this
score.
In so extensive a district, including at least a dozen mining
camps within a radius of ten miles of a central point, it is
difficult to keep track, except at considerable expenditure in
time and money, of what work is going on and what results
are being obtained. Consequently the following notes are
necessarily incomplete. They will, however, serve to show
that the mineral industry is surely, if slowly, advancing in
importance in the district.
At the Mother Lode, in Deadwood Camp, work is being
continued as usual. The drift at the 200-foot level has been
extended about 300 feet north from the shaft, and is now about
half-way to its objective point directly under the old workings,
to connect with which an upraise of about 175 feet will have to
be made. The south drift is in about 75 feet. It is understood that matter for an illustrated article descriptive of this
valuable property will shortly be supplied to the Record by
a thoroughly reliable contributor, The Sunset group—Sunset,
Crown Silver and C.O.D.—has been acquired by the Montreal-
Boundary Creek Mining Company, organised lately in Montreal by Mr. W. L. Hogg, and capitalised at $2,000,000. The
main shaft on the Sunset is down 182 feet, and both the main
ledge and a blind lead have been crosscut at that depth. A
tunnel has been run in on the south side of the claim, and
from this tunnel a 60-foot winze has been sunk. The ledge
has been crosscut at different points, and 70 feet of ore met
with, values ranging up to $17.60. A temporary hoist is
expected to arrive shortly, and a similar power plant to that
on the Boundary'Creek mine has been ordered to come in
when the railway shall have been opened to Boundary Creek.
The grade for the spur railway line from Greenwood to the
Sunset and Mother Lode is already forward.
Tne Morrison is reported to have made another strike, and
it is stated that the Great Hopes Gold Mining Company
intends to resume work on the Great Hopes claim, Deadwood
camp. A vertical shaft has already been sunk about 100 feet
on this claim, but the ledge has not yet been cut at that depth.
The surface showing is an excellent one, and it is very probable
that a crosscut from the bottom of the shaft will meet with the
ledge at that depth. Messrs. Hector McRae, of Rossland, and
Lionel H. Harris, of London, the latter connected with the
London and Canada Syndicate, Ltd., which holds a controlling
interest in the Boundary Creek Mining & Milling Company,
Ltd., of Greenwood, were recent visitors to Boundary Creek.
It is intended to shortly do some work on the Company's
claims with a diamond drill, which is now on the way in. It
is understood that a larger company is to be formed in London
to take over the B.CM. & M. Co. 's mineral claims, leaving
the townsite of Boundary City, near Greenwood, for the local
company to deal with.
There is not much doing in Providence and Skylark camps
just now. Several claims near the confluence of Eholt and
Boundary Creeks are doing work. The Last Chance, in Skylark camp, is to be equipped with a steam plant, and two or
three neighbouring claims controlled by Spokane companies
will shortly have men at work on them. Smith's camp
remains practically idle. Copper camp has some development
work going on, but little is heard as to results. In Graham's
camp, near Midway, a tui.nel is being slowly driven on one
claim of the group owned by the Graham Estate, Spokane,
and the Lygia, owned by Messrs. W. H. Norris and James
Beckwith, of Midway, is opening up in a promising manner.
The work in progress on the Old Ironsides, Victoria and
Knob Hill claims, in Greenwood camp, is chiefly drifting on
the ledge and sinking the Old Ironsides No. 2 shaft. These
properties adjoin, are under the same management, and
together have a pay roll of about 70 men, with a prospect of
an early increase in numbers of the working force. The No. 2
shaft referred to was, early in June, down about 270 feet. It
is situate on the east side-line of the claim, about equi-distant
from the north-east and south-east corners. It is connected at
the 200-foot level with No. 1 shaft by a 300-foot crosscut,
which passes through 83 feet of ore, the remainder being
through ledge matter. There are also two drifts at the 200-
foot level, one running south for 200 feet and the other north
for 150 feet. Both are in ore all the way, and are near the
footwall, though not on it. Crosscuts are being run east and
west from these drifts to cut the walls of the ledge. No. 2
shaft was sunk for the first 60 feet through good ledge matter,
and below the 200-foot level went through 50 feet of ore, stated
to assay up to $36 and to average $20. There is now a full
10-drill plant on the Old Ironsides, with five machines work •
ing. The mine plant is shortly to be increased by a 50 h.p.
hoist, which will be placed at the 200-foot level of No. 2 shaft.
A drift from the Old Ironsides along the lead into the Victoria
is in more than 150 feet, meeting with some fine-looking
copper ore. The work done to date on the Knob Hill aggregates 1,000 feet. This includes a 550-foot diagonal crosscut,
an upraise of 135 feet, and the remainder drifting, all being
reported to be in ore of assay value. Two machine drills are
being worked with power obtained from the Old Ironsides.
It is expected that the spur line from the Columbia &. Western
Railway at Eholt will be completed by November next, the
work of grading already being In hand.   ■
Both at the Stemwinder and the Brooklyn development
work is proceeding steadily, the power plants on both properties facilitating progress. The plant for the Snowshoe, aWo
in Greenwood camp, has been delayed in transit, so matters
are at a standstill on this property so far as underground work
is concerned. It is stated that the Gold Drop, which lies
close to the Snowshoe, will shortly be acquired and developed
by an incorporated company.
The Winnipeg and Golden Crown, both in Wellington camp,
are forging ahead right steadily. No particulars of the work
below the surface have lately been obtained by the writer; but
as both have lately added to their respective steam plants,
and their stock—especially the Winnipeg—has been in demand
at increasing rates, it is evident that developments are regarded
as satisfactory.
Good reports come from the City of Paris, in Central camp, 5
where the ore showing underground is said to be very good
indeed. Mr. John Douglas, of Midway, is understood to have
sold out all his interests in this camp, including the Mabel,
Cornucopia and Ora. There is some talk of the No. 7
resuming work thissummer, but nothing definite is yet known
about this.
In Long Lake camp, the Jewel is being developed, but no
information is being given out respecting the condition or
prospects of the property. Several otherclaims in the vicinity I
are also having attention. There are a few men either prospecting or doing assessment work in Kimberly camp. The
greater number of prospectors appear to have this year gone
farther afield, most to the West Fork and other tributaries of
the main Kettle River, and a few to the Similkameen country.
Summit camp has been unintentionally omitted from the
above summary, but there is not much known to the wiiler
about it, just now. Reports are in effect that the B.
C., widely and favourably known as a big copper-gold
proposition, is developing most satisfactorily ; that the R. Bell
looks promising, and that the Oro Denero when its plant, now
on the ground, is installed, will " astonish the natives. '
Midway, B.C. PERCY VERENS.
ROSSLAND.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
Unquestionably one of the marked advances for which the
mineral industry in Trail Creek mining division is noted, took
place last week.    Simultaneously with the arrival of lhe C;ui-lj
adian Pacific Railway the first train on its standard gauge are
the coeval facts of ore shipments over the new tram from the 4
War Eagle's new hoist, and shipments from the Center Star's
new shaft to its group of six bunkers on the mine's extension 3
of the Canadian Pacific Railway, for the main  line proper
may   be said  to terminate   at   the   company's   new   depot
situated   on   Second   avenue,   the   building   being   almos-t
completed.
This company, which has been fiercely and systematically
attacked in the editorial columns of the Miner, appears to
have survived the silly attacks made on it by that journal,
and the company is pursuing the even tenor of its way very
much to the disappointment of the eminent nobodies who
have been vainly endeavouring to saw the air. It has been
said that the milk in the cocoanut is accounted for by the
fact that the wheels have got into the mire, and Hercules has
been invoked, but he refuses to be blackmailed. I have
never been able to account for the malignity which some
people profess to entertain against the Canadian Pacific
Railway Company. This hostility is certainly unworthy of a
community less pretentious, and less ambitious than what I
find here. It is doubtless, to put it mildly, an error of judg-';
ment, and decidedly a wrong policy. So far as my investiga- •
tions are concerned, there is nothing to justify this malignant
prejudice. Prejudice has never yet built up a healthy community, and it never will build one up. It would be ungenerous and unjust to charge our American neighbours with
having originated this hostility. It has not been the aliens
at all, but some of the " ward " politicians clothed with a little
brief authority. This seemingly unfounded prejudice must
disappear in the light of the great work this railway companyTHE MINING RECORD.
33
is doing for southern British Columbia, and the sooner the
better, for the sooner capitalists learn that here there are no
tricksters in ambush to waylav capital and abuse it the
better. " There are others," and other fields. Whatever is
necessary to safeguard public interests will certainly be done.
This precludes the necessity for "demogogical interference."
The centre of the greatest industrial activity is now located
on the southeast face of Red Mountain. Down the long War
Eagle tram for a distance of 1,200 feet the ore is conveyed by
means of a modern tramcar and emptied into the bunkers
from which it is loaded into box cars of 20 tons capacity
each. At the same time the group of six bunkers is being
fitted from the new shaft of the Center Star via its own tram,
which runs for about 250 feet from the Center Star shaft to the
ore bunkers.
Both bunkers are situated on the mine's extension of the
Canadian Pacific Railway. A siding runs in front of the
Center Star bunkers, but at present this siding is not used.
The cars loaded with Center Star ore are loaded while on the
main line of the extension by means of an extra shoot connected with the gates of the bunkers, but the siding will
eventually be used. A few hundred yards further to the west
on Le Roi ground, the tram cars are steadily delivering ore to
the 32-ton cars of the Great Northern, which ore is sent to the
Northport smelter, while that conveyed to the Trail smelter is
shipped on Canadian Pacific Railway cars, and this ore comes
from the Center Star and War Eagle mines. The Iron Mask
shipped ore to Northport.
As ore shipments from Rossland mines have recently been
the subject of adverse criticisms from the Coast press, it would
be well for the readers of the Record to understand that I
have not found the Rossland Miner to be a reliable authority
on ore shipments or other statistics in connection with the
mineral industry here. Some time ago it was compelled at
the close of 1898 shipments to reduce its total of ore shipments
from 126,000 to about 116,000 tons.
It was in error to the tune of about 10,000 tons, and it published this error from November until the close of that year.
On January 1 it was compelled to reduce its total by 10,000
tons. The mistake was mally a typographical error, which
occurred in transferring from one week to another. This
statement can be confirmed by referring to its fyles.
Ore from the Le Roi has heretofore been shipped in cars
marked 60,000 pounds capacity, but since this capacity was
placed on the cars the siding and ends have been raised 18
inches, giving, I am informed, a capacity for each car of 32
tons.   These cars are open trucks.
At present the ones in use on the Canadian Pacific Railway
are box cars with a capacity of 40,000 pounds, or 20 tons to the
car. According to the Miner's record of shipments there have
been shipped this year up to June 17, 58,756 tons of ore, or
about 930 tons in excess of the real figures. The Le Roi is
credited with 38.003, it should be 37,413, and the War Eagle
with 18,554, which should be 18,270. Iron Mask 1.200, when
it should be 1.178. Center Star 945, when it should be 924,
and 44 for Deer Park and Evening Star, when it should be 41
—making a total of 57,826.
The spirit of exaggeration which accompanies Western progress, is indeed very noticeable. As the local statistician
really believes that it is his duty to help the industry along
even with untruths, he is more firmly convinced that because
it is popular it must be right. He believes that there is nothing true and nothing new, and that nothing matters very
little.
To appreciate the growth of this mining industry here, one
may station himself at a convenient point, say at the end of
the waggon bridge opposite the Center Star Hotel, where an
extensive view of the various active mines can be attained.
Looking up the gulch are the old workings of the Center Star
and the present shafthouse office, etc., of the Iron Mask. To
the left of these on the southeast face of Red Mountain are the
cluster of buildings, shafthouse and other structures of the
Center Star Gold Mining Co. In the centre are the buildings
and workings of the War Eagle, and from the bunkers on the
railway track to the great hoist, from Patsey Clark's old log
cabin to the modern hotel of the New War Eagle, all denote
progress. To the extreme left are the cluster of Le Roi buildings with its separate system. To see all of these in the- daytime is indeed to witness much industrial activity, but the
picture must be seen at night illuminated with its hundred
electric lights, sparkling like huge diamonds in the blackness
behind. The lights with their twinklings seem to add to the
activity, and the whole panorama is one of restlessness, denoting that an army of industrial workers is beneath the surface,
hundreds of feet in great shafts, in long and bewildering tunnels in grimy cross-cuts and drifts, working as sappers and
miners to get ore enough out to meet the expectant demands
for dividend.     Shift replaces shift, hour follows hour,  the
harsh grating of the ore as it is dumped into cars and bunkers
continues night long. At midnight a number of grimy-faced
men with candles attached to their miner's dips trudge to their
lowly cabins, and are replaced by others who, in their turn are
relieved by others, and so on ad infinitum.
In the deep and middle of the night, as well as in the broad
sunlight of day this "vein pursuit of gold " goes on, but there
is little day once the surface is entered. It is all darkness,
pinned here and there by miner's dips, and resounding with
the noise of drill and blast, one constant recurrence of sameness from which the visitor emerges with some inward feeling
of thankfulness that he is not a miner, and has no grudge for
the poor devils who have to spend so much of their lives under
ground, and yet there is no lack of numbers of men seeking
this hard work. They keep coming from the far off land of
the blue-nose, from across the ocean, from south, east, west
and north, and are fully verifying the economic question that
the supply is greater than the demand.
The strike which recently occurred in the Slocan, Ymir
and other mining divisions has not yet affected Rossland.
Whatever may be the fixed policy of the future here, at present the feeling seems to be one of reluctance to disturb the
status quo. The mine managers evidently prefer to have no
disagreement at present at least, and since there is no strike,
it may be taken for granted that the demands of the miners
are being complied with, otherwise the union would certainly
place itself on record.
Subjoined is a brief report from the various working properties : Le Roi, average shipments, 9 cars daily, 32 tons each,
288 tons ; War Eagle, 8 cars daily. 20 tons each, 160 tons;
Center Star, 3 cars daily, 20 tons each, 60 tons ; Iron Mask, 1
car daily, 20 tons.
The shipments made by the Evening Star and the Deer
Park have not been constant or of a commercial character as
may be inferred from the quantity.
Iron Horse.—The shaft is 300 feet deep. Work continues in
the north and southeast drifts at the 300 foot levels. A quantity of low grade ore has been encountered. The southeast
drift is being continued in the direction of the old workings
where the surface showing is the best of any on the claim.
The fact that the management is drifting towards these workings is criticised, and why they were abandoned, now that
they are being drifted towards, has not been explained by the
present management.
Mascot.—The management is cross-cutting from one tunnel
to another.
Sunset No. 2.—Shaft No. 1 is down 460 feet. No. 3 is down
70 feet.    About 25 men are employed on the property.
East Le Roi (Old Nickel Plate).—Work was commenced on
the new hoist, which is about 400 feet northwest of the old
workings. It is the intention to connect this shaft with the
old workings at the 200-foot level. No shipping ore has yet
been found.
East Le Roi—Great Western.—Operations on the property
continue to be suspended.
Deer Park.—Drifting north and south continues without
material results.
White Bear.—The management is placing skids in the shaft
down to the 250-foot level.    Drifting is about to commence.
Iron Mask.—Work has commenced on the projected improvements.
Burnt Basin.—This district lies 8 miles west of Long Lake,
and about 18 miles west of Rossland. It is in the extreme
eastern portion of the Kootenay River, about 13 miles north
of the International Boundary. The Columbia and Western
extension of the Canadian Pacific Railway runs directly
through the district. It is expected that the passenger service
will be in operation by the 1st of July. The district was first
explored four years ago by A. P. Hunter and J. W. Henderson,
who made the first location. Very little interest has been
taken in this division until the present year. There' are at
present several strong joint stock companies operating in this
section : The Mother Lode, the Avon Gold Mining Co., and
the St. George Mines Development Company, of Toronto. A
number of properties are being developed. The country rock
consists principally of a gold bearing quartz. There are a
number of ledges which are remarkable for their size. This
section is becoming better known every day.
Mother Lode Mines, Limited.—This compauy is operating
the Ajax and Daly mineral claims.
Burnt Basin.—The capital stock is $100,000, divided into
1,000,000 shares at the par value of 10 cents per share. Considerable surface work has been done on these claims, disclosing some strong leads. The contact is composed of quartz and
pophyry, and assays as high as 17.19 ounces to the ton. The
average assays give 3.26 ounces of gold and 2.32 ounces of
silver. Wood and water are plentiful on these claims. A
brick house and dwelling house for the superintendent have34
THE MINING RECORD.
recently been erected. A shaft has been sunk on the main
lead. R. H. H. Alexander is superintendent. The property
has been experted and formally reported on. There are
ample funds in the treasury for development work. The property is about to be crown granted. The shares of this company are selling at par.
White Bear Consolidated Mining Co.—Operations have been
resumed in this mine. Sinking has begun at the 200-foot
level, and will be continned until the 400-foot level is reached.
Mr. J. J. Warren, of Toronto, and Mr. John Y. Cole, of Rossland, who are promoters of the White Bear mine, recently
purchased some mining property on the Pend O'Reille about
15 miles from Waneta. The character of the mineral is free
milling, and it is the intention of the owners to install a 10-
stamp mill. The property is being developed by a tunnel
which will run in 350 feet. The lead is 5 feet wide, and averages about $10 to the ton. Mr. Warren has gone east to purchase the necessary plant for running the mine, which has
been named the Bunker Hill.
CARIBOO  CREEK.
tFrom a Correspondent.)
The town of Burton is situated on the east bank of the
Columbia, forty miles north of Brooklyn and twenty-five south
of Nakusp. The site has a splendid situation and commands
four large creeks, all of which enter the Columbia via Cariboo
creek at Burton, these being Goat Canyon, Snow, Trout and
Cariboo creeks. Here we have very well defined ledges, and
old timers say that the neighbourhood is remarkable for the
quantity of float to be found.
On Cariboo creek the Milly Mac group of claims has been
worked by Mr. C. C. Woodhouse, of Rossland, and now controlled by the B. A. C., through Mr. Mackintosh and Gen.
Warren, and the fact that this big corporation has become interested in the camp may be regarded as a promising sign.
Messrs. P. Bums and W. Mackenzie own the promising
Chieftain group, the ore of which has assayed as high as 8,000
ozs. per ton, though smelter returns gave but $338.00 per ton
for the first shipment made.
The Golden Hope group, managed by Messrs. Finch & McMillan, in which the Hon. G. E. Foster is interested, as also
in the.Silver Queen properties on Snow creek, are mines—for
they can now be described as such—in which great faith is
placed by the management, as is evidenced by the expenditure
of $30,000 for machinery and equipment.
The Con. Cariboo Co., of Vancouver, own a very promising
property that compares well with any property for the amount
of development performed thereon. Then the Silver Beaze on
Upper Cariboo creek has a magnificent showing right from
the grass roots and the owner will receive a handsome sum for
the claim when the pending sale, negotiated by Mr. R. S. Burton to a Glasgow company, is consummated, the price being
$40,000.
Excellent rawhide trails to all the mines and waggon roads
up both Snow and Cariboo creeks enable owners of properties
to escape excessive charges for transportation. Meanwhile a
good season is expected, and judging by the many prospectors
now arriving, it means that Cariboo creek is attracting both
capital and the trail blazer.
NELSON.
(From Our Own Correspondent).
This has not been a particularly lively month at Nelson,
three properties, the Athabasca, Granite and Royal Canadian
being compelled to close down in consequence of the eight •
hour law difficulty. Development work is proceeding steadily,
however, at the Fern and one or two other mines. At the
Fern a new compressor has been installed, and is now working in a satisfactory manner. Excavations for the new stamp
mill to be erected on the Granite have been commenced, and
lumber for the flume, through which water will be supplied
for motion power has been delivered on the ground. Arrangements, it is understood, have been made for the resumption of
work on the Nelson Poorman, and following the plan already
set by the Hall Mines Co., and about to be adopted at the
Athabasca mine, will be carried on upon the contract system
chiefly. The Hall Mines are now making regular shipments
of lead-silver bullion to the Balbach Works at Newark, New
Jersey.
SLOCAN.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
The anticipated deadlock between the representatives of
capital and labour—a result of the sadly misdirected efforts of
the Local Legislature in the way of reform— has materialised,
and as aconsequence we are nowdependingona fewinsignificant
prospects to uphold the reputation of Canada's richest silver
belt,    To speak of the loss which has already been occasioned
to the mining industry and the Slocan is indeed a painful
matter; but when we contemplate the enormous damage
which will inevitably be inflicted unless a speedy settlement
is come to, words fail to express our consternation.
At present the whole of the producing mines are lying
absolutely idle, so far as underground work is concerned; and,
more than that, the miners have practically all left for other
parts. It should be remembered that the burden of the strike
falls heavier, in many instances, on the business people of the
community than on those more nearly affected, as they are
frequently in a position from which it is impossible to recede
without incurring a heavy loss.
No overtures appear to have been made from either party
having in view a termination of the existing state of affairs,
and it is almost impossible to conjecture when a satisfactory
agreement will be arrived at. The union apparently has no
desire to compromise, lor when the Slocan Star offered $3.25
per shift of eight hours it was peremptorily declined, and the
men called upon to cease work.
Notwithstanding the enormous mineral wealth of the
Slocan, the idea of prospecting appears to have gone quite out
of date. It was commonly imagined that a large number of
the miners would stay in the country until matters were
settled, employing their time to advantage in the interval by
prospecting and developing their claims. Judging by what
has since taken place this was merely a popular fallacy, for
either the majority of them were not claim-holders, or else
they lacked the necessary confidence in the future of the dis^
trict to stimulate them in their search. It is quite inconceivable that the vast tract of mineral territory which is readily
accessible from lake points does not induce more people to
tempt their fortune in the mountains. The fact of the matter
is, an indescribable charm and attraction appears to exist
about everything new, whether it refers to an article or a
locality, and the out-of-the-way places, where nothing of value
has ever yet been discovered, seem to exert an influence which
is not felt in more settled regions. It is true that the larger
part of the ground in the Slocan is already staked ; but where
are the owners, and what are they doing ? They surely don't
expect prospects to develop into mines of their own accord;
but discussion on this point is mufh belated and unprofitable
at this stage, so we must perforce leave the matter where so
many others have left it—without a satisfactory solution.
As was only to be expected under the circumstances, ore
movements have been restricted, and will cease entirely ere
long. The Payne and Slocan Star were the only shippers last
week, totalling 210 tons between them, but even this consisted of ore mined previous to the strike.
The work in connection with the concentrating plant at the
Ruth is being speedily pushed to completion, and at the
Wakefield on Four Mile it is probable that an aerial tramway
will soon be in operation, surveys and preliminary estimates
having already been prepared. The new and commodious
bunk house to be erected at the Payne, admittedly the finest
in the Slocan, is now under construction, and will greatly,
increase the comfort of the men when work is resumed. A
long dormant property, the Enterprise on Ten-Mile, has
recently taken a new lease of life. Since its purchase by the
London & British Columbia Gold Fields the surplus ore lying
around the wharf to the tune of 460 tons, has been gathered up
and sent to the smelter, and preparations are now being made
on a scale which looks like business. In view of the eminently successful flotation in London the other day, there is
hardly room for disappointment this time.
The difficulty arising over a misunderstanding with regard
to the new law requiring all miners' licenses to expire on the
one date, caused considerable annoyance and loss of temper as
well as money at the government office here. Those who
declined to take out a fresh license until their old one was
rendered non-effective are now congratulating themselves on
their astuteness.
The appropriation for roads and trails in the Slocan is
ludicrously inadequate as usual, in spite of the fact that we
returned a government member in place of an opposition one
as formerly, but then I suppose it is the best we can get, so
what's the use of complaining.
Our hopes and aspirations have been given a rude set-back
by the present labour difficulties. The chances for a busy and
prosperous season were originally of the brightest; the mines
were one and all looking well, and as a natural consequence
outside improvements were everywhere being rapidly proceeded with. The number of important deals on the tapis
were literally too numerous to mention, but almost all have
been checked, and the prospects of many permanently ruined
by the unfortunate turn affairs have taken ; yet despite the
fall in the price of silver, the increased duty on lead, the
obnoxious mineral tax, the Klondike boom, the counter at-THE MINING RECORD.
35
tractions at Rossland and Boundary, where only the fashionable metals are met with, and now most cruel cut of all, the
eight-hour law, who would not remain a proud though indigent
citizen of the silvery Slocan ?
NORTH   EAST KOOTENAY.
(From Our Own Correspondent).
The opening of spring and the boom in copper have brought
brighter prospects to this district than have been experienced
for some years. Outfitting for the reported gold strike at Tete
Jaune Cache has been going on actively at Golden, and the
beginning of the month saw some fifty men and a hundred
packhorses leaving Golden for Tete Jaune Cache. One fatality
is reported en route on the Columbia River, a prospector
named Machet having beenjlrowned by the upsetting of his
boat in the rapids north of Kinbasket Lake.
On Porcupine Creek, above Beaver, the British Columbia
Alliance have bonded a promising group of gold-copperclaims,
and are waiting for the snow to go to start work. The company have also had prospectors at work under the direction of
Mr. Graves, M. E., locating the old bed of the stream, which
contains good placer prospects, and success has so far attended
these efforts that four claims have been recorded there with a
view to introducing a hydraulic plant.
The French Creek Company, who recently took up some
ground at Surprise Rapids, on the Columbia River, about forty
miles north of Golden, have announced their intention of
prosecuting active prospecting work on their property this
season.
The holders of the bond on the Bluewater claims also intend
to carry on development work, and are now making arrangements to that end.
The Certainty Company, which has been organised in
Quebec, with a capital of $1,500,000, have taken over two
promising copper properties within ten miles of Golden,
namely, the Certainty Group on Fifteen-Mile Creek, and the
Porphyry and Iron Hill group on Canyon Creek, and instruc -
tions have been sent to Mr. E. A. Haggen, on whose reports
these properties were acquired, to put in hand development
work forthwith, ample rands having been provided for the
purpose of fully proving up these properties,
Mr. H. Croft, of Victoria, has also announced his intention
of pushing on development on the properties which he recently
acquired at SpiUimachene on behalf of the company which he
represents. On the Burns Basin extensive development operations have been commenced on the Lucky Jack group.
Mr. W. G. Mitchell-Innes, manager of the Golden British
Columbia Company, is developing a property on McKay's
Gulch on Toby Creek, in the Windermere district, on which
an extensive strike of copper ore has been made; and work is
to be resumed with the disappearance of snow on the Pretty
Girl, on Horsethief Creek, and the company's engineer will
shortly arrive from England to fully advise as to future operations on these properties.
The Swansea has about 500 tons of ore on the dump, and the
north shaft is looking well, a fine body of grey copper ore
having been opened up. The lead on this property is 20 feet
in width, and is mineralised throughout. The Derby Company, of Rossland, are the new owners of this promising mine.
Development work is being pushed on at the Dolphine on
Toby Creek. This high grade silver-lead proposition is probably the best developed mine in the Windermere district
to-day.
Mr. Farrell, a mining engineer from San Francisco, has
arrived to put in hand development work on the Red Line
group on Horsethief Creek, but is delayed on account of the
late spring and the quantity of snow still remaining at the
higher altitudes.
PUBLICATIONS.
MANUAL of Assaying—Gold, Silver, Lead and Copper—by
Walter Lee Brown (Eighth Edition), E. H. Sargent 8t
Co., Chicago, 111.
All who are interested in assaying will welcome a new edition of this Standard Manual.
The first edition was published in 1883, and since that time
there has been a steady demand for the book. Seven editions
have been sold, which may be taken as a fair index of the estimate placed upon the book by assayers and students of assaying. This Manual is especially intended as a guide to those
without previous technical or scientific training.
At the same time it contains standard methods in use by
assayers the world over, and nothing of importance has been
omitted.
Very complete information is given with regard to the apparatus used in assaying, reagents, methods of testing reagents
to ascertain their purity, gold and silver ores, copper ores, lead
ores.
There are also special methods of assaying various minerals,
amalgamation assay and pan test for gold.
The chlorination assay and the assay of gold and silver bullion are thoroughly explained, as well as the determination of
specific gravity of minerals.
To make the book more complete a list is added of the principal gold, silver and copper minerals found in the United
States. There is also appended a list of standard books on
subjects more or less connected with assaying, and some useful tables. Altogether this little volume forms one of the most
satisfactory hand books available for assayers and students 01
assaying.
Chemical and Metallurgical Hand Book—Tables, Formulars
and other information—by Cremer & Bicknell, Cleveland,
Ohio.
Persons engaged in technical work are constantly required
to make calculations relating to matters connected with the
practice of their profession. The data for such calculations
are not always available, and the particular mission of the
volume before us is to furnish in concise form a great deal of
information relating to such points. Much care appears to
have been exercised in the preparation of the various tables
contained in this book, and every effort has been made to
secure accuracy in every detail. Among the most useful tables
in the volume are those showing molecular weight, specific
gravity, melting point, boiling point and solubility of the
principal organic compounds.
Other useful tables to the chemist are those giving the percentage of each element entering into the composition of a
large number of inorganic substances.
There are also alcohol tables, giving percentage by measure
and weight of solutions containing alcohol.
The determination of percentage, composition of acids and
alkalies by specific gravity is given, as well as tables for con
verting degrees  of  temperature from fahrenheit into centigrade.
A valuable feature of the book is a glossary—of technical
words and phrases—with their equivalents in French and
German.
Altogether this work forms a most useful hand book for
chemists and others who are more or less connected with
metallurgical   operations.    The  binding and printing is re-
CORRESPONDENCE.
The Editor does not hold himself responsible for the
opinions which may be expressed in this column. No
notice will be taken of communications tcnless accompanied by the full name and address of the xcriter.
THE SPOKANE INDUSTRIAL EXPOSITION.
rO THE EDITOR :—The annual Spokane Fruit Fair has
been merged into an event of broader scope than heretofore, and this, its sixth year, is to be known as the Spokane
Industrial Exposition, with mining as its most prominent
feature. Extensive exhibits are expected from all the camps
of this State and those sections of British Columbia, Idaho,
Montana and Oregon heretofore represented, with the addition
of all other camps available.
Additional features are to be added in the exposition of mining machinery, and awards will be made on the merits of the
exhibits, upon the recommendation of a competent jury.
A special excursion of mining investors from Eastern cities
is to be undertaken. From the present outlook it is expected
that such excursion will be made and that several hundred
Eastern people will participate.
The American Institute of Mining Engineers will hold their
annual convention in San Francisco in October and negotiations are already started to induce those from the East to return via Spokane, where they can stop over for a few days,
and, after examining the exhibits in the Exposition, visit some
of the outlying camps. This organization is composed of the
leading mining men and engineers of this country, and will
probably number three hundred in attendance.
Parties have been selected in nearly all the mining camps,
who are urged to see that creditable exhibits are made from
their sections.
Every effort will be bent to make this the greatest mineral
exhibition ever shown in this country ; it only remains for
Ji36
THE MINING RECORD.
those who are chosen to represent the camps to make it such.
Ample time is provided in which to do the work, and the
opportunity is one which should not be overlooked.
In addition to the usual collection of mineral, it is hoped to
have special collections, private cabinets, and manufactured
products as well.
Great pains should also be taken to have the fullest information at hand so that intending buyers may have additional
data on which to form an opinion of the property which the
exhibit represents.
If any camps have been omitted it is an oversight which the
committee desires to have corrected, and they respectfully
urge that they be notified of the error promptly, to the end
that it may be remedied.
Exhibits must positively be installed before the opening of
the Exposition, and ample time is therefore provided for the
collection of the exhibits and the preparation of data thereon.
Freight rates and instructions for shipping will be announced
later.
L. K. ARMSTRONG,
Secretary Mineral Division Spokane Industrial Exposition,
Spokane, Wash.
T
THE EIGHT-HOUR QUESTION.
^O THE EDITOR :—The people in these progressive times
must be prepared to give up many pet prejudices. It
does not always follow that that to which we have become
accustomed is necessarily right because it has prevailed.
This is a very progressive age, and we frequently see some of
the stoutest opponents of a proposed measure finally giving
way, though sometimes reluctantly to the overwhelming testimony which enforces belief. This is particularly emphasised
in labour problems, and if we read the signs of the times
aright we cannot help seeing that boards of arbitration and
boards of conciliation in questions arising out of labour and
capital may be satisfactorily adjusted by such tribunals. The
only difficulty that presents itself is how shall these boards be
constituted.
Meanwhile, the latest phase of the labour situation in the
interior is that the mine owners and the union are arriving at a
better understanding as to their mutual obligations. It is
clear that the mine owners prefer to make concessions, rather
than see the lock-out continue indefinitely. One of the most
agreeable incidents connected with the strike in the Slocan is
recorded by the Slocan Star. The men had struck in accordance with the demands of the union, when it was found that
there were some dangerous places in the mine which needed
immediate attention. Acting under instructions of the union
a small force of union men, presumably at the old rate of
wages went to work and made the mine safe, though there was
at the time supposed to be a lock-out. This regard for the
safety of an old friend that has paid out hundreds of thousands
of dollars to miners is like a silver lining to the cloud which
has been hanging over this industry. It shows that beyond
the question of a certain wage rate there are no animosities.
The episode speaks well for tne union, and hence there
should be an easy way out of the present difficulties where
there is otherwise so friendly a feeling as this incident
testifies. H. F. E.
Rossland, B. C.
PRODUCING MINES.
ROSSLAND.
During the month of May, 8,670 tons of ore valued at $241,-
560 were exported from Rossland.
Our Rossland correspondent telegraphs: The total ore
shipments of the Rossland mines for the year ending June 30th,
amount to 64,000 tons, to which June contributed 13,800 tons.
Though railway facilities are now complete, owing to recent
Occidents and other causes, ore shipments have not reached
the volume predicted, but next month's weekly output will be
increased commensurate with additional facilities. One important feature worthy of note in connection with the output
is that the Centre Star mine in gradually taking leading place
among shippers.
The Le Roi returns from March 1st to May 15th—75 days-
show 23,420 net tons shipped, yielding 14,400 ounces gold,
26,000 ounces silver, 888,000 pounds of copper, total value
$412,000; average production per day 312 tons, worth $5,500.
CARIBOO.
A consignment of gold dust from the Horsefly Gold Mining
Co.'s property, of the approximate value of $10,000, was sent
down to Ashcroft this month.
NELSON.
We are indebted to the general manager of the Hall Mines,
Ltd., for the following results of the Company's smelting
operations for four weeks ending June 2nd, 1899 j There were
1,792 tonsof Silver King and 1,173 tons of custom ores smelted,
yielding (approximately) 26 tons of copper, containing 26,930
ozs silver, 278 tons of lead bullion, containing 366 tons of lead,
75,870 ozs. silver, 578 ozs. of gold. -
The following are the mine exports passing through the port
of Nelson for the month of May. :
Value.
Coke, 270 tons $   i>3T4
Lead bullion     87,669
Copper bullion       33.782
Gold bullion -     20,860
Total $143,625
The returns from  the Athabasca mine at Nelson are as
follows:
Tons crushed  4°4
Value of bullion recovered $ 8,938.13
Gross value of concentrates     2,131.11
Total value recovered $11,069.24
Value per ton in bullion $      22.12 .
Value per ton in concentrates   5 27
Total value per ton $       27.39'
THE  SLOCAN,   MAY.
The following returns of 'exports are made from Kaslo for
May:
Gross pounds ore exported   3.901,630
Pounds lead   1,734,053
Ouncessilver       !96>755
Value $   169,087
From the subport of Nakusp the following is reported :
Gross pounds ore       302,930
Pounds lead, contents        98,891
Ouncessilver         15,229
Value $     13,293
SLOCAN,  JUNE.
The production of the Sandon mines to the 23rd of June is as
follows:
Tons.
rayne
Slocan Star
Last Chance
140
380
Total      585
WHITEWATER TO JUNE 23RD,
Tons.
Whitewater mine 197/^
The production of the Slocan Lake mines to the 24th June
aggregates 2,083 tons, and the total production from the
Slocan, 15,058 tons.
COAL SHIPMENTS.
TOTAL FOREIGN  SHIPMENTS FOR  MAY.
Tons.
The New Vancouver Coal Co 47,021
Wellington 26,024
Union  4,11°
Total 77jI63
JUNE SHIPMENTS.
The New Vancouver Coal Mining & Land Co., Limited,
shipments are:
Date. Vessel.                          Destination.                     Tons.
1—SS. San Mateo Port Los Angeles  4,298
8—SS. Siam  San Francisco	
9—SS. Amur Alaska	
13—SS. Titania San Francisco	
14—SS. Mineola Port Los Angeles...
19—SS. San Mateo San Francisco	
Total 21,851
The production of coal from the Fernie colleries for the
month was 10,000 t ins. The East Kootenay monthly output
is steadily increasing, and it is expected that when the new
coke ovens are completed the production will reach 700 tons a
day.
4,378
145
5. "9
3,46o
4.451THE MINING RECORD.
37
THE METAL MARKET—JUNE.
[Compiled from special telegraphic quotations to the B C
Mining Record from the Engineering & Mining Journal
New York]
The market has shown evidence of depression this month,
and prices have somewhat declined. The closing down of the
Colorada smelters, as a result of the enforcement of the eight-
hour law in that State may have the effect, however, provided
the struggle between capital and labour is sustained for any
length of time, of stiffening the price of both silver and lead.
SILVER.
Silver has been very dull this month, though there has been
little fluctuation in prices, which have ranged between 6o^
and 6o^i£.
LEAD.
The labour troubles in Colorada will necessarily interfere
with production, and as consumers are not well supplied an
active market seems probable. The New York price during
the month remained stationary at 4.42^, and our telegraphic
report to-day (June 27th), shows that no change has taken
place. Slowly rising prices are reported from St. Louis, the
latest sales being on a basis of $4.32^ to $4.35. The average
price of lead last month was $4.44.
SPELTER.
Decidedly lower prices have prevailed this month, our latest
quotations being $5.95 and $5.85. The average price last
month was $6.88.
COPPER.
The copper market continues quiet, and buyers do not
appear anxious to purchase ahead at the prices now ruling.
Again no pressure to sell is observable, and few transactions
are reported. Lake copper has fallen slightly from 18 to 17%,
the present price. Electrolytic remains from at i6#j, 15J6 for
cathodes, while casting copper is quite nominal at 163*4 to
i6#.
COAST MINES.
The output of the Dorotha Morton Mine for the month ending 31st May, was : Bullion, 2,537 °zs-; assay value, $13,130;
and made up as follows :
Value.
590 ozs. fine gold value (gold)  $12,199
1,526  "    (silver)  931
The mill ran 20 days, 5 hous and 48 minutes.
Tons crushed    i,395
Tons per stamp per day  6.8
Tons treated by cyanide     t>435
Calculated extraction 89.3 gold aud 80 per cent, silver.
The returns published each month have the assay value of
bullion, but the actual value as per smelter returns are as follows, commencing from the first return:
December  $ 3.3°3
January  6,231
February  8.i2o
March. 7.  7.864
April  9.536
May (assay value)  12,130
THE STOCK MARKET.
THE closing down of many of the Slocan mines, in consequence of the eight-hour law, has had a most
depressing influence on the market, and all dealing in
Slocan stocks has practically ceased. At the end of May
Payne was selling at $3.90, but since the mine closed down
the stock has changed hands as low as $3.10. As, however,
it is proposed-to pay dividends out of the surplus on hand
until such time as operations are resumed, the stock hits
rallied to $3.45 asked and $3.39 bid in Montreal. Since our
last report Dardanelles has fallen from 15 to 13, Noble Five
from 30 to 26 asked and only 22 bid, Rambler-Cariboo has
declined from 36 to 31, and Wonderful to 6 asked and 4 bid.
In the Nelso District Athabasca has held its own at 40 to
42, whilst Dundee has fallen to 24, and Nelson Poorman
from 25 to 16, though quoted to-day (June 29th) at 20, Fern
has fallen from 50 to 35.
In the Trail Creek District Big Three has.declined from
27 to 20, Deer Park from 6 to 4, Iron Horse from 16 to 14,
Iron Colt from 13 to 12, Jumbo from 40 to 25, Monte Cristo
from 12 to 8)4, War Eagle from $3.80 to |3.65. Whilst the
following have advanced: Iron Mask from 66 to 70, St.
Elmo to 8 and Homestake to 6. The best sellers have been
Evening Star, Homestake, Iron Mask, St. Elmo, Virginia,
White Bear and War Eagle.
Texada Island—Van Anda shares have been very active,
and have advanced from 7 to 10 since our last report, and
the large shareholders expect these shares to go much
higher. The smelter is expected to be in operation by the
15th of July, and before that time all the cheap parcels will
be bought up so far as the Coast market is concerned.
Vancouver Island shares have- been inactive for some
time, but the Alberni Consolidated mill is again running,
and if the results prove satisfactory to those who have the
option on the mine a sale may be the result.
Cariboo District—The Cariboo Hydraulic is held firm,
$1.45 asked and $1.40 bid.   A clean-up is expected shortly.
Fairview Camp—Fairview Corporation shares have been
selling at from 8% to 9 and Smuggler at 3.
Lillooet District—A few enquiries have been made for
Golden Cache shares at from 2 to 3.
Boundary Creek—Shares have been in good demand,
principally Winnipeg, at 32 to 33, Rathmullen at 7 to 8, and
Morrison at 16 to 17. Knob Hill and Old Ironsides are held
very firm in Montreal at 98 and $1.15 respectively.
Camp McKinney—The Cariboo has fallen from $1.40 to
$1.25, Waterloo from 11 to 9; Fontenoy is held firm, with
only a few small holders offering, at 17j^ to 19. Excellent
reports come from the Fontenoy, and this is expected to be
one of the big mines of Camp McKinney. All Fontenoy
shares offering under 17 cents were recently bought up
in Victoria, where the stock is principally held. Sailor
remains firm at from 15 to 16. This Company has recently
bought two more claims, namely, the Rover and the Alice
Fraction, adjoining the Cariboo.
THE ROSSLAND STOCK MARKET.
(Special report and quotations by Messrs. Dickson & Orde.)
'T^HE feature, perhaps, of the past month has been the com-
A pletion of the reorganisation of the St. Elmo Company,
whereby the assets of this concern passed into the control of a
syndicate in which are supposed to be interested some prominent capitalists of New York, it is reported that the New St.
Elmo Gold & Copper Mining Company are prepared to venture,
if necessary, on their property from $75,000 to $100,000. With
reference to other properties in the Rossland district, the Evening Star from all accounts is proving to have some valuable
ore bodies ; whether this be the case or not we do not know,
but in any event the mine is open for the inspection of those
who desire to go in. The management, we understand, purpose making some ore shipments to the smelter. Some considerable interest has also been evinced of late in the Home
stake of the South Belt in this camp ; it is rumored and believed
in to some extent that some nice ore has been met, the management are, however, exceedingly reticent and any reliable
information about the condition of the property is very difficult to obtain. A small force of men are still at work on the
Iron Colt, but it is expected that as soon as Mr. J. F. McRae—
now in Montreal—returns, work will be more vigorously
prosecuted.
Resumption of work on the Alberta is also contemplated,
this property has about fifty-two acres of ground adjoining the
Columbia & Kootenay, and has in the neighbourhood of
fifteen hundred feet of tunnel work.
In the Boundary Creek district Rathmullen and Winnipeg
have been the decided favorites, and in these a large amount
of trading has been done.
The shares that have been dealt in to the largest extent on
our market during the past month, have been Rathmullen,
Winnipeg, Brandon and Golden Crown, Homestake, Okanogan, Tamarac (Pooled), Virginia, Waterloo, Evening Star.
St. Elmo and Rambler Cariboo.
Abe Lincoln	
$     9
11
5
10
11
5
4
3
14
17
25
20
11
Athabasca	
$   52
Brandon & G'n Cr'n...
Cariboo (C. McKinney)
Cariboo Hydraulic	
Cayoosh Creek Mines..
Deer Park	
Eureka Consolidated...
Gertrude 	
Giant	
1 47
1 45
60
25
Goodenough	
Knob Hill	
Iron  Colt	
.     98
*5
20
Jumbo	
Lily  May	
London Hill	
Nelson Poorman	
Old Ironsides	
Reco	
Monte Christo	
80
_'38
THE MINING RECORD.
I
Mugwump	
Novelty	
Poorman	
Rossland Homestake.
Rathmullen	
5 Salmo Consolidated....      20
5 Smuggler        3
13 Slocan Star  1 15
5 Sable Creek         5
9 Tamarac (pooled)       15
E. A. HAGGEN,     -   -    GOLDEN,  B.C.
Broker and Mining Agent.
Cable address :—"Kanagan," Golden, Bedford, McNeill and
Moreing and Neal codes.
Silver Bell	
St. Elmo	
Victory Triumph
Virginia	
War Eagle	
White Bear	
5
8
11
23
3 75
Tinhorn        6
Two Friends        9
Van Anda       10
Victoria Texada       10
Waterloo       11
Winnipeg       34
ERRATA.
Tn the article which appeared in our last month's issue,
under the heading of the Mines of Boundary Creek, the value
of the ore in the pay chute of the Last Chance mine is given
as assaying $1.20 per ton. The decimal point was a typographical error, the value of the ore being $120 per ton.
j. b.tyrell, ma, b.sc, f.g.s., George   Purgold,
S       Consulting       §
Mining Engineer,
Fifteen years Geologist on the Geological Survey of Canada.
Stock and Share Broker.
Wallace Building,
Columbia Avenue,
Rossland, B.C
P. 0. Box 73.    Cable Address: Purgold.
Itm
I y
Dawson Gity, Yukon, Canada.
Codes : A.B.C, Fourth edition Moreing aud NeaU, Cloughs and Bedford
McNeals.
The Referendum Free Gold Mining and Milling Co'y,
Ad.
NON-PERSONAL LIABILITY.
CAPITAL   STOCK $500,000, in 2,000,000 shares of 25c. each.
Rossland, B.C., May 19, 1899.
We submit to the public as a safe and profitable investment the first issue of 100,000 shares in the Referendum Free Cold Mining
and Milling Company, Limited, non-personal liability, just organlfed and to be registered during the first week of .Inly. The capita] stock ot the Company
will be $500,000 in shares of 25 cents per value.  Of these 800,000 shares are set aside to be sold to develop further the property and operate the mine.
The Company's property is situated on Forty-Nine Creek, about 8 miles from the City of Nelson, B.C., and in the well-known free-gold belt, in which are
also the Athabasca and Poorman mines, which have yielded excellent profits to their owners. Two shafts 86 feet deep have been sunk on one vein, and numerous cuttings have been made, showing the continuity of the ore body for one thousand feet. Assays from ore from these works are as follows : $80, $87,
$246, $36'>, $412. Dr. P. Laughammer, mining engineer, estimates this vein to average $48 in value and 20 inches in width. Thii showing has enabled the
Company to conclude arrangements for a plant to treat the ore, f> be installed before snowfall. Th** gold being free and capable of extraction on the ground
the expensive charge* of transportation and smelting are obviated, and the profit'* will be correspondingly larger than from a base ore of equal assay value.
The Company 1 as thus its property proven and arrangements made to mine profitably from Its Inceptiou and to pay dividends at an early date.
A second quartz vein 6 feet In width, surface ore from which gave assays of $5, crosses the property. Exploratory work on this vein will be commenced
about June 1st. This vein promises to be a valuable one upon development, and arrangements are already made for the enlargement of the reduction plant
to keep pace with the output of ore.
The Referendum Company share offers the following advantages : Ore body of value proven, plant arrang
and ample treasury for further development.
The first Issue of shares Is offered at 6 cents, payable In five equal monthly Instalments.   By statutory pr
personal liability.
Applications for stock, accompanied by remittance of first payment, may be made throngh any cha
I for at once, reduction of ore on the grounds,
rlrfon these shares are sold free from further
1 bank or direct to the u
Igned.
Bankers for the Company
E. N.
Hrok
OUIMETTE A. CO.,
;rs for the Compauy, ROSSLAND
B.C.
The James Robertson Co'y, pin|i
jHP!        VANCOUVER,   B.C.
M a n Ufa Ct U re rS of Lead Pipe, Lead Traps, White Lead, Ready Mixed Paints.Shot Saws, Colors in Oil, Varnishes, Lacquers, &c
i^fe   Jobbers in Wrought Iron Pipe.
METALS.
Malleable and Cast Iron Fittings, Brass Glob
Angle and Check Valves.
WRITE   FOR
PRICES.
Office and  Warehouse, -      151   Hastings St.
Phone 629. VANCOUVER.
Head Office,   Montreal.
BRANCHES,
Toronto,  St. John, Winnipeg,  VANCOUVER.
Portraits!    Buildings!   Scenery!
Fao-similies of Signatures, Letters and Engravings of all kinds for Book and newspaper Printing. Map Engravings from Tracings. Also Reproductions from Photographs, Brush Drawings
and Prints.  Pine Book and Catalogue Illustrations.  Good Work at Low Prices
SPIKE BROS.' COMPANY, TACOMA, WASH.THE MINING RECORD.
The Simplest, Most Economical
and
Most Effective Concentrator
Known.
The Wilfley ©re Concentrator
Syndicate, Limited.
32 OLD JEWRY, E.C. LONDON.
■ ■
Descriptive Catalogue sent post free on application.
TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESSES:—"Wrathless,  London."
FOR SALE.
A.   HENDY   NORBOM
Triumph Ore Concentrator
In  Excellent Condition,  Practically New.
This is well adapted for general concentration of the
various ores of this country.   Apply for particulars to
W. PELLEW-HARVEY,
Vancouver, B.C.
FERGUSSON & CROFTS,
Civil. Mechanical. Mining and Hydraulic   £ nGinGCrS.
Valuations, Arbitrations, Surveys, Reports, Estimates and Specifications.
Agents for ■■«! si^
The San Francisco Bridge Company.
The Risdon Iron Works—The new patents make the Risdou Gold
Dredger the most efficient gold dredger in the world.
The Hallidie Ropeway—The best serial conveyer.
King & Hdmale's Automatic Safety Hook—Over 6,000 in use.
Willtam Cooke & Co's Wire Ropes—For all purposes.
W. T. Garratt's Steam Pomps—The Ltqhtner Quartz Mill, etc.
Existing Plants Inspected.  New Work In Progress Supervised.
Machinery Plants of all kinds supplied and erected.
P. 0. Box 423.
Phone 595.
Mining and Surveying Instruments.
Light Mountain Transits and Transit-Theodolites.
Scott's Mine Tachymeter.
Most improved constructions.    Best workmanship.
Send for list.
P.  &  R.  WITTSTOCK,   Berlin S. 59, GERMANY,
603 Hastings St., Vancouver, B.C.
Beg to call the attention of Mining Engineers, Mine Superintendents and Managers, Machinery Dealers, and all connoted
with the Mining- Industry to
THE    "WILFLEY"   TABLE.
The following strong claims are put forward for the "WILFLET," and will be found more than fully substantiated in
actual working :
1. Simplicity of construction. No expensive wearing parts.
No belt renewals. Nothing to get out of order. Practically no
repairs.
2. Facility of adjustment to all ores treated. Once adjusted
it needs but a minimum of attention.
3. Its wonderful capacity. Will handle three to five times as
much material as any belt table made.
4. Reduction of maintenance charges. No skilled labour required. Reduction in initial outlay, as smaller number of
tables are needed.
5. The pre particles being separated into distinct streaks a
f omplete separation of the different minerals contained is effected.
The " WILFLEY" has only been on the market sorre
eighteen months, yet in that time nearly 800 have been sold,
and are in use' in 200 mines, which speaks volumes for the rapid
and favorable recognition it has been accorded.
the offices of the Syndicate, 32 Old Jewry, London. E.C.
The most flattering Testimonials  have been received.
The "WILFLEY" can be seen in operation by appointment at
Samples of Ore. 50 Ib. to 1 cwt., tested free of charge.
Correspondence Invited.
1 u
Hand and Power
DIAMOND
ROCK
DRILLS	
Mining Machinery
Plans and Specifications ^
SOLE AGENT £
Jones' Hand Rock Drill J
o
Weber Gas and °
Gasoline Engines. 3
P. O. Box 641,
VICTORIA,  B.C.
^-^
Weber Gasoline Hoist.
J. N. S. WILLIAMS,
Engineer.
British Columbia Agency,
Limited,
Assay and Analytical Labratory.
This Department is under the management of J. O'Sullivan, F.C.S. who
possesses a technical knowledge which embraces every detail of this intri-
cai'c profession. He is a chemist of very high order and was for 26 years in
the cnemical laboratories of Messrs. Vician & Sons, Swansea, the world-
famed smelters. This department issues certificates of assays of ore submitted, which are absolutely accurate, and determine the exact value of metals
contained in the ore. 1 he laboratory is replete with all modern machinery
and contrivances, and is in every respeat a model workshop.
VANCOUVER, B.C.
THIS   SPACE   RESERVED   FOR
R. W. GRIGOR,
MINES,   I
R©SSLHND.   B.C.4o
THE MINING RECORb.
Mining Stocks-
Prepared by A. W. Mors & Co., Mining Brokers, Victoria, B.C., June 26,
Company.
TRAIL CREEK.
Alberta	
Big Three	
Bruce	
Butte	
Caledonia Con.
Centre Star	
Commander...
Deer Park 	
Enterprise	
Evening Star...
Georgia	
Gertrude	
(■Jolden Drip...
Gopher	
Hattic Brown..
High Ore	
Homestake.. .
Iron Horse	
Iron Mask	
I.X.L.
American Boy	
Arlington	
Argo	
Athabasca ,
Black Hills	
Buffalo of Slocan ,
■ C h an no	
Dundee	
Dardanelles	
Dellie	
Exchequer	
Fern Gold j
Goodenough 	
Gibson	
Hall Mines	
Lerwick	
Leviathan	
London	
Miller Creek	
Minnesota	
Nelson-Poo rman	
Noble Five Con	
Ottawa and Ivanhoe.
Payne	
Rambler Con	
Reco	
Slocan-Reciprocity..
Slocan Starf	
Santa Marie	
Silver Band	
Slocan Queen	
Star	
St. Kevernc	
Sunshine.	
Tamarac	
Two Friends	
Washington	
Wonderful	
Lardeau Goldsmith	
Consolidated Sable Creek Mining Co.
Lardo-Duncan	
TEXADA ISLAND.
Gold Bar	
Raven 	
Texada Proprietary	
Texada Kirk Lake	
Treasury Mines	
Van Anda.	
Vioto.ria-Texada 	
VANCOUVER ISLAND.
Alberni Mountain Rose	
Consolidated Alberni	
Mineral Creek	
Mineral Hill	
Quadra 	
Capital.    Valaure.   Price.
Iron Colt	
Iron Horse 	
J umbo	
LeRol i
Lilly May	
Mabel	
Mayflower	
Monlta	
Monte Cristo	
Nest Egg-Firefly '«t»f	
Northern Belle	
Novelty .».n"
Palo Alto	
Poorman	
R.E.Lee •	
Red Mountain View	
Rossland, Red Mountain	
8t. Elmo	
SUverlne	
Silver Bell Con	
Victory Triumph	
Virginia	
War Eagle Consolldatedf	
White Bear	
ainsworth, nelson and slocan.
,000,000
500,000
000.000
,000.000
,000,000
300,000
500,000
,000,000
000,000
,000,000'
,000.000
500,000
500,000
,000,000
000,000
500,000
,000,0001
000,000
600,000
000.000,
,000,000
500,00(1
500,000)
,000,000
000,000
000,000'
000,000'
750.000
,500.000,
000,000
000,000
,000.000
,000,000
500,000|
,000,000
,000,000;
,000,000!
,000,000
600,000
500,000
,000,000
00)000
,000,0001
,000,000
1,000
1,000.
100,
1,000
100,
160,1
260
1.000,
1.0 0,
7 K),
1,000,
200,
800,
650
£800.
$1600
2,000
160
l,O0C
1,000
250
1,200,
1,000
8,000,
1,000
1,000
1,000,
600
1,000
250
1.000
1,000,
1,000,
600,
1,000
240
1,000,
1,000:
,000
,000
,000
,000
,000
000
000
,000
000
,000
.00(1
,0001
000
,000
.000
,000
,000
,000
,000
000
,000
000
000
,000
,0001
,000
,000
000
,000
,000
,000
,000
,000
,000
000
,000
,000
,000
200:000
1,500,000
1,600,000
100,0001
1,000,0001
250,000
600,000
260,000
5,000,000
150,000
260,000
600,000
500,000
750,000
600,000
*   04
20
10
02
&>A
10
04
20
WA
06
11
15
03
03
06
05
14
70
10
i4
25 ■
£9
tO 20
15
10
19
08J-S
06
4
4
05
14 '
5
8
11
08
6
I
08
20
8 65
11
6'.;
10
06
24
13
12
12
11
1VA
10
04
25
12^
; 46
31
00
60      I
25
10
1
0 25
1
26
1
0 25
1
1
1
1
1
05
12>a
10
07
04%
16
06
25
06
04
10
05
10
10
25
1 00
25
10
04
0»H
5
05U
05^
06
CARIBOO.
£100,000
55,000,000
800,000
£350,000
$200,000
1,000,000
300,000
600,000
500,000
500,000
600,000
2'0,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
100,000
1,600,000
1,500,000
1500,000
1,500,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
1.000,00
1,000,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
k '"
600,000
1,250,000
1000,000
100,000
1,000,000
(■0,00-)
50,000
50,000
100,000
60,000
1,260,000
1,000,000
100,000
2,000,000
$5
1
£1
$10
1
1
1
1
1
1
25
10
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
10
1
10
10
10
10
1
1
10
1 60
Cariboo M. & D. Co	
25
140
1 50
I.ILL00ET district.
85
Cayoosh Creek Mines	
02
JAIRVIEW  CAMP.
o&4
09
BOUNDARY CHECK.
Boundary Creek M. M. Co	
05
1
25
Knob Hill                     	
96'*
17 J
1 181
16
07j|
08
31
CAMP MCKINNBV.
23
1 25
24
09
O'Shea	
18
02
02
02
02
C3
REVELSTOKE.
15
VRBNON DIVISION^**
■ * CROW'S NEST PASS.
10 00
Y.Y.T.
W    ■ LAKE BENNETT, B.C.
OPERATING THE ONLY
SawsPlaniiuiMills
At the head of Naviga
To the	
YUKON AND ATLIN GOLD FIELDS!
Builders of.
Boats, Barges and Scows.
Two-thirds of the freight bound for Dawson was carried by
barges constructed by us. You can save from $100 to $150 per
ton by shipping to Bennett, thence by barge, as against through
rates.
We are prepared to furnish all kinds of lumber for construction of Steamers, Barges, or Boats.
We also have the largest and best assorted stock of General Merchandise in the North at
LAKE BENNETT, B.C.
Consisting of Groceries, Provisions, Dry Goods, Furnishing Stoves, Tinware,!
Enamelware, Window Glass, Hardware, etc. Call on or write us before send- j
ing to the Coast for your supplies. Information cheerfully given by apply*!
ing to
Ttie Victoria Yukon Tradinrj 6o., Limited,
Lake Bennett B.6.
Head Office, Victoria. B.C.THE MINING RECORD.
4.1
MISCELLANEOUS.
Colorado Mining Machinery
Is Popular the  World Over.
TH6 Hendrie & Boithoif
me ana supply 60.
are the originators and designers of the most
improved types of
Colorado's Famous Mine and
12 X 12 IDEAL HOIST.
Mill  Equipment.
We make a Specialty of Hoisting flachinery.
All Styles.     All Sizes.       All Duties.
OFFICE AND SALESROOMS: We solicit your correspondence.
1601-1615 Seventeenth St.,     DENVER, COL., U S.A.
ALBION IRON WORKS COMPANY, LTD.
CAPITAL      —      —      —      —      9500,000
ENGINEERS,   IRON   FOUNDERS   AND   BOILER   MAKERS.
MANUFACTURERS  OF MARINE AND LAND ENGINES, BOILERS, ETC.
Fish   Canning    and   Mining    Machinery,   Hydraulic    Giaut    Pipes   and   Sinking   Pumps   for   Mines,   Stoves,   Gkates
French    Ranges,   Etc.,   Etc.
Sole  Agents   in   British Columbia for H. R. Worthington's Steam Pumps, and  Ingersoll   Rock
Drill   Company's   Steam Rock Drills.
NO. i CHATHAM STREET AND 71 STORE STREET, VICTORIA, B.C.
■K-    C»^»-
-P. 0.   DRAWER 12.—*—«■*
Wm. H. BREWER, MINING ENGINEER.
MEM. N. ol ENG-. INST. MINING & MECH. ENG.
and AM. INST., M.E.
P.O. Box 130. 2s! VICTORIA,   B.C.
GWILLIfl & JOHNSON,
(McGill.)
Mining Engineers and Assayers.
Mine Surveys, Draughting, Analyses Labratory, Tests by Chlorination and Cyanide Methods.
Delaney Avenue, -      -      SLOCAN  CITY, B.C.
THE BRITISH COLUMBIA REVIEW
Subscription $2.50 Per Annum.
^L^OOQ^JJNLyESTMEJ>JT,
To Brokers, Mining Engineers,  Owners of Mining Claims,
- Assayers, Journalists and others.
Advertise in the B. C. REVIEW—The Only Representative B.C.
Journal in Europe.
39 Bishopsgate St, within
LONDON, ENG,
PIONEER STEAM GOFFEE18PIGE MILLS,
ESTKBLISHEP    IS68.
Manufacturers of Coffee, Spices, Cocoa, Cream
Tartar, Mustard and Baking Powder.    :    :
STEMLER & EARLE, Pembroke Street
Between Government and Douglas, VICTORIA, B.C.
Electric Lighting & Power.
Write or call on T. Watson for estimates
TEL. 409, on House Lighting or Power Plants.
General Electric Construction, Etc. P.O. BOX 397.
28 Broad Street. Victoria, B.CI
1
1
42
THE MINING RECORD.
MISCELLANEOUS.
ONLY
ROLL  JAW   CRUSHER
Breaks large or when set close, Reduces to Gravel or Sand. Does work
of Breaker and rolls all at one operation. Only Fine Crusher for
Quartz or any Hard  Rock-
Send ior Circular." 1
STURTEVANT MILL CO., boston, mass.
RobtWard&eo.,
Temple Building, VICTORIA, B.C.
Metropolitan Building, Vancouver, B.C
70 Baainghall St., London, E.C,
Ltd.
Commission Merchants and Importers.
Shipping, Insurance and Financial Agents.
Royal Swedish and Norwegian Consulate.   Royal Belgian Consulate.   Royal Danish Consulate.
GENERAL AGENTS for The Royal Insurance Co.   The London & Lancashire Fire Insurance Co.    The Northern Assurance C$i
The Standard Life Assurance Co., The London and Provincial Marine Assurance Co., The Western Assurance Co. (Marine.) The London Assurance
Corporation (Marine).   La Foiicier Caxnpagnle d'Assurances.   Swiss Marine Insurance Companies.   The Ocean Accident and Guarantee Corporation
SOLE AGENTS for Curtis' & Harvey's Sporting and Blasting Powder and " Amberite " (Smokeless Powder.)
CANNERY AGENCIES.—Ewen & Co.—Lion and Bonnie Dundee Brands.   Bon Accord Fishery Co.—Consul and Bon Accord Brands.
Canadian Pacific Packing Co.—Flagship Brand.  West Coast Packing Co.   Currle, McWllliams & Fowler,   Imperial Cannery.
Managers and Agents for
The   British Columbia Corporation,   Limited,
Mortgages, Debentures, Trusts, Estates
Managed and Rents Collected,
Importers of Oilmen's Stores, Tin Plates, Portland Cement, Pig Iron and
General Merchandise.
Managers and Agents for the Moodyville Sawmills.
Charters Effected and  Indents Executed  for every Description of British
and Foreign Merchandise.
Tug Boat Agents.
The Bank of British Columbia.
(Incorporated by Royal Charter, 1862).
CAPITAL (with power to increase)  i £600,000      $2,920,000
RESERVE    £100,000      $    486,666
Head Office—60 Lombard Street, London, England.
AGENTS AND  CORRESPONDENTS:
In Canada—Canadian Bank of Commerce, Merchants' Bank of
Canada, The Molson's Bank, Imperial Bank of Canada, Bank of
Nova Scotia and Union Bank of Canada. In United States—
Canadian Bank of Commerce (Agenoy), New York ; Merchant's
Bank of Canada, New York; Bank of Nova Scotia, Chicago. In
Australia and New Zealand— Bank of Australasia. In
Honolulu—Bishop & Co.
branches:
In British Columbia—Victoria, Vancouver, New Westminster,
Nanaimo, Kamloops, Nelson, Sandon, Rossland..
In the United States—San Francisco and Portland.
CANADIAN - YUKON GOLD     FIELDS
Drafts, Letters of Ore'dit, etc., issued direct on Dawson City.
SAVINGS   BANK   DEPARTM ENT.—Deposits received from $1 upwards, and interest allowed thereon.
Gold Dust purchased and every description of Banking Business transacted.
GEORGE   GILLESPIE, Manager.
SIMON LEISER &Q®.
i^iKWholesale Grocers.
-   VICTORIA,  B.C.
Headquarters for Mining Supplies.m
THE MINING RECORD.
43
BRITISH   COLUMBIA  WHOLESALE   SUPPLY  HOUSES.
Office Furniture
We have in stock or made to order
ROLLER CURTAIN DESKS,
FLAT TOP DESKS.
Office and Library Tables,
Typewriter Tables.
OFFICE   FURNITURE of
EVERY  DESCRIPTION.
Inlaid Linoleums,   Plain  and   Printed    Linoleum,   Cork Carpet.
For anything in House Furnishing write to us.    We are headquarters.
WEILER  BR0S.,
YieTORm, B.e.
L.ENZ <& LEISER, 9 &n yates street.
 IMPORTERS  OF —■
GENERAL   DRY   GOODS.
-MANUFACTURERS   OF-
CLOTHING, SHIRTS AND UNDERWEAR.
A Large Supply of Goods Suitable for trje Kooteoay and KJondirve Trades.
ONLY   WHITE   LABOR  EMPLOYED.
Special attention given to packing Goods for the Klondike Trade and other Mining Camps.
|CALL at E j SAUNDERS & CO..
....HEADQUARTERS     FOR....
^53>«<35>
Klondike Supplies
We put through the Customs the Complete Outfit.     Be sure and get your Price List.    Best Goods; cheapest price.
c        VICTORIA, B.C.
P.O. DRAWER HC
TELEPHONE  28.
39 & 41 Johnson Street,
TURNER,  BEETON & CO.
Victoria, Vancouver, and Nelson, B.C.
 AND AT	
H. C. Beeton & Co., SS Finsbury Circus, London, Eng.
WHOLESALE     •     MERCHANTS.
Drv Goods, Liquors, Cigars, Flour, Btc.       goods indented from all parts
-» m- r- ^vvT,     ai_«_^     x^+^ ...OF THE WORLD...
Manufacturers of Clothing, Etc.
 TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESSES	
"TURNER," Victoria.      "BEETON," London.       "TDRBEET," Vancouver and  Nelson.44
THE MINING RECORD.
PROFESSIONAL   ADVERTISEMENTS.
W. PELLEW-HARVEY, F.C.S.
(Mem. Fed. Inst. M. and M.E.)
Assayer and Mining Engineer.
Established 1890.
The Vancouver Public Ore Testlngand Sampling Works.
Purchaser of COPPER, SILVER, GOLD and LEAD ORES and
MATTE for the following houses whom he represents :
VIVIAN & SONS, Swansea.   ELLIOTT'S METAL CO., LTD.,
Burry Port.    Smelters, Refiners, Desilverizers. And. Manufacturers.   Also agent for the Cassell Gold Extracting Co., Ltd., Glasgow,  (Cyanide process).
WORKS AND OFFICE j
,T-719 Pender Street, - VANCOUVER.
IS BROAD STREET. VieTORIH, B.e.
J.   A.   MACFARLANE,
(Fellow ol the Chemical Society, Loudon, since 1880.)
Mines Examined and Reported On.    Assays Made
with scrupulous personal care.
j2S Pender, opp. Post Office. VANCOUVER,   B.C.
A. H. BROMLY, M. I. Mech. E,
M. In.st. M. E. M. Aheb. I. M. K.
Mining and Consulting Engineer.
Code:—Bedford McNeill.
Eldon Street, P. 0. Box 308,
LONDON, E.C. VANCOUVER, B.C.
liChristopher,London." ("Bromly, Vancouver.")
J. N. S. WILLIAMS,
ENGINEER.
Is prepared to supply and put in working order Mining, Milling
and Metallurgical Machinery by the best makers.
Hand-Power
and
Diamond Rock Drills
Specialty.
Proving of Mineral Claims at Depth  Undertaken.
Contracts taken for tunnelling and shaft sinking.    Steam plants
•   tested by the Indicator adjusted for economical working.
Sole Agent for Jones Hand-Power Rock Drill.
Office No. 14, Board of Trade Building.
P. 0. Box 641.
VICTORIA, B.C.
WM. F- BEST,
ANALYTICAL CHEMIST.
(Heidelberg and Leipzig.)
ASSAYER.
Late Official Analyst for the Province of New Brunswick.
Rooms ao, 30., Board of Trade Building, VICTOR1H, B.e
A. H. HOLDICH,
ANALYTICAL    CHEMIST
and
METALLURGIST.
Royal School of Mines, London.
Seven years at Morfa Works, Swansea.
Seventeen years chief chemist to Wigan Coal & Iron Co.
Late chief chemist Hall Mines Co., Ltd.
Assays and Analyses made on all varities of mineral and
many organic substances.
Special experience In Smalting—both Swansea and American process.
NELSON,  B.C.
HRGHBOLD  &  PEARSON,
MINING   ENGINEERS
ASSAYERS.
Cable Address: Archpsar, Nelson.
Codes: Bedford McNeil A.B.C.
P.O. Box 583,
NELSON,
British Columbia.
Wm.J. Trethewey, E M.
Maurice A. Bucke, M.E.
TRETHEWEY & BUCKE,
MINING ENGINEERS
Fifteen years' experience
Silver  Lead  Mining. . . .
Codes :     Moreing   &   Neal's;    "Bedford-McNeill."
Cable address, "Warrus."
Specialties—Reports,   Mine   Management,   Under- I
ground Plans and Models.
Departments In—Provincial Land Surveying, J. M.
R. Falrbairn, P.L.S;
Assaying—James   Cook, - G.A.C., late   of   Tharsis-,^
Sulphur & Copper Co.
OFFICES >
VANCOUVER, B.6. KASLO, B.e.
HOWARD WEST   mining engineer)
(Associate of Royal School of Mines, London, Eng.)
Five Year's Residence In West Kootenay.
Reports on Slocan Properties!
New Denver, B.C.
Makes a specialty of supplying
reliable Information and
Telegraph Codes used: Bedford McNeill's,
A.B.C. fourth edition and Moreing & Neal's
pnnira (Moreing & Neal
-^uuiiB J Moreing & McCutcheorJ
Bewick, Moreing & Co. -
Hp..   Mining Engineers and Mine Managers
CENTRAL OFFICE—Broad St. House, Loudon, England.
BRANCH OFFICES—Rue du Faubourg, Paris, France;  Perth, Coolgardie, Cue, Lawlers, Western AustraliaI
Auckland, New Zealand;   VA.\COUVER,   B.C.
I 512 Cordova St., VANCOUVER, B.C
Resident Partner In Canada—
J. D KENDALL
Thirty-five years' practical experience in mining.THE MINING RECORD.
45
PROFESSIONAL ADVERTISEMENTS.
SEND  YOUR  ASSAYING   TO THE.
INLAND LABORATORY,
KAMLOOPS, B.C..    ■*
REDMAN & OUTHETT, ""ALLU*V%U%\E&\Vii*s.
Mailed specimens receive our special attention.   Parcels of ore sampled
and treated.
DICKINSON & ORDE
MINING AND STOCK BROKERS.
Correspondence Solicited.
Codes used:    Bedford-McNeill's, A.B.C, Clough's, etc.
Cable address:   "Dickinson."
ROSSLAND, B.C.
John Harris.
B. W Jones.
J©HN HARRIS & Co.
(Irate of Harris, Kennedy & Co., Rossland.)
MINES     AND     STOCKS.
We have agents in all the principal mining camps and can furnish clients
with confidential reports and properties at 1st hand
We have some special bargains in Kepublic and Buffalo Hump.
Members Spokane Stock Exchange.
113 Mill Street,
Spokane,
Cable: "Harrl«" Spokane. p0> Box ?a4 Wash., U.S.A.
In the Heart of the Silver District
IS  PUBLISHED
.The Silvertonian
A weekly  newspaper,  publishing reliable  news  of  the  Slocan
Mining Division.   Reliable and accurate reports from the mines,
the  ore  shipments  and  values,  and  authentic  news from  the
prospects under development.
Subscription Prices.—To addresses in Canada and the XTnited
States, $2.00 per year. To addresses in Great Britain, $2.50 per
year.    All subscriptions payable in advanc e.
MATHESON BROS.,
Publishers,
Silverton, B.C.
F. W. GROVES.
CIVIL and MINING ENGINEER,
PROVINCIAL LHND SURVEYOR.
Mineral Claims Crown Granted and reported upon.
Bank of British North America Bldg., GREENWOOD, B. C.
Codes: Clough's
Bedford McNeil.
W. A. BAUER,
Provincial  - Land  -   Surveyor.
Surveys of Mineral Claims and Crown Lands.
HEAD OFFICE :
6m HASTINGS STREET, <*^VANCOUVER,   B.C.
A. W. MORE & CO.   *
MINING and STOCK BROKERS.
Codes used:    Bedford-McNeill's, Moreing &
Neal's, Clough's, and A.B.C, Fourth Edition.
86 Government Street, VICTORIA, B.C.
PEMBERTON St SON
7UTINING    BROK6RS,
Real Estate, Financial and Insurance Agents.    Mining Properties for sale.    Agents
for the Townsite of Alberni.    Farming Lands for sale in all parts of the Province.
FORT STREET,
Victoria, B.C.
HENRY NICHOLSON,
NOTARY PUBLIC, MINING AGENT,
MINING NEGOTIATIONS TRANSACTED.
OFF-ICE:   CAMP McKINNEY, B.C.
N B.—Some valuable mining properties in Camp McKinney and vicinity for
disposal.   Correspondence soliclt«,d.
B. C. POTTERY CO., limited
VICTORIA, B.C.
Manufacturers of . . .
Fire Bricks, Pressed Bricks, Sewer Pipe and
Fittings, Chimney Pipe, Flower Pots, etc.
Cable address:
"Cortez," Vancouver.
Codes : BrownhalPs.
Moreing & Neill.
ONLY FIRST-CLASS PROPERTIES HANDLED
MINES BOUGHT AND SOLD
For authentic and thorough information, call or address :
J. M. MACKINNON, Mackinnon Building, Granville Street, VANCOUVER, B.C.
jS46
THE MINING RECORD.
MISeELL»NEODS, PUBLICATIONS, &C
CHARLES    F.     CUNO,
ASSAYER and CHEMIST.
Gold, silver, lead, 75 cents ; any two $1.00 ; all three
$1.25. Copper, $1.00: Znlc, $1.50; Iron, Manganese, Silica, $2.00
each, all three $5.00. Prices on other chemical work furn-
lSHeu on application. Amalgamation, cyanide, chlorinatijn
tests, $5.00 each. Contracts for Ore made with smelters and
sampling of same attended to. The only perfect Concentrator on exhibition.    Write us.
1732 Champa St., P.O. Box 784, DENVER, Colo.
RELIABLE ASSAYS.
Gold $ 60
Silver     40
Gold and silver      75
Lead ..      50
Copper  $1.00
Gold, silver and lead 1.25
Gold, silver copp°r  1.60
Gold, silver, copper, lead  2.00
Highest price paid for
ogben assay eo.. I429'i6th St., Denver, eoio.
Samples hy mall receive prompt attention'.*
Bullion.
To Bring your Business Before
English Financiers, Brokers, Etc.,
©
You Must Advertise
in the LONDON PRESS.
You will save time and money if before doing so you consult C. J. WALKER,
The Canadian Advertising Press and General Agents,
24 Coleman St., London, H.C., England.
Lowest office rates.    Estimates and advice free.    Write   for
"C. J. Walker's Guide to the Press."   Letters can be addressed-^
care C. J. Walker, to await arrival in London.    Introductions
arranged.    Commissions of all kinds executed.    Highest references.     Cut this out and stick it in your diary for reference.
B
ADMINTON
HOTEL....
Late Manor House.
W. H. MAWDSL3Y,  - Manager.
VANCOUVER, B.C.
Corner Howe and Dunsmuir Sts.
Tel. 22a. P.O.  Box 373.
The Recognized Headquarters
for Mining Men.
Re - furnished, re-decorated and
under new management.    The
best cuisine on the Coast.
N.B.—The Manager will be glad
1   I   to receive ore specimens for the
—'   Hotel collection.
F. J. L. TYTLER,
CONSULTING ENGINEER,
Notary Public in and for B. C., Commissioner of Oaths.
Office, 23 Mackinnon Block, Granville St., VanrnttV^r
P.O. Box3p. Telephone 750. ABC Code.   TdllWUYBii
Student of Glasgow University.'  '
Pupil of Messrs. Hawkes Crawshay, Gateshead-on-Tyne.
Late Civil Engineer, Oude & Rohilknnd Bros., India.
Late Civil Engineer, Department of Public Works, India.
Late Manager Slrmoor Iron Works.
Late Inspector of Dykes, British Columbia.
For several years Consulting Engineer to the Government of B. C.
All business with mines transacted, reports made, assays supplied. Plans
estimates and specifications for general engineering purposes made and
works managed and supervised.
Hints on Amalgamation and the General Care of Gold Mills.
By J. W. ADAMS—Illustrated.
A Practical Book for Practical Men.   Should be In the hands of
every mining man  and   metallurgist.
All previous works on gold metallurgy have devoted most attention to the theories, mechanics, chemists and history of gold
milling. This book tells what to do and how to do it. It is not
based on laboratory tests, but on the Practical Results obtained
by the author in an experience of Over Twenty Years, and tells
how best to employ that which is already for use, not in any one
locality, but all over the world.
The articles from which this book is compiled first appeared in our columns, where they secured widespread Interest. We have undertaken1 its
publication at the suggestion of prominent men in the mining world who
wisht d to have the valuable information therein contained in more permanent form.   Cloth bound $1.50.
Modern Machinery Publishing Co.,
218 La Salle Street, CHICAGO, TJ S. A.
THE MINERAL INDUSTRY, ITS STATISTICS, TECHNOLOGY AND
TRADE, VOL. \l\ 1897.
(By R. P. Rothwell, Illustrated, Price, ?5.00.)
Among the especially valuable papers In this number are :—Calcium Carbide and Acetylene, by A. H. Cowles; the Manufacture of Hydraulic Cement
in the United States, by F. H. Lewis; Manufacture of Sulphuric Acid without Lead Chambers, by George Lunge: Progress in Electro-chemistry, by H.
Boms; Manufacture of Clay Ballast, by H. F. Bain; By-product Coke Ovens,
by W. H. Blauvelt; Briquette Manufacture, by P. R. Pjorllng; Progress In
Electric Copper Refining, by Titus Ulke; The Copper Industry in Arizona, by
James Douglass; Copper .SmeltIng in the Caucasus, by G. Kolle; Telluride
Gold Ores, by J. F. Kemp; Gold Mining in Siberia, by R. De Bate; West
Australian Gold Mining, by H. C. Hoover; Progress in the Metallurgy, by P.
Argall; Mining Practice in South Africa, by E.D. Chester; Progress in the
Metallurgy of Lead, by H. O. Hoflm n; Recent Smelting Practice in Colorado, by L. 8. Austin; Progress in Electro-Metallurgy of Nickel, by T. Ulke;
Occurrence and Treatment of Platinum, by Henry Louis; Metallurgy ol
Quicksilver in Italy, by V. Spirek; The American Slate Industry, by H. L. J.
WarrerijTProgress in the Metallurgy of Zinc, by W. R. Ingalls; Progress In
Ore Dressing, by R. II. Richards; Accidents in Mines, by F. L. Hoffman; and
Tunnel Rights, by R. W. Raymond.
THE SCIENTIFIC PUBLISHING CO., 253 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.
Edwards Bros.,
534 Cordova St.,
 VANCOUVER, B.C.
DEALERS IK
PiiotoQrapliic stock
Agents for the Rochester Optical Co , and the Eastman
Kodak Co.
LARGE STOCK OF	
Film and Plate Cameras
 ON HAND.
PRICES SENT ON APPLICATION.
PREHO B. $15.
M. R. SMITH j GO. •
ESTABLISHED   1858.
MANUFACTURERS     OI
HIGH CLASS BISCUITS & CONFECTIONERY
Gold Medals awarded at Royal Agricultural Exhi-
tion, '95-'96-'97-'98. Medal and Diploma awarded
at Colonial and Indian Exhibitions. Silver Medals
at Provincial Exhibitions, 1886.
BRANCH
430    Cordova    Street,
VICTORIA, B.C.THE MINING RECORD.
47
YflNeeUVER  ISLAND   e©HL.
COAL^COAL!
The New Vancouver Coal
Mining & Land Co*
(LIMITED.)
(FORMERLY THE VANCOUVER COAL COMPANY.)
Are the Largest Coal Producers on the Pacific Coast.
NANAIMO COAL
(Used principally for Gas and Domestic purposes.)
#
SOUTH FIELD COAL
(Steam Fuel.)
Protection Island Coal & New Wellington Coal
(House and Steam Coal), are mined by this Company exclusively.
THE NANAIMO COAL gives a large percentage of gas, a high illuminating power, unequalled
by any other bituminous coal in the world, and a superior quality of coke.
THE SOUTHFIELD COAL is now use(l by all the leading steamship lines on the Pacific
THE NEW WELLINGTON COAL, which was introduced in 1890, has already become a
favourite fuel for domestic purposes. It is a clean, hard coal, makes a bright and cheerful fire, and its
lasting qualities make it the most economical fuel in the market.
THE PROTECTION ISLAND COAL is similar to the New Wellington Coal. This coal
is raised from the submarine workings under the Gulf of Georgia and is shipped from wharves both a
Protection Island and Nanaimo.
The several mines of the Company are connected with their wharves at Nanaimo, Departure Bay and
Protection Island, where ships of the largest tonnage are loaded at all stages of the tide. Special despatch
given to mail and ocean steamers.
SAMUEL L. ROBINS, Supt., Nanaimo, B.e.48
THE MINING RECORD.
TRHNSPCRTHTION COMPANIES.
Canadian Pacific Railway
THE WORLD'S HIGHWAY TO THE PACIFIC COAST, THE ORIENT AND THE ANTIPODES.
THE BEST, CHEAPEST AND QUICKEST WAY TO
British Columbia* Japan and China, Oregon, Hawaii, Washington,
Fiji and Australia,
The Gold Fields of Cariboo and the famed Kootenay Country in British Columbia are reached
ine i*oia jjiems   ^_ ^ ^e Canadian Pacific Railway via Revelstoke, B.C. |
FOR   FURTHER   INFORMATION,  APPLY TO   ANY   AGENT   OF THE COMPANY OR TO
A. H. NOTMAN, District Passenger Agent, St. John, N.B.
H. J. COLVIN, District Passenger Agent, 197 Washington St.,
Boston, Mass.
E. V. SKINNER, General Eastern Agent, 353 Broadway, New
York.
C.  E.  Mcpherson, Asst.  Gen.  Passenger  Agt., 1 King St. IS;,
Toronto,  Ont.
J. P. DEE, District Passenger Agt., 232 S. Clark St., Chicago, 11.
M. M. STERN, District Passenger Agent, Chronicle Building,
San Francisco, Cal.
E. J. COTLE, District Passenger Agent, Vancouver, B.C.
W. R. CALLAWAY, General Passenger Agent, Soo Line, Min-
neapolls, Minn.
ROBERT KERR, General Passenger Agent, Western and Pad-
Ac Division,  Winnipeg. Man.
i£REHER BAKER, European Traffic Agent, 67 and 6S King
William St., B.C., and 80 Cockspur St., S.W., London, Eng.;
7 James St., Liverpool. Eng., 67 St. Vincent St., Glasgow,
Scotland.
C. E. USSHER,
D. McNICOLL,
Asst. Gen. Passenger Agent,
MONTREAL
General Passenger Agent,
MONTREAL.
R. P. EITHET & CO.,
WHOLESALE MERCHANTS, SHIPPING AND INSURANCE AGENTS.
PROPRIETORS OF VIGTORIA WHARF, OUTER HARBOUR, COLUMBIA FLOURING MILL, ENDERBY, AND VERNON MILLS, VERNON.
Agents for Victoria Lumber and Manufacturing Company, Ohemainus, V.I.; Victoria Canning Company of British Columbia;
Fraser River, Skeena River, and River's Inlet Canneries; Skeena River Packing Company, Skeena River ; Pacific
Coast Steamship Company, San Francisco ; Scottish Union & National Insurance Company of Edinburgh ;
Lancashire Insurance Company of England; Queen Insurance Company of America (Fire);
and English and American Marine Insurance Company.
LLOYD'S   AGENCY,       HAWAIIAN   CONSULATE.
WHARF STREET,
VICTORIA, B.C
Canadian Pacific Navigation Co., Ld.
TIME TABLE NO. 36.
(Taking effect September 1st, 1898.)
VANCOUVER ROUTE.
Victoria to Vancouver daily except Monday at 1 o'clock.
Vancouver to Victoria daily except Monday at 13 o'clock or on
arrival C.P. Railway No. 1 Train.
NEW WESTMINSTER ROUTE.
Leave Victoria—For New Westminster, Ladner and Lulu Island Sunday at 23 o'clock; Wednesday and Friday at 7
o'clock. Sunday's steamer to New Westminster connects
with C.P.R. Train No. 2 going east, Monday.
For Plumper Pass—Wednesdays and Fridays at 7 o'clock.
For Moresby and Pender Islands—Friday at 7 o'clock.
Leave New Westminster—For Victoria Monday at 13.15 o'clock.
Thursday and Saturday at 7 o'clock.
For Plumper at 7 o'clock.
For Plumper and Moresby Islands—Thursady at 7 o'clock'.
FRASER   RIVER  ROUTE.
Steamer leaves New Westminster for Chllllwack and way
landings every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday at 8 o'clock
during river navigation.
NORTHERN ROUTE.
Steamship of this Company leave Victoria for Fort Slmoson
via Vancouver and Intermediate ports on the 10th, .20th and SOth
of each month, and for Queen Charlotte Islands on the 10th of
each month.
KLONDIKE ROUTE.
Steamers of this Company leave weekly for Wrangel, Juneau, Skagway and Dyea.
BARCLAY   SOUND   ROUTE.
Steamer "Wlllapa" leaves Victoria for Alberni and Sound
ports the 1st, 7th, 14th and 20th. Extending leatter trip to
Quatsino and Cape Scott.
The Company reserve the right of changing this Time Table
at any time without notification.
G. A.  CARLETON, JOHN IRVING,
General Agent. Manager.The Hudson's Bay Companv
HAVE
Baie de Peres
Battleford
Calgary
Chapleau
Dauphin
Deloraine
Edmonton
Fort William
Kamloops
Langley
Lethbridge
AT
Lower Fort Garry
Macleod
Mattawa
Morden
Nelson
Pincher Greek
Portage la Prairie
Port Simpson
Prince Albert
Qu'Appelle
Quesnelle
Bat Portage
Siding Mountain
Shoal Lake
Sudbury
Touchwood Hills
Vancouver
Victoria
Vernon
Whitewood
Winnipeg
And at other principal points in British Columbia, Manitoba and Northwest Territories.   Purchasers will find at these
Stores the best goods at moderate prices, imported direct from all the principal markets of the world.
Felten & Guilleaume, Carlswerk Mulheim on Rhine, Germany
 Manufacturer! of	
Electrical Leads and Cables
Wire Ropes for Mining
Electric Lighting Cables for Coal Pita
with arrangment for avoiding fire-damp explosions In case of the cable breaking.
iron, Steel, Copper and Bronze Wire
Round ai.d Flat Wire Ropes, "Albert," or
so-called "Lang's" Lay Ropes, Patent
Locked Coll Wire Ropes, Patented Flattened Strand Wire Ropes.
Superior qualities.
Sole Agent* tor Canada
Jack * Robertson
7 St. Helen St.
MONTREAL.
Established 1862
Walter S. Fraser & Co.,
Limited. *
HARDWARE MERCHANTS.
IRON,  STEEL,  PICKS   AND SHOVELS.     11/1 Ml    «%m«I    IWIimimm  CiimnIiaii
PIPE.  FITTINGS AND   BRASS  GOODS,     lYIll      311(1    iVI 111 111 Q  011001165
BARROWS, TRUCKS,  ETC
Tel.   3.
P. O. Box 423.
Wharf St., Victoria, B.C.
Ontar o Gold Mining
A few Mines
who Use.
British Columbia.
Sultana Mine.
Foley Mine.
Mikado Mine.
Olive Gold Mine.
Cameron Island Mine.
Hammond Reef Co.
CANADIAN RAND DRILL CO.,
Le Roi Mine.
War Eagle Mine.
Monte Christo Mine.
Centre Star Mine.
Crown Point Mine.
Slocan Star Mine.
MONTREALBRANCH  OFFICE:
MACKINNON BLOCK,
GRANVILLE STREET
WORKS:
I VANCOUVER,
PETERBORO, ONT.
B.C.
PUBLISHED  BY   "THE MINING  RECORD,"  LIMITED  LIABILITY,  VICTORIA  AND VANCOUVER,   CANADA.