RXUSTRHTEIX—Notes wi the Ymir Mine  and Its Mill Practice.
Shipping Facilities of the New Vancouver Coal Go. at Nanaimo.
t*****'M>*'-fc*^-M-**-^*»-***AA*»*/»a«a>a>
VOL.VI.
NOVEMBER,    1899.
No  3.
GEO! e. HINTON & COMPANY.
BRITISH COLUMBIA AGENTS FOR ROYAL ELECTRIC COMPANT.
... Electrical Construction and Supplies...
ELECTRIC HOISTS, BLOWERS, FANS, MOTORS AND DYNAMOS.   "S.K.C." TWO PHASE TRANSMISSION
SYSTEM.    ELECTRIC MINING APPARATUS.
VICTORIA.   B. C.       VANCOUVER,   B. C.
The Royal Electric Company
MONTREAL, QUEBEC.
 'MAKERS OF	
■Electrical  Mining:  Machinery
MOTORS
Adapted for Operating Stamps, Compressors, Hoists, Trams, Drills, Pumps.
Lighting Plants for Mines and Buildings.
WDUR   S. K. O.   SYSTEM
RENDERS DISTANT WATER POWERS AVAILABLE '
FOR ALL CLASSES OF MINING WORK.
V/GTOR/A.
Write Oue British Columbia '''BskncBwa **T
VANGOUVER.
ONLY
Breaks large or when set close, Reduces to Gravel or Sand.    Does work
' of Breaker and rolls all at one operation.    Only Fine Crusher for
Quartz or any Hard  Rock-
Pend tor Circular. V
&ifcoLL jaw crusher STURTEVANT MILL CO., boston, mass.
PRICE,   20    CENTS.I
ssss&sssssssssss
BELTING
Users of this article would do well to
examine our stock in this line. We carry
a larger assortment than any other dealer
in the Province.
The Electric Brand of Rubber Belting
we stock is not excelled by any other
make. It is used by all the large mills
in the Province. We carry it in stock up
to 22 inches, and Leather Belting up to
16 inches in width.
McLennan, McFeely & Go.
LIMITED,
WHOLESALE HARDWARE
VANCOUVER, B.C.
DAWSON CITY, N.W.T.
Agents for the Giant Powder Co., San Francisco.
Agents for the Majestic Steel Range-Co., St. Louis.
Gates' Iron Works.
fessssssssssssssssssssssss
«5SSSSS$!
Gates
Crushers
K   Are easily the best
■K     machines to-day
8> for handling
Cement,
Ballast and
Road Metal
OF ALL GRADES.
1 ECONOniCAL. SSR^
m   Metal per hour at a cost of breaking of less thi
than'2.centt^tor^
is FFPFCIFNT '"^^^SSS^'^i^W^^^'^f^BS^di
'-ft   iform prodn
i
Jiinnnum attendance'; give % more uni-
surae least power, require least repairs.
ii sizes.    4,000 m use.
Address Dept.SS. for Catalogue.
GATES IRON WORKS,
B 650 Elston Ave., CHICAGO, III.
V
FRIED KRUPPGRUSONWERK
Madgeburg-Buckau (Germany).
MINING - MACHINERY
ORE   CRUSHING:
Stone    Breakers   of   especially   strong
construction.    Roller  Mills,  Chilian
Mills,   Ball   Mills,  for dry  and   wet
crushing—more than i,8oo at work.
Stamp   Batteries—Shoes   and    Dies
Krupp's Special  Steel..,
of
AMALGAMATION :
Amalgamation Tables and Pans, Lasrlo's
Gold Amalgamators, Settlers, etc.
SEPARATION AND CONCENTRATION :
Separators, Exhaustors, Hydraulic
Classifiers, Percussion Tables, Jig.
gers,  Rotating Round Tables.
LEACHING PLANT -. -■
COMPLETE   GOLD   ORE   DRESSING   PLANT.
*J (a)   For Treating by the Wet Method with Stamp Batteries, Amalgamation and Concentration-
J^^V,i,/J (b>   For Dry Crushing by Ball Mills, Dust Extraction and Leaching
COAL   WASHING   PLANT—Large Testing Station for Crushing and Dressing Ores at the Works.
lAGENTS; ■     ;WW'"'■''-^';- : ■'■ W.'-	
For   CANADA—Jas. W. Pyke & Co., 85 St. Francois Xavier Street, Montreal.
For the UNITED STATES—Thos. Prosser & Son, 15 Gold Street, New York.
For MEXICO—Pablo Bergner, Apartado 549, Mexico.
For SOUTH AFBICA—United Engineering Company Ltd., P.O.  Box 399, Johannesburg, S.A.R.THE MINING RECORD.
GENERAL   MINING   MACHINERY.
HOISTING
CRUSHING
AND
Mining
Machinery.
RAf^niMC    Double Drum
DHV/UIVO Winning tngin
g c-ngines.
BACON'S UnderS
round
Earle C. Bacon, Engmee.
Winze Hoist*
Havemeyer Building- NEW YORK.
V
ty
((
Farrel "
Ore and  Rock
Mine   Cars.
Engines.
Boilers.
Gravity
Incline
Machinery
Send  fur Completely
Illustrated   Catalogues.
sv
SfcSE
Crusher.
Standard of the World.
BACON'S
DOUBLE CYLINDER
Single Drum Winding   Engines  for
Mine Shafts, Slopes, etc.
Link Bell
ELEVATORS
AND
CONVEYORS.
-4L
wm
hIks
Conveyor 328 feet centers, handling 4 tons
ANY   MATERIAL.
"Eink Belt," 4-mbeel Eocomotioe, 2 motor.
" run of mine" coal per minute. ANY   CAPACITY
Electric Coal Mining and Haulage Machinery,
Link-Belting, Sprocket Wheels, Malleable Iron Buckets,
Shafting, Pulleys, Gearing, Clutches,
Patent Machine-Moulded Rope Sheaves,  etc.
THE LINK=BELT MACHINERY CO., Engineers, Founders, Hachinsts, Chicago, U.S.A.
WM. R. PERRIN & CO., Chicago, ill, u.sa
MANUFACTURERS
Ft ^ ■ ' ^k For Cyanide
liter Presses  ,„„„:,%,„„
WRITE    FOR   CATALOGUE.
mmvmmiMm>*''**>THE  MINING RECORD.
m
aSSAYERS' SDPPLIES AND ENGINEERING INSTRUMENTS.
Ainsworth   Short-Beam
BUTTON
BALANCE.
No. 1 Sp cial with 5-inch beam. Sensibility 1-2C0 milligramme. The ac'-ompanying
illustration shows abalance that is accurate, rapid and has that stability of adjustment and
steadiness that is so de-irable In an ollice doing a large amount of work.
It Is not a new idea we have Just come upon and are asking you to try. It has been
upon the market several years and has been ■ onstanlly improved upon until we believe it
is the simplest, most convenient and reliable Balance skilled mechanics and modern
machinery can produce.  There is none better made.
Write for catalogue A for complete description and price" to
WM.   AINSWORTH   &  SONS,
Successors to Wm. Ainsworth, Denver, Colo., U.S.A.
3 AGENTS   FOR   BRITISH    COLUMBIA,
The British Columbia Assay & Chemical Supply Co., Vancouver.
W. F. Teetzel & Co., Nelson:
ASSAY, MINING and
WE are Manufacturers and direct Importers, and carry a large
Stock of Balances, Furnaces, Fire Clay Goods, Scientific
and Practical Books, Glassware, Platinum Goods, Acids, Chemicals, and all other Assayers' and Miners' requirements.
SOLE AGENTS for Morgan Crucible Company, Battersea,
Becker's Sons' Balances, Etc.
B, C, ASSAY and CHEMICAL SUPPLY CO., Ltd.
#   P.O. Box 355 VANCOUVER, B.C.
Telegraphic address:     Assay,"
Vancouver. B.C.
Codes, Moreing & Keal and A.B.C,
HEARN & HARRISON.
(Established 1857.)
MANUFACTURERS AND IMPORTERS OF
MINING, SURVEYING
^ENGINEERING
INSTRUMENTS.
Office Instruments and Materials.
Repairs and alterations executed promptly.
CORRESPONDENCE SOLICITED.
Catalogue sent free on application.
1640-1642 Notre  Dame St.,
MONTREAL, CAN.
THE DENVER FIRE CLAY
I
1742 to 1746 Champa St.,  DENVER, COL.
Established 1851.
-Incorporated   189 s.
ASSAYERS5 J1ATERI1ALS, nine and Hill Supplies, Chemists Supplies, Chemicals,
Chemical Glassware. Prospectors' Outfits. Special Agents for Morgan CraciMe Co,,'
Battersea, England. Largest stock of Balances, Scales, Furnaces, etc, Baker <&
Adaamson's Acids. Platinum Ware, etc. Borax, Boneash, Cyanide Potassium, Manganese and other heavy Chemicals at manufacturer's prices. Headquarters for Mining
and scientific books.
"JOHN   TAYLOR   &   CO.,
New illustrated catalogue on application. 63 First St., SAN  FRANCISCO   C   IfTHE MINING RECORD.
111.
GENERAL  MINING   MACHINERY.— Continued.
546 Washtenaw Avenue, CHICAGO, ILL, U.S.A.
-HEADQUARTERS FOR-
I Mining Machinery.
Hoisting Engines for Deep Mines.     Prospectors Hoists.
Gray's Patent Chairs. Cars, Cages. Sederholm Boilers.
Corliss Engines.      Reidler Pumps and Air Compressors.
«
q H
25   Q
_#P-
m
«*jgw
Oa
53
Adjustable Comet Rock and Ore Crushers.
Perforated Metals for all Purposes.(We ^i^d&'X^r"^
Improved Crushing Rolls.
Smelting and Roasting Furnaces.
Stamp Mills & Concentrating Mills
And equipment of every kind. Our machinery in these lines is more largely used than that of any other manufacturer. It is in
use on all gold fields and is recognised everywhere as rhe best. The Whitewater Deep Concentrator is a recent example of our work.
Ball Pulverizers such as used at the BepubUc Mine and the Helena & Livingstone Mill are of our manufacture. Write for Catalogue.
-RBPRBSENTBD    BY-
MENNO UNZICKER, SPOKANE HOTEL, SPOKANE, WASH.
Exc usive Manufacturers of Riedler Pumps  and  Air  Compressors  for  United States, Canada,  Mexico,  South
America, England, South Africa and Australia.m
IV.
THE MINING RECORD.
BOILERS, WATER WHEELS AND COMPRESSORS.
Robb-Armstrong Automatic Engines.
CENTRE OR SIDE CRANK.
sasMHiiiriuW"1"^
In our side type up to 100 h.p.
the outboard bearing is connected
with the frame by a wing and is
kept perfectly in line. This allows
of its being satisfactorily used for
portable purposes and is a great
advantage for stationary plants.
ROBB ENGINEERING CO. Ltd.
AMHERST, N.S.
The Pelton Water Wheel eompany
Gives exclusive attention to the development and utilization of Water Powers by the most
modern, economic and improved methods. An experience of more than fifteen years, involving
both the. theory and practice of hydraulic engineering as relates to power development in its
widest range of application, is at the service of customers.
NiNE THOUSAND WHEELS NOW RUNNING—Aggregating some 700,000 h.p.
ELECTRIC POWER TRANSMISSION Pelton Wheels afford the most reliable and
efficient power for such service, and are running the majority of stations of this character in
the United States, as well as most foreign countries. Highest efficiency and absolute regulation
guaranteed under the most extreme variations of load. Pelton Wheels are running every
water power plant in British Columbia. Parties interested will be furnished with a catalogue
on application. Addbuss	
PELTON WATER WHEEL COMPANY, 121 Main Street, SAN FRANCISCO, CAL.
AND
Cascade
WATER WHEEL
mm
Adapted to all Heads from
3 Feet to 2000 Feet
Our experience of 33 YEARS
building Water Wheels enables us to suit every req u i re-
men t of Water Power Plants.
We guarantee satisfaction.
Send for a Pamphlet of
either Wheel and write
fall particulars.
James Leffel & Go.
SPRINGFIELD, OHIO, U.S.A.
WATER POWER
Plants Developed and Installed.
The  Stilwell-Bierce  &  Smith-Vaile  Co
DAYTON, OHIO, U.S.A.
—MANUFACTURRS OF
The - Victor - Turbim
HYDRAULIC MACHINERY and AIR COMPRESSORS.
30 YEARS EXPERIENCES.
Becent plants installed:—Laehine Rapids Hydraulic & La
Co., Montreal, Que., 12,000 h.p.; Chambly Manufacturing C
Montreal, Que, 20,000 h.p.; West Kootenay Power & Light 0
Rossland, B.C., 8,000 h.p.
Compressed air  from Falling Water.
=a HIGH TESTIMONIAL.
THE DOMINION COTTON MILLS, Ltd., MAGOG, QUE., JUNE 7th, 1898.
THE TAYLOR HYDRAULIC AIR COMPRESSING CO., Ltd., Montreal   Que.
DEAR SIRS:—
We have had your Air Compressor in successful operation for over twelve (12) months
in our Print Works, where it has replaced steam to drive the engines in the Printing
Department. Your Compressor runs without attention or expense, and is saving the
cost ot tuel formerly employed to drive the same engines by steam.
I am pleased to certify to its successful operation as amost efficient motive power.
Yours truly, W. T. Whitehead, Manager.
TAYLOR AIR COMPRESSING CO., SPOKANE, WASH.THE MINING RECORD.
v.
CABLES, HOISTS AND ORB CARS.
See those wires—how they interlock?   Note the smooth surface also?
THE PATENT
IfttIM
No displacement of wires in any event.   Gives three times the service of other cables, and
adds correspondingly to the life of the rolling 6toek.
"Is used only on the patent"
fflGK CABLE
Bleichert Wire Rope Tramway,
1 -^ ■ :—.and others manufactured by—--~-———-~ ^   ir
1 he Trenton  Iron  Company,   I renton, I\# J.
Engineers and Contractors and sole licensees in Norlh America for the Bleichert Systpm.    Also, Wire Rope Equipments for Surface and Undergrourd
B aulage, Transmission of Power, etc.   Illustrated book upon application.
New York OFPICE-Coopei, Hewitt & Co., 17 Burling Slip. Chicago Opfice-i 114  Monadnock Building
M. BEATTY & SONS,
WELLAND, ONTARIO,
Dredges, Ditchers and Steam Shovels,
For Dredging, Ditching, Dyking. Gold Mining, Etc.
Of various styles and sizes to suit any work.
Mine Hoists, Moisting Engines, Stone Derricks, Horsepower
Ho.stcr.s,   Suspension   Oablcways,   Submarine   Rock
Drilling Machinery, Gang Stone Saws, Centri-
<^4 ' fugal Pomps for Drainage Works, Dump
ing Sand, Gold Mining, Etc.
We also furnish WIRE ROPE at Lowest Prices.
mms'tm:
-isSwsK
H
•IHfcY
HYDRAULIC   PIPE.
WATER   .*   WORKS   .'   OR   I   MINING   .'   PLANTS.
The largest and best equipped rivetted Steel pipe-making plant on the Coast
ESTIMATES   FURNISHED. LARGE   ©R   SMALL    QUANTITIES.
N©   DELAY   IN   DELIVERY. SATISFACTION   GUARANTEED.
WHITB   US
ARMSTRONG & MORRISON
VANCOUVER,   B.C.
Portraits!    Buildings I   Scenery!
Fac-simlles of Signature0, Le'ters and Engravings of all kinds for Book and newspaper Printing.   Map Engravings from Tracings.   Also Reproductions from Photographs, Brush Drawings
%     aud Prints.   Fine Book and Catalogue Illustrations.   Good Work at Low Prices.
SPIKE BROS.' COMPANY, TACOMA, WASH.THE MINING RECORD.
MISCELLANEOUS MACHINERY,  ETC.
i
Hoisting»»Winding Engines
Mining, Milling and Concentrating
M7wi""MDPV
Thoroughly Modern in Type; Substantially Constructed, and Convenient and Efficient in Operation. ^
Contracts Tor Complete Steam and  Water  Power Plants
a Specialty. General Mill and Mine Supplies.
f The JENCKES MACHINE CO.
....Hgent, j? 32'40 Lansdowne Street.
.ROSSLAND. B.e.  *
F. R. Mendelhall,
ESTIMATES  SUBMITTED   PROMPTLY.
P   ttf"   Catalogues and Prices on Application. r
SHBRBROOKB. QUE.
Joshua Hendy Machine Works,
Nos. 38 to 44 Fremont St., SAN FRANCISCO, Cal., U.S.A.
-MANUFACTURERS OF AND  DEALERS  IN-
Hydraulic / Quartz Mining / Milling Machinery
COMPRI8rNO-
HYDRAULIC GIANT8,
WATER GATES,
SHEET IRON and
STEEL PIPE,
STAMP MILLS,
ORE CRUSHERS,
ORE FEEDERS,
CONCENTRATORS,
SMELTERS,
HOISTING and
PUMPING PLANTS,
SAW MILLS,
MINE and MILL
SUPPLIES, Etc., Etc.
Catalogues and Prices Furnished
Upon Application   j
HOISTING  ENGINE.
IMPACT  WATER   WHEEL.
X'Xj^^.TIiTTJlvfi  EBTI1TEES   "•Yi!JriS!ri„MTY8i»Eirr.
W
E are always in the market for    :    :    :
:    :    :   CRUDE OR NATIVE PLATINUM.
I I I
BHK6R St CO.
.NEWHRK, NJ.
Theodor Lexow
Nos. 12 to 16 John St..
near Broadway,
J NEW   YORK,
IMPORTER  OF
CARBONS (Black Diamonds.)
For   Diamond   Drills   and   all   Mechanical   Purposes.
HENRY    DEMMERT.
HKMILTON   POWDER   CO'Y.
E. H. HEAPS & CO.,
Machinery, Mining and Investment
BROKERS.
506 Cordova St.    VANCOUVER, B.C.
MANUFACTURERS' AGENTS AND DEALERS IN
Kew and Second-Hand Machinery, Diamond Drills, Canning and
Saw Mill Machinery, etc., etc., etc.
Represekting—Cowan & Co., A. R. Williams, M. C. Bullock Manufacturing Company, Clayton Air Compressor Works, and other
tint-class maunfactHrers.    . . .
(Incorporated 1861.)   Manufacturers ot
High Explosives, Blasting, Mining and Sporting Powder.
DEALERS    IN    ELECTRIC    BLASTING    APPARATUS,    SAFETY    FUSE,     DETONATORS,    ETC.
Head Office.-   MONTREAL.
LOCAL 0FFICE8:
Vancouver,  Nelson, Rossland   Greenwood.
WORKS:
NANAIMO.THE MINING RECORD.
vii.
ELECTRICAL, MACHINERY.
CANADIAN GENERAL ELECTRIC
COMPANY, Limited.
Head offices, Toronto, Ont. CAPITAL, $1,500,000. Factories, Peterboro, Ont
BRANCH OFFICES:
Halifax, N.S.,    Montreal, Que.,    Winnipeg, Man.,     Nelson, B.C.,    Vancouver, B.C.
MftNCFaeTURERS OF
Electric f Mining 1 Apparatus
Hoists, Pumps, Blowers, Fans, Blasting
Apparatus, Dynamos for Lighting and
Power and Motors for all Purposes	
Electrical Transmission of Power Successfully Operated up to 50 Miles
BY    OUR
THREE PHASE TRANSMISSION SYSTEM
.WRITE US..
BRANCH OFFICES IN BRITISH COLUMBIA
NELSON.
VANCOUVERm THE MINING RECORD.
MISCELLANEOUS. ■   '.
noersoirseroeaiit Rook Drills
For   TUNNELS     MINES   and   QUARRIES.
Stralolft Line DoDlex and 60IDDOODII nlrG0niDr6SS0rS
COMPLETE   MINE   EQUIPMENT.
JAMES COOPER MANUFACTURING COMPANY, limited
- MnWTPT.AT.     p.Q -.
Branch   Office-ROSSLAND. B.C. JAMES P. SWORD, Manager.
T7ianh„nt| Ready Mixed Paint
I i I III I > For the Inside and Outside of Cottages leads all others.    Durable, Bright and
*^ *VM M.M. \Ai M.M. \J J Glossy.    Manufactured in 69 beautiful shades.    Write us for color cards.
j Have you Barns, Outhouses or Fences to be Painted ?
| 1 Yl ft It /l ( If so, try our "Farmers'"  Paint, made specially for that purpose.      It will preserve
ll 1/1      111 and  beautify.
XJ X. tXXX vt. ■ ( Some of Our Other Specialties : — Oil Stains, Varnish Stains, Enamels,
Varnishes for carriages, houses and boats. Tinting Colora, Carriage Colors, &c.
The British America Paint Company,
VICTORIA   AND   VANCOUVER.
ALBION IRON WORKS COMPANY, LTD.
CAPITAL      —      —      —      —      $500,000
ENGINEERS,   IRON   FOUNDERS   AND   BOILER   MAKERS.
MANUFACTURERS  OF MARINE AND LAND ENGINES, BOILERS, ETC.
Fish   Canning    and   Mining    Machinery,   Hydraulic    Giant    Pipes   and   Sinking   Pomps   for   Mines,   Stovbs,   Gratjbb
French    Ranges,   Etc.,   Etc.
Sole  Agents   in   British Columbia for H. R. Worthington's Steam Pumps, and  Ingersoll  Rock
Drill   Company's   Steam Rock Drills.
NO. 1 CHATHAM STREET AND 71 STORE STREET, VICTORIA, B.C.
■HC-  ■»<:<'• P. O.   DRAWER 12.   "K- -»<:<'••• —
BANK ©F BRITISH NORTH  AMERICA.
ESTA-BLISHED 1836      INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER 1840.
phid op eapiTHL. ~:~:t:~~':'~ ....  Sl.000,000 STERLING.
RESERVE FOND,  300,000
LONDON. ENG., OFFICES, 3 CLEMENTS LftNE.   LOMBHRD STREET.
BRANCHES   AND   AGENCIES :
HALIFAX, N.S. MONTREAL, P.Q. HAMILTON, Ont. WINNIPEG, Mail.
ST. JOHN, N.B. OTTAWA, Ont. BRANTFORD, Ont. BRANDON, Man.
FREDER1CTON, N.B. KINGSTON, Ont. LONDON, Ont. NEW YORK, N.Y.
QUEBEC, P.Q. TORONTO, Ont. MIDLAND, Ont. SAN FRANCISCO, Cal.
BRANCHES  IN   BRITISH  COLUMBIA :
VICTORIA, VANCOUVER, ROSSLAND, TRAIL, KASLO, ASHCROFT, GREENWOOD.
Also at the  Gold Fields—ATLIN,   BENNETT and DAWSON CITY,
Highest Prices Paid for Gold Dust and Amalgam. G.   H.   BURNS,   Mgl\,   VICTORIA,   B.C.The Mining Record.
Vol. VI.
NOVEMBER,   1899.
No. 2.
BRITISH COLUMBIA
MINING RECORD
Devoted to the Mining Interests of British Columbia.
PUBLISHED BY
The Mining Record Limited Liability.
advertising: rates on application.
H. HORTIMER LAMB, Managing Editor,
London Office : 24 Coleman Street, E.C
Vancouver Branch Office : T. G. Ure, No. 2 Area ic.
Montreal : Gray's Agency.
Denver, Col.: National Advertising Co.
San Francisco : Dake's Agency.
SUBSCRIPTION TERHS:
Canada and the United States, one year -   -   $2.00
Great Britain and Foreign, "       "    -   -     2.50
All communications relating to the editorial department
of the British Columbia Mining Record to be addressed to
The Editor, B.C. Mining Record,
P.O. Drawer 645, Victoria, B.C.
All communications relating to the business department
of the British Columbia Mining Record to be addressed to
the Business Manager, B.C. Mining Record,
P.O. Drawer 645, Victoria, B.C.
IN what way will the war in the Transvaal affect
British Columbia? It is argued with a good deal of
truth, that as investment in new enterprises is practically stopped there at present, and as capital for investment in new enterprises is continually being accumulated in Great Britain, a stream of capital may
well be set flowing towards British Columbia. Against
this, however, must be offset the fact that when the
Transvaal is overcome and brought under British rule
—as it must be—the greater security thus offered to
capital will cause a tremendous boom there after the
war is over which will temporarily eclipse everything
else in the mining world. The chances are that British Columbia's boom will not come until the re-organization of the Transvaal on the new basis has been
fully accomplished. In the meantime, however,
Eastern Canada, the United States and Great Britain
are contributing enough to maintain a steady rate of
progress in the Province.
The market for mining shares is in a peculiar position; the volume of transactions is fairly good and according to reports from Montreal very large at that
point. But prices rule low and there is little or no
opportunity to make'money in speculation. The
cause is dear money in New York, and the official explanation is the dread of war in the Transvaal.   The
real explanation will be found much more in the
heavy speculation which has been a characteristic
of Amercian business during 1899. Just how far the
reaction will go it is hard to say. It is not likely to
attain panic proportions, and will be succeeded after
a short time by a healthy revival. But the effect upon
Canada is to make the Canadian banks concentrate
their resources and refuse credits that in the ordinary
course of business they are only too glad to grant.
There is no market upon which the effect of a contraction of credit is so instantaneous as the mining share
market. It brings a certain amount of shares on the
market for which there are no buyers and it forces
prices down to the point at which investors prepared
to hold for a considerable time will come in.
Some very interesting information has recently
been received on the subject of the establishment and
■maintenance of schools of mines, by Mr. Archibald
Cameron, secretary of the Rossland school, from the
New Zealand Minister of Mines, Mr. A. J. Cadman.
The New Zealand schools are not established under
any special legislative enactment, but are managed
by a local council or committee, with assistance from
the Colonial Government by grants of money provided by votes of the House of Representatives. The
amount voted for the year 1898-99 was £2,800, in addition to which the Government paid the salaries of
three instructors at the annual rate of £350, £200 and
£170 each. The sources of revenue beyond the assistance given by the Government are class fees, charges
for analyses, and testing, and local subscriptions. In
connection with the schools there are three annual
scholarships at the Otago University, of the value of
£50 each, tenable by students who pass the examinations as required by the regulations of 15th June,
1894, a copy of which is also forwarded. The Otago
School of Mines, which, by-the-way, was established
nearly nineteen years ago, and the Thames School in
New Zealand, the School of Mines and Industries and
Technological Museum at Adelaide, South Australia,
and the Ballarat, Bairnsdale and Bendigo Schools, in
the colony of Victoria, have done an immense amount
of good in qualifying local men for important and
responsible positions as mine managers and superintendents; and it may safely be asserted that the assistance accorded these institutions by the Australasian Governments has been more than justified by
the results attained. Many of the cases of bad mining and consequent disaster in this Province might
have been avoided had the managers or engineers in
charge of the undertakings been locally trained men.
familiarised by adequate practical experience and
study with the the characteristics of rock formation
and occurrence peculiar to British Columbia  mining46
THE MINING RECORD.
	
H
localities. It is sincerely to be hoped that the Pro-
eincial Government will awaken to the importance of,
at least, contributing towards the maintenance of
schools of mines in our principal mining centres—
that at Rossland being particularly deserving of support.
The adjustment of the labour difficulty in the Slocan and Nelson divisions is apparently as far off as
ever, aud the outlook, at least as regards the prospect
of a creditable silver lead output from West Kootenay this year is particularly gloomy and unsatisfactory.   The present unfortunate state of affairs is directly due to the ill-advised and hasty action of tffi?
Provincial Legislature last session in the passage of
the eight-hour law; yet,   notwithstanding, the wage
question might have been amfcably settled on the lines
of mutual concession, but for the obstinate and unreasonable stand assumed at the outset by the few
agitators who regrettably occupy positions as leaders
of organized labour in this country.    The inconsistency, meanwhile, of Miners' Unions in the Slocan is
sufficiently illustrated in the fact that memb.ers cf
these bodies are permitted to remain at work in the
Ainsworth mines and in one only of the Nelson mines,
when the wage paid is on the basis of three dollars
per diem, while in the Sandon and—with the solitary
exception referred  to—Nelson mines, the men are
called upon to go out on strike unless they are paid
the additional fifty cents demanded by the union for
an eight-hour day.   This anomaly is explained on the
ground   tint before   the   eight-hour law   came into
force, Ainsworth was a "three-dollar camp."     But if
this is correct, it merely puts the Union in a less advantageous light.    Having approved of three dollars
a day of ten hours in Ainsworth, it is now cooly admitted that men working eight hours under precisely
similar conditions in a neighbouring camp are entitled to a higher wage for shorter hours!   The Slocan miners, we are told, are standing out for the pay
they have been accustomed to receive in the past.
This, however, is far from true.   The men have been
offered and have refused a higher ratio of pay than
that   formerly   established,   but they demand more.
One has only to apply the reduetio ad absurdum to
their argument to demonstrate the correctness of this
assertion.   Suppose, merely for the sake of example,
a meddlesome and idiotic Legislature introduced a
measure with a penal clause, regulating the hours of
underground labour to four or two or none at all in
the twenty-four, it would still, if   we   accepted the
premises as in all seriousness set out by the Sandon
Miners' Union, be the bounden duty of mine-owners
to pay the men just as much for working "no hours''
as they (the miners) might reasonably expect to get
for "putting in" a good ten hours a day.    And on
such grounds as these organized labour in the Slocan
is "on strike."   All mining operations in this district
would have been, ere this, entirely suspended but for
the absolute necessity of keeping the workings in the
principal Slocan mines in order in anticipation of the
resumption of work when miners from the outside
will be engaged to take the place of the "strikers."
It does not seem so long ago since the mining industry of Canada was threatened with disaster through
the imposition of an export duty on ore, aimed chieflv.
so far as the western part of the country was con
cerned, at the establishment of a smelter to handle
exclusively Canadian ores on United States territory
at Northport. The experience which the country has
had with the Northport smelter ought to place it
beyond the power of the most prejudiced and least
acquainted wtih the necessities of the industry to ever
advocate such an expedient again. Had there been
no Northport smelter there would have been no $4.50
rate for freight and treatment, and consequently the
tonnage and prospective tonnage of the Rossland district would have been less. The projectors of the
Northport smelter were influenced by purely economic considerations in placing it where it is without
reference Id the 47th parallel. And a purely extraneous consideration like that of the existence of a
boundary line, had it been used to prevent the erection of a smelter there, would just in so far as it discriminated against the most economic smelting have
added to the cost of treatment, and accordingly reduced the tonnage of ore and diminished the returns on what was treated. This might have had the
most far-reaching and damaging effects because the
future of English capital in British Columbia depends very largely at the present time upon the returns Le Roi shareholders receive, and any cause
injuring their interests would have injured British
Columbia for an indefinite time. It is not safe to
meddle with economic laws to obtain a temporary advantage. Much more is lost in presently unseen and
unexpected directions.
It will now remain to be seen whether the British,
Columbia smelters will be benefitted to the degree
anticipated by the re-admittance of lead, the product
of Canadian mines and smelters, but refined in the
United States, into this country free of duty imports.
By an Order-in-Council the Dominion Government
has granted this concession in consequence of a strong
appeal from our principal lead smelting establishments-; but, in our judgment, while the rebate of the
duty may serve to counter-balance the advantage the
American smelters have over their Canadian competitors in being enabled to sell in the New York market
a proportion, or 10 per cent, of the Canadian lead
they import, it is extremely doubtful whether, as is
claimed, the renewal of the if, per cent. Canadian import duty on lead bullion will to any appreciable extent assist in building up Canadian lead manufactories, unless the- present duties on manufactured lead
are considerably increased; and until we are in a
position to turn the entire product of our lead mines
to manufacturing uses, our lead smelters must be
prepared to face a keen competition from the States.
It will probably interest British Columbians to
learn that the cylinders of the U.S. battleship Oregon
were made from iron mined on Texada Island, and
although so little is known locallv concerning these
iron deposits, it is, according to a Mr. Abraham Hil-
sev, secretary of the Puget Sound Iron Company,
who publishes a letter on the subject in Iron aud Steel.
a remarkably promising property, vielding after treatment a very superior charcoal iron, which sells in San
Francisco at from $25 to $35 per ton. The Puget
Sound Iron Company own 2,400 acres of land on the
Tsland, and it is stated, have on this property five million tons of iron ore, assaying 68 per cent, of metallic
iron in sight. The mine has, however, not been systematically worked for some time, and the presentTHE MINING RECORD.
47
reference to the property in the American technical
papers looks rather like an attempt to interest further
capital in the undertaking.
It is regrettable to learn that the Fairfield Syndicate, which owns and operates the well-known Dorotha Morton mine, now rinds that the ore-body which
has yielded to date between $80,000 and $90,000 in
gold and other values, represents only a rich blanket
deposit, the main lead having yet to be found. The mill
and Cyanide plant have consequently been temporarily closed down. All interested in metal mining on
the Coast will join in hoping that tne further ettorts
of so business-like and bona fide a concern as that
which is behind the Dorotha Morton, will prove completely successful.
It is clear that the Alaskan modus vivendi virtually
concedes nothing to Canada unpossessed before, and the only present advantage it conveys is in
certain conditions which prevent conflict of jurisdiction between the Customs officials of the Dominion
and those of the United States. Sir Louis Davies,
the British Ambassador at Washington, and Colonial
Office authorities in London have jointly done their
best in the case but without avail; as the United
States at present refuses to accept a reference to arbitration; and the boundary dispute, vexatious thougn
it is, cannot be regarded as sufficiently grave to
amount to anything like a casus belli between two
generally friendly nations. A tentative compromise
proposal made by Sir Louis Davies suggests that—
while other points in connection with the boundary
line shall be arbitrated under condition that are very
liberal for the United States—Canada is to receive
one port, Pyramid Harbour, and thus gain access to
the Yukon, via the Lynn Canal. The United States
claims to Dyea and Skagway are simultaneously to
be recognized by the Dominion and the Empire. This
is probably as much as Canada can well hope to obtain under existing political circumstances, and the
settlement of the dispute would, even on such terms,
involve a considerable gain on the Dominion's present
unsatisfactory position. But with the Pacific and
Western States Senators and Congressmen resolutely
opposing the slightest American concession, while
also urging a refusal of arbitration, it seems very
doubtful indeed, if even Sir Louis Davies' offer will
at this juncture find acceptance at the hands of the
rulers of the neighbouring Republic. They will more
probably fear, with a Presidential election contest in
early prospect, to alienate Western and Pacific States
supporters in Congress, and at the same time supply
the Democrats with an available campaign weapon.
The trouble is that a cry of "not an inch of American
ground shall be given up," is very popular with
United States electors, who would in a host of cases
fail to recognize that the suggested compromise
rather involved a settlement of ah international territorial dispute on terms very favourable to their
country, than any transfer of American territory. It
is extremely difficult to convince our neighbours of
the Western and Pacific States that Dyea, Skagway,
Pyramid Harbour and much other territory, which
they claim to be Alaskan, are altogether debatable
ground, to some of which Canada seems to be entitled under the old and badly-drawn boundary treaty
between  Great   Britain   and   Russia.    The United
States can, of course, claim no further Alaskan rights
than those purchased from Russia, and in part delineated by the treaty in question.
According to the American Consul at Dawson
City, there is now abundant evidence that only the
very rich Klondike placers can be-worked at a profit
without machinery on account of the high price of
labour and living. Hydraulic mining will soou have to
be introduced in this country. The opportunity is now
open for capitalists to buy claims to operate with machinery, which will yield rich returns for the money invested, but the poor man's chances, so far as this country is concerned, are gone. Recently some three
thousand Yukon miners left Dawson for the much
"boomed" Cape Nome gold fields, where their
chances of coming to grief are infinitely greater.
The information obtainable regarding the Anaconda group of claims in the Atlin district, recently
purchased by a London syndicate, with which Lord
Ernest Hamilton is connected, is somewhat vague,
but what there is of it, eminently interesting. The
mineral showing (it is not in any sense a vein or lode),
is, we learn from an official source, several hundred
feet wide, and Mr. Bromly, the syndicate's engineer,
after making very careful and systematic tests, has
found fair values—in some spots the rock assays over
$20 in gold—in every direction where drillings have
been made. This extraordinary deposit resembles in
point of size the famous Treadwell mine, but on the
surface of the Anaconda, where, no doubt, the gold
has been concentrated by the action of the elements,
the values are decidedly higher. The future profit-
earning capabilities of this property, is, however,
largely dependent on a fact, not yet ascertained, as to
whether or not the rock, which is free-milling on the
surface, will continue to have this characteristic as
depth is attained. Meanwhile the prospects of Atlin
as a quartz and hydraulic camp are by no means unpromising, some quite rich discoveries of both galent
and copper-gold ores have lately been made, and the
country is hardly any more inaccessible than was the
Slocan ten years ago; if anything, indeed, it is more
favourably situated in respect to transportation facilities. The great difficulty, of course, would be, however, the extreme cold in winter and the necessity of
bringing- in fuel from some considerable distance.
As regards placer mining in Atlin, the chief complaint of the miners is that the 100-foot claims are
too small, and that on all the branch creeks there is
an insufficiency of water. Of course, the second of
these drawbacks cannot well be overcome, but the
first, if the miners' contention is found to be reasonable, could be remedied in the future so far as vacant
ground is concerned at any rate. It is asserted that
is does not pay to work an Atlin claim of 100 feet
only, when, as is generally the case, a man has to
sink six feet to bed-rock, and several instances are
cited where men have abandoned otherwise fairly
promising ground solely on this account.
All mining operations in the Omineca district are
now practically over for the season; but the result of
the past summer's work has been, on the whole, gratifying.   It is true no very remarkable "cleans-up" havei
48
THE MINING RECORD.
been made, but working with the most primitive appliances, individual miners in many instances had recovered by sluicing and hydraulicing, from one hundred and fifty to three hundred ounces of gold ere the
season closed. A still more satisfactory tribute to the
hydraulicing potentialities of this field is the recent
acquisition of ground there by Californian syndicates,
whose representatives have in every case been experienced hydraulic engineers from that State.
The completion of the telegraph line to Dawson
City is a matter of much moment, particularly to mining companies operating in the Yukon; though the
benefit will be considerably enhanced when the connection is made between Ashcroft and Bennett.
Thanks largely to the exertions of Mr. Valleau, Gold
Commissioner for the Omineca district, the route of
the new line from Quesnelle, is, we understand, to
take a different course from that originally considered,
and the old telegraph trail as surveyed over thirty
years ago by the Western Union Company, is in consequence to be re-opened. Thus the Omineca. as well
as the Atlin district, will enjoy, ere long (the advantages of telegraphic communication with the commercial centres. What this will mean to mine-operators in Omineca may, to a certain extent, be estimated,
when it is stated that in the case of a break-down of
machinery, an order for replacing parts when sent
through the ordinary mail channels, not infrequently
is from a month to six weeks in transit. Meanwhile,
it is satisfactory to learn that preparations are now
being made by the Department of Public Works at
Ottawa for the early commencement of work on this
important undertaking.
The Lenora mine at Mount Sickar is an exceedingly promising prospect, but there is, at present, no warrant for the hysterically boomistic reports which have
been appearing of late in the daily papers concerning
this "wonderful mine." For example, what could be
more utterly absurd than the following paragraph
from the Colonist, having reference to the contract entered into by the Mount Sickar Company to consign a thousand tons of ore per month to the Van
Anda smelter :
"There is enough ore in sight in the Lenora mine
to continue this arrangement for an indefinite period.
To make a start with, there are 1,500 tons on the
dump. The amount of ore in sight in the chute nobody has attempted to estimate; it is too enormous to
even make a guess at."
Mining engineers do not "guess at" the amount of
ore in sight in a mine; the methods employed for arriving at such a calculation being, as- a rule, of a
somewhat more precise character. But the paragraph is a particularly fine instance of the ludicrous
unreliability of the daily press when dealing with mining affairs in this country. Meanwhile, the policy
adopted by Mr. Croft, manager of the Mount Sickar
and B.C. Development Company, of shipping comparatively large quantities of ore from the Lenora
mine at the present stage of its development, is certainly open to criticism; though the high price copper
now commands, and a specially advantageous arrangement with the Van Anda smelter, may serve to
justify the course pursued, by the Lenora mnagement.
The shareholders   of   the   late, lamented   Golden
Cache Mines Company, or rather those of them who
have taken advantage of the new owners' offer, may
yet perhaps have cause for gratulation. If we accept
a recent report on this Lillooet property by the Toronto engineer,'Prof. Montgomery, who recently examined the Golden Cache and adjoining claims at
the instance of a Toronto syndicate there is yet hope
that this ill-starred property may be profitably operated. According to Prof. Montgomery, while "there
is practically no ore of commercial value in sight" in
the Golden Eagle mine itself, on the adjoining claims
known as the Monarch, Ample, Whale and Gladstone,
and which, by-the-way, the Golden Cache Company
had, we understand, purposed to acquire, are exceedingly promising properties, the value of the ore in
sight here (about 1000,000 tons) being placed, after
allowing for loss in reduction, at $960,000, or $460,000
when the cost of mining and milling is deducted.
Prof. Montgomery concludes his report as follows :
"In making these estimates I have proceeded in the
usual way, and while doing so I have been quite well
aware that the possibilities of these properties are
greater and that there is even a probability that there
are 150,000 tons of pay ore in sight at the present
time, but I considered it safe and proper to give 100,-
000 tons as my estimate of the quantity of ore in sight,
and $460,000 as the total profit, after paying for the
mining and reducing and all necessary expenses incidental thereto. When I make these statements I
make statements that could not truthfully be made at
any one time in reference to many mining properties.
There are but few indeed that can show $1,000,000
worth of ore at one time. I have endeavoured to re^
move all possible factors tending to exaggeration or
uncertainty, and yet there remains an immense quantity of ore of good paying grade, therefore, I have
formed the opinion that the Monarch, Ample, Gladstone and Whale constitute a mining property of
great value, and I have no hesitation in recommending that this property be operated. With regard to
the Golden Cache I would recommend that it be prospected with a view to finding a sufficient amount of pay
ore. There is enough evidence to justify this recommendation, and especially as there are a good compressor and drill upon the ground ready for such
work, but, understanding that the new owners of the
Golden Cache property are also the owners of the Monarch, Ample, Whale and Gladstone, I think it would
be well for the present to devote all capital and energy,
to the working of these last-named properties, in
which there is a large quantity of ore in hand, and
leave the prospecting of the Golden Cache to later
on." '
It is to be hoped, both for the sake of the original
shareholders, who have acquired shares in the new
company, and also in the interests of mining in Lillooet that Prof. Montgomery's very favourable opinion regarding the value of these properties may be
justified by substantial returns from the mines themselves.
Apropos of thi
Albert   Canyon,
somewhat vainly
panies (oh, yes,
makes me more a
Country compani
mismanage their
It's the rule and
enough generally
close-down of the Tangier mine at
a correspondent firom Revelstoke
enquries: "Why do English com-
I'm an Englishman, but this only
shamed of the asses sent out by Old
es to represent important interests)
properties in B.C. so persistently?
not the exception.    They pay well
to get good, sensible men. 'ThenTHE MINING RECORD.
49
why on earth—but if I continue I shall grow profane." There are, meanwhile, some very marvellous
rumours concerning the manner in which work at
the "Tangier" has been conducted during the past
few months, and our correspondent endorses, as being
in the main correct, the following report from the
Revelstoke Herald :
"The shut-down of the Tangier mine at Albert
Canyon, which has been working 25 or 30 men all
summer was announced in our issue of Wednesday
last. Since then something has been learned about
the methods employed in opening up this property,
which, to say the least, appear to have been very ill-
advised and have in consequence produced results
far from satisfactory. Less than a year ago, shaft
sinking was started on the property and a hole sunk
below the creek level about 60 or 65 feet. Enough
timber to make 100 feet was built on top of this (the
timber part being filled around with waste) and the
shaft celled 100 feet underground. Levels to the extent of 800 or 900 feet were run' in all directions from
the bottom of this pit and $15,000 or $20,000 spent
without any results. Gopher holing at the grass roots
is hardly the way to make a mine, and intelligent
miners who are familiar with the stiuation at the Tangier are at a loss to understand why a considerable
portion of the large expenditure already made was
not spent in sinking instead of useless work, which
leaves the company, as far as a mine is concerned, in
practically the same position as when- it commenced
operations. The Tangier Company, so its miners
state, is a good outfit, and intend to do what is right,
but it appears to be like so many other English mining companies, the victim of mismanagement in the
practical work of development. However, it is to be
hoped that the company will not be discouraged to
the quitting point by the unsatisfactory showing of
the past year's work, but will resume operations in the
near future with some one at the head of affairs at the
mine who can properly develop the property."
The career of the concern from its inception to date
should afford a salutary object-lession to British investors. It afforded a typical instance of a mining
company floated on the strength of the very largest
assurances, and a lavish use of promotion money and
•the names of titled and other directors of social standing, who, for the best part, knew nothing whatever of
mining or business management.
The I. X. L. mine at Rossland presents the curious
spectacle of a property which is free milling and
which has a ten-stamp mill within 1,000 feet of the
ore bins, shipping ore to a smelter instead of milling
and amalgamating on the spot. The reason is not
far to seek. Upon ore of the grade of the I. X. L. the
percentage loss in milling amounts to a higher sum-
than the amount charged for freight and treatment
by the smelter which pays the miner 95 per cent, of
the gold and silver value of his ore. This is an instructive object lesson in the progress made in smelting. Not so very long ago a free milling ore was the
most sought for and retained the highest profits,
grade for grade. Nowadays there is nothing to pick
and choose between a free milling and base ore, except that if the base ore contains elements favourable
for fluxing the advantage lies with the base ore.
volume of hearsay evidence , repeated "from a man
who was'working there," or "from a man who was
told by the superintendent at such and such a time,"
and so forth, to the effect that in its immense ore
bodies values only occur in spots, and that the general
average is too low to pay. Against this must be set
the fact that exactly the same thing was said abmt
the Le Roi during 1895 and 1896, and also about the
Centre Star from 1892 to the present day, and that
these mines are to-day cheerfully productive. The
Columbia-Kootenay has also been recently thoroughly
tested by Mr. Collins, and a scheme of development
outlined which no mining engineer would undertake
without enough ore in sight to justify it.
The Le Roi Company has anounced that it is about
to ship its dump of second-class ore, which contains
120,000 tons of rock. Fortunately for next year's record this enormous shipment will not all come into
this year's figures; but enough of it may to send the
tonnage up to 200,000 tons for 1899. This dump is
not being added to much at present, because the
grade of ore previously stored on it now goes straight
to the smelter. It will be remembered that under the
old management experiments were entered into at
the O.K. mill upon samples of this dump and it averaged about 8 dwt., of which a considerable proportion was saved on the plates, and it was freely stated
at the time that the company intended to erect a
stamp mill at the mine. This was not done, however,
probably because the present improvement in smelting rates was foreseen by the men that have brought
it about. There will very likely be further alarmist
rumours as to the decrease of the grade of Le Roi ore
when this shipment swells the tonnage, on the part of
those who read the signs of the times upside down.
The Le Roi returns for the first half of September
give a gross return from all values of just an inappreciable fraction over $12 a ton. When it is considered
that this allows the mine the full commercial value of
the copper in the ore, it is evident that this is ore
which would barely be profitable to a mine not operating its own smelter and not working on a large
scale. But it is profitable and very handsomely so.
The fact is that the ore in the Le Roi is just as rich as
it ever was, but the economies effected in treatment
have been so great that the Le Roi is able to make a
profit now on ore which was previously waste from a
commercial point of view. There is an excellent dividend for the shareholders lying already mined m the
second-class dump just as soon as the smelter is enlarged sufficiently to treat it. Meanwhile ihe mine,
instead of having its rich spots gouged out for the
purpose of sensational returns is making profits on
ore left standing before and storing up a vast accumulation of "ore in sight" of a higher average grade
than that which is now being worked satisfactorily.
To any conservative investor this should present a
very satisfactory state of affairs. But if it is satisfactory from the point of view of the Le Roi shareholders how much more so from the point of view of the
owners of other mines. Ore is now of commercial
value which even fjwo years ago was of no account
whatever, and this fact has already given a great
stimulus to production and development round Rossland. ♦
Whether the Columbia-Kootenay is a mine or not
is a question often discussed in Rossland.   There is a
There is a very persistent impression among them
50
THE MINING RECORD.
•- :■<-<■ _--.■»■:-.'--<■■>. 1 ■•<.,.-?. *\j.->«--a -• -*.'■:■ A -..-.-y:ir..-J-: ■„,.     ■■■J-'1i, ,;i;;
investing public in England that the Le Roi smelter     the value of ore in sight of the price asked for the
is not owned by the Le Roi Company ; it is an en-     property."
On account of legal dif-
It might be thought that Mr. Mackintosh had been
And fortunate indeed is, it for the interests of ".he Lc
Roi shareholders that it is so.
tirely mistaken impression.
ficullics in the way of a foreign corporation owning wrongly reported. But the remarkable similarity be-
real estate in the State of Washington it was neces- tween this and a paragraph in another interview
sary to effect the ownership of the smelter at North- shifts the onus from the shoulders of the much-endur-
port in a somewhat round about way. But except for ing reporter. To buy a mine for half the value of the
the one-quarter interest owned by Messrs. Bellinger ore in sight is in North America an impossibility, to
and I'ltrni the snu-ller is owned and operated solely sell it for the value of half the ore in sight would be
by and for the benefit of the Le Roi mining company the rankest folly.    Besides which the clause in the
agreement rendering it necessary to secure the unanimity of three well-known experts on any given subject, let alone ore in sight, is imprimis a bar upon this
syndicate's doing any business at all.    No three ex-
Mr. Carlyle is authority for the statement that on perts have ever been known to agree on anything,
the general average of shipments for this year the Le aiKi tne better known they are the more their opinions
Roi company   has made a   net   profit of   $7-5° Psr seem to differ.
ton of ore mined.   This requires a tonnage of 66,666 	
tons to earn 10 per cent on the capital of the com- Probably no journalist in British Columbia has ac-
pany.   This it has already exceeded during the pre- ccmplished more in the direction of drawing public
sent year, and at present rates of shipment and returns attention to the mineral resources of the rich district
an extra 4 per cent should be earned before the close 0,f Boundary Creek, than the present editor of the
of the year, bringing the capacity of the mine up to Midway Advance, Mr. E. Jacobs.    His conscientous
16 per cent, for this year.    Coming out of a mine reports'of the mines, or, to be more exact, the more
which has relatively unlimited resources of the same developed properties of Boundary Creek which reports
class of ore this must   be    considered a favourable during the past three years have   appeared   in    the
showing.    If it were all that could be done from a \rews-Advertiser and in  the   Mining Record;   his
mine of large capital and small vein pushed to its ut- habit of discountenancing boom statements, and the
most it would be but a small return.   But the Le Roi fearless stand  he has always taken on  matters af-
is unable to produce more only because it cannot hoist fecting the welfare of the district, have brought him
more and cannot keep the timbering of the mine up the usual reward—the dislike and antagonism of the
to a large production.   When the improvements un- many he has taken to task or with whose plans he
der way    are completed the output of the" mine can has interfered by his (to them) too honest statement
)f fact. But if Mr. Jacobs is not popular, he is at
least generally respected, and certainly outside the
district a great deal of dependence is placed upon
his opinions. In these times when it is the rule for
editors of the local newspapers published in our mining camps, to assume that their whole duty is comprised in the one effort to indiscriminately "boom"
the district in which their prints circulate, sublimely
careless whether they publish the truth or not, so
be increased to the limit of the hoisting capacity and
that output can be maintained for a very long life.
Exceedingly -satisfactory developments are attending" the opening out the West Le Roi in which is consolidated the No. 1 Josie and West Le Roi and Josie.
It is said that the old Josie workings have been extended into the West Le Roi and Josie ground, or
nitlicr. that this ground has been opened from these     long as t s attained, refresl        to find
workings and a very satisfactory chute of ore chscov- such local newspapers as the Midway Advance setting
ered. The No. 1 has been developed to the 400- an excellent example against this silly and really quite
loot level and is now in a position to break a good futile practice. Some few weeks ago the citizens of
deal of ore. This consolidation will assuredly add Greenwood tendered to the noted metallurgist, Mr.
another great mine to Rossland's list. The No. 1 and Paul Johnson, a complimentary dinner. In the cus-
thc West Le Roi and Josie are two properties which ternary course of the convivialities, speeches of
always had ore of a good grade on the surface. Con- the usual after-dinner type were indulged in, and
ditions were such, however, that more than the usual the guest of the evening was toasted and wined.' Af-
amoiuit of faulting and displacement was to be ex- ter this what could the poor man do ? Mr.
pected near the surface. Their development, however, Johnson rose to his feet and told the jolly corn-
has been very satisfactory from the first. In the No. pany that "the biggest niines on this continent will
1 particularly, a very small amount of work resulted be right around Greenwood." (Uproarious and en-
in the discovery of a large and permanent ore body, thusiastic applause.) Mr. Johnson did what was ex-
without question the extension of the War Eagle pected of him. lie felt happy himself and everyone
vein. was happy, so, instead of giving his hearers a long
and scientific disquisition on the vein formation of the
Boundary Creek district, or on the actual amount of
ore in sight in the mines, as calculated by a conservative mining engineer who takes nothing for
granted, he indulged in a little playful exaggeration
of language fitted to the occasion alone. This is the
view taken of the matter by the Midway Advance,
and we feel sure it is the correct one. So experienced
man as Mr. Paul Johnson in sober moments would
The following report of a passage in an interview
which an Eastern paper has with Mr. Mackintosh,
the ex-Governor of the Northwest Territories, rings
of conservative mine buying gone mad:
"You are at the head of what is known as the
Mackintosh syndicate?"
Yes, bul we take all responsibility of developing a
property before asking anyon* to buy it or advising certainly not give utterance to statements which "he
the public to invest, and by articles of agreement, could not substantiate; he would not surely make
three known experts must report that mere is twice     swh a rash assertion as is accredited to him beforeTHE MINING RECORD
5i
a scientific body, nor would he embody it in a report.
It is quite enough, meanwhile, to know that Mr.
Johnson and his principals have sufficient confidence
in the future of the Boundary Creek district to go to
the length of establishing there a large and costly
smelter.
The Columbia and Western Railway is at last completed as far as Greenwood, arid already preparations are being made for the consignment of ore from
some of the more developed mines of the district to
the Trail smelter. It is not likely, however, that the
mineral production of Boundary Creek will exceed or even come up to two hundred tons of ore a
week until next summer, when local smelting facilities should, by that time, be provided.
Mr. J. D. Kendall, the well-known mining engineer who was quite recently engaged in professional
work in this Province, has lately been interviewed in
London by the representative of a leading mining
journal. Mr. Kendall then gave the following opinion, which accurately, though briefly, explains why
so many London promoted and thence mismanaged
British Columbia mining companies have hitherto
failed to realize expectations. "I would like," he is
reported as saying, "to avail myself of this opportunity of saying that the very small financial success
which has hitherto attended the mining operations of
British companies in Western Canada is not attributable in the smallest degree to the scarcity of mineral
or to unfavourable conditions of working, but is the
effect of causes which ought not to be allowed to
operate, and can easily be avoided at the beginning,
and often overcome at later stages, by a knowledge
of the technical and commercial conditions to be dealt
with."
Mr. Frank Richards, of Liverpool, Atlin, Vancouver, etc., to whose strange promotion methods the
London Critic has referred in terms of justifiable censure, is very, very angry, not only with our London
contemporary, but also with the Mining Record. He
will not, however, take any proceedings against
the Critic, which, after the usual wont of one lashed
in its columns, he freely denounces as a "blackmailing sheet." The Critic can, of course, afford to laugh
at comment thus occasioned.
Elsewhere is published a letter from Mr. Henry
Croft, replying to a comment which appeared in last
month's issue of the Mixtng Record, referring to
the prospectus of the British Columbia Mining and
Exploration Company, Limited, of which he is one
of the organizers. It will be remembered that we
called attention to two statements in this prospectus:
(1) that the company's properties "are situated in
some of the best mining" districts of the Province—
and . . . shareholders will have the benefit of being
interested in different mining camps, thereby availing
themselves of the development work that is being done
on a number of the adjoining mines;" and (2nd) that
"the present sale of shares to the public will be
mainly devoted to the development of the properties."
Mr. Croft in his letter explains, with a considerable
show of ingenuity, the meaning it was intended should
be conveyed by these statements. We can only express
regret that  the  wording  in   the prospectus  should
have been such as to admit of an ambiguous interpretation. The first statement suggests to the ordinary reader, speculation, not mining; the second—
well, whatever construction you like to place on it.
"The present sale of the shares to the public will be
mainly devoted to the development of the properties;" mainly may mean anything from sixty to
ninety-nine per cent.; and to what purpose the balance of this money is to be devoted is not mentioned
in the prospectus. Too much care cannot be taken in
the preparation of prospectuses, and even honest-in-
tentioned concerns-, as under which category we believe the B.C. Mining and Exploration Company
may be placed, must expect criticism from the public
and the press if failing in this important particular.
A correspondent residing in Chihuahua, Mexico,
sends us for publication the following remarkable
circular which has been issued to the victims of a concern called the Union Trust and Smelter Manufacturing Co., of St. Louis :
■£=*=*5t*-44-
Cl\iI|TiaritIa, Mexico, Julio 3 de 1899.
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN
GENTLEMEN! N*
You are hereby requested to personally state your own complaints to the Postmaster general regarding your dealings and
transaction with mr H. Meinhard sect, Treas, Promotor, Presi-
dsnte manager of the Union Trust and Smelter mfg. Co. 415
Locust St Room 203. St Lomis. Mo.
May the good Lord have mercy on this exsequtiou proof confidence gentlemen and his hundreds of victims, who deeply
deplore their loss of faith and money through the mail by a
prospectus, which speakes of a way to become wealthy by
sending $2. to H. Meinhard & Co. this is what the St. Louis
Republic said on may 25 th. with a strong hint and sound
warning on may 29 th.
Prospectus which Speaks of a
way to Become Wealthy.
Within the past few days a number of St. Louisans
have received through the mail a prospectus of the
" Union Trust Consolidated Smelter Manufacturing Company" of this sity. The prospectus sets forth that the
company has incorporated with a capital of $1. 750, 000
and has obtained all the patents, franchises, trade and
options of a dozen or more in dividualcorporations throughout the State, of which it is now sole owner. It
offers for sale stock in the new corporation at $2 a
share, and guarantees a dividend of 10 per cent per
month on each share. It is further stated that " this is
no lottery or green goods, but a good snap to get rich,
guaranteed as good as gold in ang trust companv."
i
My clients Holt and Spears of .61 Paso, Texas, inwested
$ 1750. 00 with them for a fake smelting mashine, while the
swindled meoutof $ 1. 300 as agent for them in Mexico, very
regretfully. W. T Bricecare apartado 83 Durango. Mexico.
$M^M£
g3§
The London Mining Journal ought surely by now
to know that the Atlin gold fields are neither in Alaska, nor even in the Yukon country, but within British
Columbia. Yet under the heading', "Mining Men
and Matters," a recent issue contained the following:
"Mr. Rider Haggard has, it is stated, turned his attention from literature to the more profitable pursuit
of gold mining in Alaska. In company with Lord
Ernest Hamilton, he has proceeded to the Atlin gold
fields. Certain claims there, according to the correspondent of the San Francisco Chronicle have been pur-52
THE MINING RECORD.
n
m
chased by the novelist and his companion from Sailor
Bill Patridge for half a million dollars. Sailor Bill
was a few months ago a poor American sailor, but is
to-day a millionaire."
There are other mistakes in the paragraph, for
which, however, imaginative Pacific Coast newspaper
correspondents are responsible. Thus it is not Mr.
Rider Haggard, the famous novelist, but his brother,
Colonel Andrew Haggard, also a novelist, but better
known as an ex-military man and very capable writer
on angling, who is associated with Lord Ernest Hamilton's syndicate in certain Atlin claims and others on
the Coast, notably the Blue Bells mine. The syndicate was, moreover, warned in Vancouver to be
careful in acquiring property in Atlin, and did not
agree to pay "Sailor Bill," who is certainly no millionaire, such a wholly excessive sum, as anything approaching $500,000 for his Atlin interests.
Messrs. Gooderham and Blackstock are as large
stockholders and chief promoters of both the War
Eagle and the Centre Star Companies, assailed by
much-adverse criticism in Eastern Canadian financial circles, by reason of an alleged exaggerated estimate of profits made in the prospectus which accompanied the Centre Star flotation. In that prospectus
it was represented that the Centre Star should, from
shipments of 1,000 tons a week, pay $420,000 a year
in dividends. If so, say Toronto and Montreal money
men, how comes it that the War Eagle, a much better
equipped mine and shipping 2,000 tons a week only
pays $300,000 in dividends? This query Mejssrs.
Gooderham and Blackstock are not unnaturally requested to answer. Meanwhile War Eagle stock goes
down many points. An explanation would certainly
seem to be needed.
The troubles of the Dorotha Morton mine have
added a competent new official to the staff of the Ben
D'Or in Lillooet, for the company operating the latter mine has engaged the services as general manager of Mr. W. F. Lundy, who was until the other
day superintendent of the Dorotha Morton. Mr.
Lundy is an expert at battery work, having long
been conversant with it in South Africa, and under
, his superintendence very satisfactory results attended
the operation of the-Dorotha Morton mill and Cyanide plant.
The revelations that are being made in the trial at
St. John, New Brunswick, of the case of Domvilk-
versus the Klondike, Yukon and Stewart River
Pioneers, Limited, are throwing interesting but disconcerting light on to the very doubtful promotive
methods of this ill-starred Yukon company, and fully
account for its failure to realize the large boom
promises, on the strength of which the concern was
floated, to the detriment of many British investors.
The concern began in misrepresentations and continued in gross mismanagement.
When stock in a gold mining company or any other
company is pooled it is generally understood that the
lr.caning of this arrangement is that the promoters'
stock has been placed in such a position that it cannot be sold until the treasury stock is all disposed of;
such treasury stock being in the first place intended
for development purposes only. The promoters'
stock is supposed to remain in the pool intact, and
the certificates are not issued until the pool is leeiH-
mately broken.   Instances, however, are not wanting
in British Columbia mining companies where pooled
stock has been "bartered, sold and assigned," even
before the treasury stock has been all sold. This is
in direct violation of the pooling agreement and the
compact made with the public. It is contrary to the
express pledges made in the prospectuses and other
data issued to the public, and it is therefore to be con)
demned for that reason alone; if othexs were not wanting. Meanwhile, some will, naturally enough enquire how pooled stock can be sold if the certificates
are not available. In the case where the promoter is
one of the locators of the property and holds a. large
amount of promoters' stock for his interest, it is tacitly understood that he has a "pull" with the company's
directorate. While the pool prevents his getting pos-
scssion.of the stock certificates, in some way his sales
are recorded on the books of the company, and he is
thus protected in his transactions. In other words,
he is permitted to break the pool, the only difference
being this, that he is not furnished with the certificates
but his sales are recorded and the purchaser takes his
place for so much of the stock as he has purchased in
this manner.
RECENT MINING DECISIONS,
DART  VS.   ST.   KEVERNE  MINING   CO.
Mr. Justice Drake has decided in this action that a
mineral claim cannot embrace several detached pieces
of land. Particulars of the judgment will appear in
a later issue.
RE  O.  K.   GOLD  MINING  CO.
Motion of Liquidator of Full Court for leave to
enter for hearing the appeal against the allowance of
the claim of the Old National Bank of Spokane, a
creditor of the company, amounting to $35,853-74-
Mr. Justice Drake delivering the judgment of the
Court dismissed the motion on the 7th September,
1899. The result is the appeal falls to the ground
and the Old National Bank will be allowed to prove
in the winding up of the company for the full amount
of their claim.
PENDER VS.  WAR EAGLE MINING CO.
The facts in this case were that it was one of the arrangements of the War Eagle mine that, when working with drills in a winze or upraise the drills as they
require sharpening are thrown down for the purpose of being carried away for repair. A platform of
wood was constructed for receiving the drills, and
occasionally a drill either missed the platform or
bounded off it and fell into the tunnel. Whilst the
plaintiff was passing along the tunnel he was struck
and injured by one of these drills.
The action was tried three times. On the first
trial, judgment was' given for the plaintiff and on appeal a new trial was ordered.
The jury disagreed on the second trial.
At the conclusion of the third trial the jury found
that the defendants were guilty of negligence .in not
having the platform so constructed as to prevent the
steel drills from shooting into the ninnel, and that
the plaintiff was not aware that the drill which injured him was coming down at the time he passed,
and assessed the damages at $
On the motion for judgment, the trial Judge- entered judgment for the defendants, holding that there
was contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiff disentitling him to recover.
On the apoeal, the Full Court reversed the decision
of the trial Judee, but considering the damages excessive as found by the jury, reduced them to $500.THE MINING RECORD.
53
'*NOTES ON THE YMIR MINE AND ITS MILL
PRACTICE.
(By S. S. Fowler, S.B., Nelson.)
LYING north of the International Boundary, west
of Kootenay Lake, east of Columbia River, and
south of Nelson, and the outlet of Kootenay Lake,
is a roughly quadrangular mountainous country covering about 1,450 square miles.
View of Wild Horse Creek Valley from Ymir Mine.
Occupying the central portion of this quadrangle
is the drainage area of the Salmon River, a considerable stream which has its source within a few miles of
Nelson, and flowing south joins the Pend D'Oreille
near the Boundary.
This Salmon River country, covering about 900
square miles, was practically inaccessible until the
construction of the Nelson & Fort Sheppard Railway
in 1893, and it was not until the summer of 1896 that
any considerable mining activity was manifest. The
country, therefore, is possessed of a very brief history.
Aside from the placer mining operations of 35 years
ago, which were carried on near the mouth of Salmon
and along the Pend D'Oreille, there is now no evidence of mineral location until about 1885, when some
two years before the discovery of the Silver King
near Nelson, by the Hall brothers, locations of quartz
claims were made by these same men near the head of
Wild Horse Creek, a small stream entering the Salmon from the northeast at the present town of Ymir,
18 miles from Nelson.
Nothing more appears to have been done for the
next decade along the Salmon Valley, but, as stated
above, in 1896 many claims were staked, and since
then the district has made substantial progress. Today, aside from the property named in the title, the
Fern, on Hall Creek, the Porto Rico, on Barrett
Creek, the Yellowstone, on Sheep Creek, the Second
Relief and Arlington on the North Fork of_ the Salmon, are considerable producers, or nearly in condition to produce, and there are many other properties
throughout the district affording excellent prospects,
* Paper read before the September meeting of the Canadian
Mining Institute.
and indeed some of them have made small shipments
of smelting ore.
Physically, the Salmon country is not complicated
in structure. It is mountainous, but few of the mountains reach an altitude of more than 7,500 to 8,000 feet,
and the summits are generally rounded. The creek
valleys are deep, however, and glaciation appears to
have been an important factor in determining the
present topography. The glaciers, however, have, I
believe, all disappeared, although in the Slocan country to the north there are many remnants of that
powerful moulding agent to be seen.
The rocks which underlie the region being described, are predominantly of igneous origin. In a
very general way it may be said that east of the Salmon the granites are in evidence, while to the west
augite porphyrites, schists derived from them, some
small gabbro bosses and large areas of tuffs and agglomerate occupy the field. But throughout these
rocks may be seen considerable inclusions of sedimentary rocks, principally slates, except along -md
near the range which forms the watershed between
the Salmon and Kootenay Lake, where there are thick
beds of quartzites and some crystalline limestone, extending more or less continuously southwesterly into
American territory. The country is a very interesting field for geological research, and deserves more
extended study than can be given it for a long time.
The Dominion Geological Survey sent a party into
this field under R. G. McConnell during the summ.-r
of 1897, but litle more than a general reconnaisoner
was accomplished, the shortness of the season and
smoke from the forest fires usually causing an early
return of the field parties.
As to the respective ages of the rocks hereabouts,
the slates have not been traced to connection with the
Kaslo series east of the Slocan slates, but from their
lithological features one is inclined to ally them with
that series, and if that is proper then the small slate
areas of Salmon River are probably of Cambrian or
pre-Cambrian age. The various basic igneous rocks
may be of different ages, but Mr. McConnell places
Ymir Mine.54
THE MINING RECORD.
m
the augite porphyrites in the carboniferous. Some
of the granites appear to be comparatively recent, but
the youngest rocks of the vicinity occur in dikes of
blackish to dark grey colour, varying much in tex-
Ymir Mine—Another View.
ture and composition, and piercing the rocks above
named, and 1 believe, most -of the veins of the district. Generally these dikes may be described 'As
mica diabase, the biotite probably being a first product of alteration, while frequently the whole mass
has become completely kaolinized.
Coming to the Ymir mine itself, we find it on the
west side of the valley of a North Fork of Wild Horse
Creek. This valley lies in a slate area several miles
in length and about 4,000 or 5,000 feet wide. The
slates are limited on the east by granite and on the
west by porphyrite. They strike about N. 35 E. and
stand on edge, the line 01 contact with the porphyrites being approximately parallel to the strike. Extending from a point near the contact in a direction
about N. 65 E. is a fracture in the slates which is
traceable several thousand feet, but within the distance along which this one fracture can be identified
there are no ore bodies known other than that which
has become the Ymir mine.
This property was taken over by its present owners
in November of 1896, since which time 5,000 feet of
development has been done, resulting in showing an
ore body about 500 feet in length, with its end limits
practically parallel and vertical. A depth of nearly
500 feet has been attained, but very little water has
been encountered, in fact barely sufficient to justify
running a pump for sinking.
In plan this ore body shows a decidedly lenticular
shape, wtih a maximum width of ore of about 30 *eet.
No disturbances of importance have shown themselves, but there are many slips and several partially
open narrow fissures, while two principal dikes with
Office, Compressing Plant and Storehouse at Ymir Mine
Tramway Loading Station at Ymir.
a number of branches cross the deposit generally
nearly at right angles to the latter. From a structural
standpoint these dikes form one of the most interesting features of the mine, and will be alluded to again.
Beside the numerous horses of slate, which in so
wide a fissure must be frequent, the vein filling is
quartz, impregnated with pyrite, galena and blende,
no copper mineral having ever been found.
The ore appears to have been deposited at two different periods or else derived from different sources
for the eastern 300 feet shows a perfectly white quartz,
and the sulphides contained are coarser in structure
and brighter in colour than in the western 200 feet
of the ore chute, where the quartz is not only frequently of dark smoky blue colour and often nearly
opaque, but the gold tenure is considerably higher
Near the region where these two varieties of quartz
join they are curiously intermixed, but may be easily-
distinguished. Throughout the mine the walls are
usually very free, but in places along the hanging ofTHE MINING RECORD.
55
the blue quartz there is not only no clay parting, but
the quartz seems to have replaced the slate, retaining
the structural features of the latter and becoming difficult to distinguish underground from the country
rock.
Subsequently to the deposition of the ore of both
Aerial Tramway—Ymir Mine—to Mill.
these bodies, the dykes were intruded and the fractures which rendered their presence possible seem to
have been followed by movements more or less in the
direction of the plane of the vein and in parts, along
both walls, with the result that other fissures were
formed, some extending for some distance into the
footwall country, diagonally to the strike of the vein,
and others along the hanging wall. These last fissures are filled with a very nearly barren white quartz,
carrying at times sharply angular fragments of slate.
The later movements have also created fractures in
the ore body, along one of which at least, where there
is a local concentration of galena,—oxidising action
has been going on with the result of producing a
band of "carbonate," affording fine specimens ol
Cerussite and a local but marked increase in the gold
values, the gold being largely free but invisible except
after carefuL panning.
Another effect of these movements is the faulting
and fracturing of the dikes and their being rendered
more easily subject to alteration. This faulting movement is in the direction of the plane of the vein, but
nowhere has it been extensive; i.e., not more than 3
or 4 feet. The material along the plane is usually so
soft as to make it difficult to get specimens shewing
striation, still we have one from the hanging wall side
with two distinct series of striae.
Stoping has not yet proceeded far enough to enable
us to know all we desire of the structural features of
the vein, but before leaving this part of our subject,
I may cite an interesting freak of the larger of the two
main dikes we have met with. In the No. 2 Level a
four-foot. dike comes squarely up to the footwall,
where it turns a right angle to the left along the wall,
and so continues, gradually curving to'the right for
20 feet where it crossed the drift squarely. Going
through the dike we found slate, and cross-cutting on
the outer side of the dike, we found 11 suddenly turning again and butting against a fault fissure, nearly
filled with two feet of calcite. Just how or where the
dike proceeds into the hanging wall we do not yet
know, nor is it specially important. The main point
to be observed is that our failure to closely examine
what we presumed to be the footwall rock led us astray, and into an expanse which was useless at the
time except to reveal an interesting structure.
We have not yet developed any special mining sys^
tem at the Ymir, nor have we so far encountered the
necessity of any, for the first stoping was done only
in March last, and since the first of June our mill has
been principally employed in handling an accumulation of several thousand tons on dumps.
However, the fact that much of the ore body is too
wide for stulls and that good mining timbers are
scarce, together with the pres'sure of what will probably prove itself to be a not too strong hanging-wall,
will undoubtedly necessitate a system of combined
crib-work, filled with waste and of square setting.
The mine produces two general classes of ore; first,
mill stuff; seeond, crude ore. The former is sent
directly to mill by a Hallidie Ropeway, about 2,400
feet in length from the mouth of No. 3 Tunnel, i.e.,
the lowest which has exit to the surface. The second
general class consists of two sub-classes, crude galena
and oxidized ore or carbonate. Both of these an
small in amount compared to the milling ore, and they
are shipped directly to the Hall Mines Smelter at
Nelson, the crude ore in bulk and the carbonate in
sacks. Milling material on reaching a bin at the lower
tramway  terminal  passes through  a  No.   3   Gates
Interior Yiew of Tramway Loading Station at Mine.
crusher, which reduces the coarsest to pass about a
2-inch ring. Below the crusher is a 200-ton bin, from
which the feed passes by a tram-car after being
weighed,' into the battery bins proper. The crusher
and tram terminal are in a separate building, but the
cost of tramming is a very small item.
The mill proper embraces a 40-stamp 850-lbs. bat-56
THE MINING RECORD.
tery, arranged on four sets of ten stamps each, eight
silvered copper plates, 56 in. x 12 feet; four sets of
four-cone classifiers, and twelve six-foot Frue vanners. This plant is driven by water with a 6-foot
Pelton wheel under 415 feet net head, the crusher
being separately driven by a 24-inch motor under
320 feet head. The stamps make from 96 to 102, 6^-
inch drops per minute, and with an average issue of
7 inches, crush a little over 100 tons per diem through
No. 9 diagonal slot screens, i.e., slightly over 2} tons
per day per stamp.
We have found a tendency toward banking of the
pulp at each end of the mortar, to avoid which we
give the first and fifth stamps about ij inch greater
drop. I may also say that we intend trying the method
of introduction of feed water advocated by Mr.
Bernald McDonald, which formed the subject of an
interesting paper by that gentleman read before the
Institute.
The bullion produced averages about 580-1000
gold, 400-1000 silver, and 20-1000 base, thus showing practically no amalgamation of lead, but the presence of a very considerable amount of free silver.
Without disclosing the gold tenure of our tailings, I
may say that they are most satisfactory, and in fact
are remarkably low when we consider the apparent
baseness of the ore. Of the total gold and silver recovered we find in the bullion 82 per cent, of the gold,
27 per cent, of the silver, and in concentrates 18 per
cent, of the gold and 73 per cent, of the silver.
The ore, thus far, has shown itself quite free from
acids and from arsenic, antimony and tellurium, a
fact which is partially reflected in the very low consumption of quicksilver, viz., about 2-10 of 1 oz.
avoirdupois per ton crushed.
Other properties in the vicinity of the Ymir arc
not yet sufficiently developed to show whether or not
this mineris exceptional in its size or the character of
T^M!
Interior of New Bunk House at the Mine.
In operation we employ one inside plate, and on
it accumulate about 40 per cent, of our gold. The
outside plates slope 2 inches in a foot, and on the upper 24 inches of their length we gather about 80 per
cent, of the recovered free gold which passes the
screens. The lower part of the plate (10 feet), we find
to be very valuable, and it passes an extremely small
amount only of free gold. An interesting feature of
the operation of the lower part of the plate, is that the
amalgam on that portion is very much higher in
silver than that gathered elsewhere, and proportionately lower in gold.
Zinc blende and pyrite cause us no trouble in keeping the plates clean, but the extremely small si7c of
the galena particles, together with their gravity,
causes them to catch in the minute depressions of the
amalgam and gradually to cover the latter. For this
reason our plates are dressed every six hours, and
thus we are able to keep them in excellent condition.
This result we consider good work in view of the fact
that our concentrates amount to 6 2-10 per cent, of
'.he mill feed, and contains over 14 per cent, lead, and
10 per cent. zinc.
Tunnel No. 3, Ym,ir Mine.
its ore, but it seems highly probable that the success
which seems in store for it will have much to do toward bringing the Salmon River country into prominence.
VERBATIM EVIDENCE  IN  THE IRON
MASK-CENTRE STAR LITIGATION.
Having been requested by many of our readers
throughout the Province to publish in these columns
a verbatim report of the evidence in the Iron Mask-
Centre Star litigation, Mr. H. F. Evans, our Rossland correspondent, was enabled through the kindness of Mr. J. B. Hastings to carry out our instructions to copy the official report of the proceedings and
evidence taken, and which we are in consequence enabled to publish in serial form.THE MINING RECORD.
57
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BRITISH
COLUMBIA.
Before Mr. Justice Walkem.
Between :
The Iron Mask Gold Mining Company
(Foreign)        -        -'       -     - Plaintiffs,
AND
The Centre Star Mining and Smelting
Company (Foreign), George Gooderham and Thos. Gibbs Blackstock - Defendants.
Rossland, B.C., April 17, 1899.
The Registrar—The only case on the docket that I
know of is between the Iron Mask Gold Alining
Company (Foreign) and the Centre Star Mining and
Smelting Company (Foreign).
The Court—Are there any appearances for the respective parties?
Mr. E. V. Bodwell—Your Lordship, I appear in
the case on behalf of the plaintiffs, as does also my
friend Mr. A. H. Macneil.
Mr. A. P. Davis—Mr. A. C. Gait and I appear for
the defendants.
The Court—I understand that you are not going
to open the case now. I suggest this, that the case
be called and regularly opened, and if you want an
adjournment, that the main trial be adjourned to
such day as you may agree to.
Mr. Bodwell—Yes, My Lord, there are two motions here, notice of which has been given, and my
friend Mr. Davis and I thought it would be convenient, subject to Your Lordship's direction on the
point, to dispose of these motions to-day and then
adjourn the formal opening of the case, that is, the
beginning of the evidence, until Tuesday next.
The Court—Suppose we call this the beginning of
the case. -
Mr. Bodwell—These motions are, of course, a part
of the case. The case, I understand, is now open,
and these motions are made. After these motions are
disposed of, then we have arranged to commence
taking evidence.
The Court—I will hear the motions just stated now.
What motion is it?
Mr. Bodwell—I have a motion, and my friend, Mr.
Davis, has a motion. We' have a motion to amend
the pleadings, Your Lordship.
Your Lordship will remember the form in which
the pleadings were originally framed. The plaintiffs'
statement of claim was a statement that they were the
owners of a certain mineral claim, and that the defendants had trespassed on that mineral claim and
taken ore therefrom. The defendants pleaded in defence to that, that they had a mineral claim and
extra-lateral right. But a short time ago, in fact within the last three weeks, certain information came into
- our possession and upon that information we founded
an application to amend the pleadings which were
heard and disposed of in Victoria, arid certain amendments to the statement of reply were allowed. I
think perhaps I had better refer Your Lordship to
the amendments now. They are paragraphs ia, ib,
ic. id, and ie.
The Court—Who was the Judge?
Mr. Bodwell—Mr. Justice Martin.
The amendment which we ask for now is in the
same   line,   and practically raises a similar issue to
that which has been already allowed.    In fact, the
first amendment which we (preliminary motion of
plaintiffs) ask does not change in any way the substance of the amendment of paragraph ib, except
that it states the facts exactly as the evidence will
disclose them. At the time we made this amendment we were not fully instructed upon the facts as
we are at present, and it is necessary, I think.
The Court—Does this extend the effect of ib, that
you are applying now to amend?
Mr. Bodwell—To amend ib to conform to the
evidence, as we expect it will be adduced.
The Court—I suppose I had better read it and see
what it is. (The Court reads the affidavit). The
papers show that, "On the 7th day of July, 1890, one
Bourgeois purported to record a claim called the
Centre Star mineral claim. At the date of such
record the said Bourgeois and one Morris were partners or joint owners of such Centre Star mineral
claim, and in the year 1891 an arrangement was entered into between the said Bourgeois and Morris
whereby they agreed that their interests in the said
claims should be shown upon the record thereof in
the mining recorder's office, and accordingly the
said Bourgeois abandoned his former record,"—this
was not in the pleadings before, at all?
Mr. Bodwell—No;, this was an amendment which
was allowed.
The Court—I do not recollect Bourgeois name in
it.
Mr. Bodwell—No; it was all discovered within the
kst three weeks. .
The Court (resuming the reading)—"and accordingly the said Bourgeois abandoned his former record of the said alleged Centre Star mineral claim."
Bourgeois and Morris were Centre Star locators, I
suppose.   Preliminary motion?
Mr. Bodwell—That is the case we want to show
now.
The Court (resuming the reading—"and on the
71I1 day of July, 1891, re-recorded the said claim, and
the said other claim in the name of himself and the
said Morris, and the plaintiffs say that the title of the
defendants, if any, to the said alleged Centre Star
mineral claim is based upon the said record of the
7th day of July."   That is, of their joint record, 1891?
Mr. Bodwell—Yes, sir.
The Court (resuming the reading)—"and that if it
shall be proved—which the plaintiffs deny—that the
said alleged apex of the said alleged vein is on
gicund contained within the limits of the said alleged
Centre Star mineral claim."
Mr. Bodwell—If they prove an apex, we say their
claim dates from the record of 7th day of July, "1891.
The Court—If the Centre Star proves it. What
you want to show is, first, the location on that?
Mr. Bodwell—Yes, sir.
The Court—And the record of Bourgeois and
Morris, that being the origin of their title according
to vour statement.
Mr. Bodwell—Yes, sir.
The Court—"And that if it shall be proved—which
the plaintiffs deny—then it is a question about their
lines?"
Mr. Bodwell—I can explain it in a word now, I
th-nk.
The Court—In other words, the apex is in your
ground?
Mr. Bodwell—No: that their title relates back to
the 7th day of July, 1891; that follows from other
pleas.58
THE MINING RECORD.
The Court—I think I understand; perhaps I am
wrong. The alleged apex is contained "within the
limits of the said (preliminary motion) alleged Centre
Star mineral claim.    Well, you deny that?
Mr. Bodwell—Yes, sir.
The Court (resuming the reading)—"then the
plaintiffs say that the Iron Mask mineral claim is a
prior location."
Mr. Bodwell—"On the dip" under the act of 1891,
The Court—On the dip itself?
Mr. Bodwell—Yes, sir; Your Lordship will remember that the act of 1891 changed the Mineral
Act and provided that the prior locator on the dip
should have a priority over a subsequent locator on
the apex of the same vein, that is, if there were no
adjoining owners.
The Court—I understand, that is to say, if they
then had the apex on their ground, still, if the adjoining locator first got to the vein by reason of the
c'ip, that he would have a prior claim?
Mr. Bodwell—That is it.
The Court—That is in case he met it or intersected
it.
Mr. Bodwell—He would have the vein all the way
down, because he was a prior locator on the dip.
The Court—All the way, but not into the adjoining
ground. He would have the vein all the way down
from where he intersected the dip.
Mr. Bodwell—Yes, he would have his own vein to
that point.
The Court—He would have his vein down, from
that point—not down to that point—but down from
that point?
Air. Bodwell—We are really getting beyond the
point for the purpose of this amendment. My Lord.
All we want to show is that their location—in fact
we have been allowed to plead that—the plea which
Your Lordship has just read has been already made.
We have been allowed to state that their location is
a location dating from the (preliminary motion) 7th
of July, 1891, and not from the 7th of July, 1890, and
'that we come within the provisions of the amendment
of the law, which took place in 1891, and, being the
prior locator on the dip we have all of the rights
which flow from that, whatever they may be.
The Court—Mr. Bodwell, as a matter of information to me, did the act require, for instance, your
people to strike the dip? I mean to strike the dip by
sinking?
Mr. Bodwell—No; I don't say the act required
anything about it at all; but if this state of facts were
proved, that upon one claim a man_had an apex of
the vein and sinking on that vein he intersected another on an adjoining claim, if he had the prior location, would have priority because he was on the dip
before the other man was on the apex.
The Court—I understand you; you mean whether
he sunk on it or not.
Mr. Bodwell—That would be the point exactly.
The Court—I understand you.
Mr. Bodwell—The facts as set out there are not
exactly as they will appear in the evidence, and I seek
to make an amendment which will confirm the statement in the pleadings to the facts as they will be
proven, and if Your Lordship will look at that plea
which is drawn there and the b. d., you will see the
difference. The difference is just this, in a word:
The amendment that has been allowed states that after
1891 Boursreois and Morris became partners. As a
matter of fact, they were partners in the year 1890,
before they discovered or located any of the claims
in question. Bourgeois and Morris entered into a
partnership, under the terms of which it was arranged
that they should (preliminary motion 11) have a
joint interest in every claim which either one of them
discovered or which was recorded or located in their
joint names, or in the names of either one of them
separately. That arrangement continued down to
and past the year 1891; in fact, down to the time
when the Centre Star claim was sold to Durant and
Larbet, who are the predecessors of the Centre Star
Company.
The Court—Air. Bodwell, which was the prior location?   I forget.
Mr. Bodwell—It is alleged that the Centre Star is
the prior location. The Centre Star has the prior
record. The amendment that I now wish to make is
in these works:
"The plaintiffs further say that prior to the month
of July, 1890, and prior to the date of the discovery,
location or record of any of the mineral claims hereinafter mentioned, one Joseph Bourgeois and one
Icseph Morris entered into an agreement by which
it was stipulated that they should prospect together
for mineral claims, and should be joint owners of any
and all mineral claims discovered by them, or either
of them, or located or recorded in their or either of
their names. In pursuance of the said agreement the
said Bourgeois and Morris, during the summer of
1890, prospected together in the district in which the
claims in question in this action are situated, and
while so prospecting discovered a certain mineral
claim, which was recorded on the 7th day of July,
1890, in the name of the said Joseph Bourgeois as
the Centre Star mineral claim (which said mineral,
claim is alleged by the defendants to be the Centre
Star mineral claim, in questoin in this action). The
said Bourgeois and Morris, about the same time also
located and recorded a number of other mineral
claims in the neighbourhood of the said Centre Star
(preliminary motion 13) mineral claim, and were and
continued to be joint owners of all the mineral claims
discovered by them in the said district and recorded
in their or either of their names. On the 7th day of
July, 1891, the said Bourgeois and Morris procured
the said Centre Star and the said other mineral claims
to be re-recorded, in the joint names of the said
Bourgeois and A'lorris, in order that their joint ownership in the said claims, which still continued, might
appear on the records of the office of the mining recorder for the district in which the said claims were
situated. And the plaintiffs say that the said re-
record of the said Centre Star mineral claim amounted
in law to an abandonment of the said claim, recorded
on the 7th day of July, 1890, and that the title of the
defendants, if any, to the said alleged Centre Star
mineral claim is based upon the said record of the
said claims made in the joint names of the said
Bourgeois and Morris on the 7th clay of July, 1891,
and if it shall be proved—which the plaintiffs deny—
that the said alleged apex of the said alleged vein is
on grounds contained within the limits of the said
alleged Centre. Star mineral claim, that the plaintiffs
say that the Iron Mask mineral claim is a prior location on the dip of the said alleged vein, if anv, and
the plaintiffs claim the benefit of the provisions of
section 21 of the Aiineral Act, 189T."
That is the way in which we wish that paragraph
to read. Now, we seek to add another paragraph
which carries out the same line and shows this, thatTHE MINING RECORD.
59
Bourgeois and Morris, being joint owners, as aforesaid, located not only the Centre Star, but the Idaho
mineral claims, and that the Idaho and Centre Star
were on the same vein, and therefore the location of
the Centre Star was bad, and never became a good
location; but whatever rights the Centre Star people
have in that vein or in that mineral claim dates, not
from the record, and is based, not upon the location,
but upon the arrangement, whatever it was, that was
made with the Governriient, by which they obtained
a patent in 1893. The Centre Star mineral claim was
patented in the year 1893, and that in the year 1893
there was no provision in the law for granting ex-
tralateral rights, and therefore the claim of the Centre Star people to extra-lateral rights is not founded
upon the statute; that is to say, if their title began in
1893, they could acquire no extra-lateral rights with
respect to the Centre Star mineral claim; if their title
began in 1890, then they would acquire a certain class
of mineral rights. If their title began in 1891, they
acquired no extra-lateral rights of any kind or description. Now, then, the amendment which we seek
to make—the point which we wish to bring to Your
Lordship's attention is this: That the title of the
Centre Star people being based upon a patent, that
the patent relates back to the first valid act which the
Centre Star people or their predecessors in title took
in order to found the claim which afterwards resulted
ii a patent; that their original location, being bad,
under the Mineral Act, could not be a valid location,
but if they have any right at all it is based, not upon
location, but upon an agreement between the locators
and the Government, under the terms of which it was
arranged that notwithstanding the invalidity of their
original location, they should still have a patent, but
that patent would relate back, then, not to the location, but to the agreement, implied agreement—for
it must be so taken—with the Government, by reason of which they got a title (Preliminary Motion 14),
which would be in the year 1893. But at that time
the Government had no power; no officer of the" Land
Department had any authority to issue a patent for
a mineral claim which would contain the incident of
extra-lateral rights.
The Court—This is your case: You say Bourgeois
arid Alorris entered into a partnership prior to 1890?
Mr. Bodwell—Yes.
The Court—That the ground was taken up in
Bourgeois' name only; is that correct?
Mr. Bodwell—The Centre Star was taken up in
the name of Bourgeois; the Idaho was taken up in
the name of Morris.
The Court—Whatever it was, it would not matter.
The battle is with the Centre Star just now.
Mr. Bodwell—Yes.
The Court—Bourgeois took up the Centre Star?
Mr. Bodwell:—Yes.
The Court—The claim wai> recorded in Bourgeois' name?
Mr. Bodwell—Yes.
The Court—At least, it was recorded in his name
there; he took it up, although they were partners, as
you allege.
Air. Bodwell—Yes.
The Court—Do you allege that that record here
over-rides the partnership or the partnership overrides the record—because that is what it comes to?
Mr. Bodwell—The two would stand together in
this way: The arrangement between the two was that
the Centre Star should be owned by them jointly,
and that the Idaho should be owned by them jointly.
Whether the Centre Star was recorded in the name of
Bourgeois or Morris would make no difference; it
was the joint property of both. (Perliminary Motion 15.) If it was recorded in the name of Bourgeois, then Bourgeois'would be holding an undivided
half interest in that mineral claim for Morris.
The Court—In trust; that is your point?
Air. Bodwell—Yes. The Idaho being recorded in
the name of Morris, Morris held an undivided in-
. terest to the Idaho for Bourgeois, therefore they were
both the joint owners of the Centre Star and of the
Idaho, and the Statute, section 80, is quite familiar
to Your Lordship. I think it is section 80, of the
Act of 1888, says—the same langauge has been continued down through all of the Mineral Acts to the
[.resent day : "No free miner or incorporated company shall be entitled to hold, directly or in the name
of another person, more than one mineral claim on
the same lode or vein, except by purchase." Now,
there was no purchase. The only title which either
Bourgeois or Alorris had was the title by location.
The Court—In other words, you say they had two
mineral claims?
Mr. Bodwell—They had two mineral claims on the
same lode, in direct contravention of the Acts. Therefore, their locations both of the Centre Star and of
the Idaho were unlawful locations.
The Court—Air. Bourgeois was the locator of the
Centre Star and Alorris the locator of the Idaho,
each owning a half interest in the other?
Mr. Bodwell—Yes.
The Court—Contrary, as you say, to section 80.
Mr. Bodwell—Yes. Therefore, it was an unlawful location, and no title can be founded on that location.
The Court—An unlawful location in each of them?
(Preliminary Alotion  16.)
Air. Bodwell—In each of them, and as to both1
claims.
The Court—Therefore, no lawful title to either.
Don't these sections come into operation after the
certificate of improvement—those sections that refer
to getting a certificate of improvement—come into
operation then?
Mr. Bodwell—That will be a matter of defence, of
course, to which proper weight will have to be given.
Aly friend, Afr. Davis, will rejoin, as he has already
rejoined that we did not add that, and that question
will have to be considered and decided. But just ^
for the moment the point I want to make is, that
there can be no lawful location under the Act in this
way, therefore, no title can be founded on that location. If the patent subsequently issued to the Centre Star, that patent must either be considered to be
invalid altogether, or if valid, to be founded upon an
arrangement implied by which the Government
agreed to raise its contravention of that Statute and,
notwithstanding the defect in the location, to give a
patent for the mineral claim, but the patents would
then depend not upon location—for that was alto-'
gether bad, and always bad.
The   Court—I   suppose   Air.   Davis  is  going to
answer you by quoting Farmer vs. Livingston.
Mr. Bodwell—Farmer vs. Livingston does not apply to this case. In that case Farmer, whoever was
the party applying, I think it was Farmer, had not
acquired any right in the land at all, because his
application for a homestead entry had never been ac-6o
THE MINING RECORD.
cepted by the department, and the decision in Farmer vs. Livingston does not touch the point which is
before Your Lordship now at all, for Your Lordship
will see that it is not an attack upon the patent. It
can be decided quite consistently with the patent being allowed to stand. The patent, in words, gives to
the grantee (Preliminary Motion of Plaintiffs) from
the Crown the mineral claim called the Centre Star
mineral claim, and the rights which are provided under section 31 of the Act of 1888, which were extra-
lateral rgihts. Now, if there had never been any
change in the law, the point which I- am making perhaps would not deserve very serious consideration;
but the change in the law makes the dates upon
which these titles rely of the utmost importance. As
I stated a moment ago, if a man had a location in
1888, he obtained a certain kind of extra-lateral
rights; in 1891 he obtained a different kind; after
1891 be obtained no extra lateral rights at all. Now,
the point I make is: This title cannot be traced back
to the location, because the location was absolutely
bad, and there was no authority in any department
of the Government to make that location good. If
the patent issued at all, it issued by virtue of an arrangement and a presumed power in some officer of
the Government to waive the invalidity in the former
location and to,give a patent notwithstanding that.
But, as I stated before, the minute you reach that
conclusion, then the patent depends, not upon location, but upon the agreement with the Government
by which that invalid location was to be considered
as not having occurred.
The Court—There is no provision, so far as I remember—except you have seen it yourself—in the
Act giving the Government power to waive these
conditions.
Mr. Bodwell—No, I am entitled to go that far,
but I do not need to. I am entitled to show as the
uniform course of decision in British Columbia has
been, that the Mineral Act contains within itself all
the powers which are to be given to the Government. There is no presumption of an extraordinary
power outside of the express wording of the Mineral
Act, and it does not confer upon the officers of (Preliminary Alotion 18) the Land Department any authority to depart from the Act in granting rights
which are dependent upon the Act altogether.
The Court— I do not suppose the other side will
dispute that. I recollect Mr. Gait quoted some American case that went that far; but really without
quoting any American case, the land laws, as well
as the mineral laws of the Province, speak for themselves. The Government has no power to override them.
Air. Bodwell—No; the point which my friend will
make is this—and the case is a perfectly arguable
one, but I think I can make a great deal' of trouble
for him, and I hope I may be able to convince Your
Lordship that I am right on that—the case which
my friend will make is this: The patent is a record,
and as a record it is unassailable, except there ap-
pear_ defects upon the face of it. Well, that is true
within certain limits. A record of any court is only
good, if the court has the jurisdiction to make the
record. No court can exceed its jurisdiction and
then say: "There is our record; you cannot attack
our jurisdiction, because we have a record." The
cases all draw that distinction; eveiy American case
which can be cited, draws the distinction that where
the officers of the Land Department act within the
limits of their jurisdiction and come to a certain decision upon facts which are before them, their decision upon those matters of fact cannot be attacked
in any collateral proceedings; but where the Land
Officers act in respect to a matter over which they
have no jurisdiction, or misapply the law to a state
of facts which are proved, in either one of those
cases the patent can be attacked collaterally. Now,
as I say, I might argue this very fairly, and I submit
with a good deal of force, that the Mineral Act (Preliminary Motion 19) did not give to any officer of
the Land Department jurisdiction to say that one.
locator having two' mineral claims on the same lode
or ledge could hold either one of them. But I need
not discuss that question, because I can put my case
upon a different ground, and one which will leave
the question of the patent out of consideration. There
was a case in the United States which illustrates
particularly the point I wish to> make; that is the case
which has been quoted to Your Lordship in argument
here very frequently; the case of Waterloo vs. Poe.
The Court—The ejectment case?
Mr. Bodwell—No; Poe is the name of a man; it
is not our friend "John Poe," My Lord; I thought it
was until I saw the record. The case is in the 54th
Federal, but I can tell Your Lordship in few words
the point I want to make. In that case a patent
was proved, but evidence was received to show that
the original location was made without parallel end-
lines, and when the survey was made	
The Court—Evidence was received to show no
end-lines ?
Mr. Bodwell—No, parallel end-lines in the original
location; but it was proved that when the survey
was made the end-lines were drawn in and made parallel. One side contended that they were entitled
to go behind the patent and show that the original
location had no parallel end-lines, and therefore that
the subsequent location could not find extra-lateral
rights, because there were no extra-lateral rights in
the location. But the court said this, that at the time
at which those end-lines were changed there were no
conflicting claims with reference to that land; therefore, it was open to the locator to choose his own
location; only he and the Government were interested (Preliminary Motion of Plaintiffs 20) in it. But
we think that the drawing in of those end-lines may
be taken to be a new location made upon that day,
and as that is a question simply between the locator
and the Government, and the rights of third parties
not intervening we consider this a new location made
upon the day on which the end-lines were drawn in,
and then the Statute applies and extra-lateral rights
attach. I think I am right in saying that that .title
did not relate back to the original location, but related back to the date when the location was relocated, and if there had been between the date of
the original location and the date of the re-location
a change in the law abolishing extra-lateral rights,
that the patent in the Poe-Waterloo case would have
had no extra-lateral rights attached to it, but, of
course, the American law had not been changed, so
the extra-lateral rights attached. That is exactly our
case here. I say, if our friend supports the patent
at all, he must support it upon the theory that by
some arrangement between the locator and the Government with which third parties were not	
The Court—Wait a moment.    Here is your pro-position, as I have taken it down. I was not familiar
with that point in that case, but I know the case. You
say if between the time the survey was made and
the time patent was applied for the law had been
changed, a patent granting extra-lateral rights would
not have been given?
Mr. Bodwell—Would not have been given.
The Court—And any patent granted, at any rate,
would these rights not have conferred extra-lateral
rights?
Mr. Bodwell—Yes; would not have conferred
them?
The Court—That is what I understand you to say.
(Preliminary potion of Plaintiffs 21.)
Air. Bodwell—The next thing I want to draw your
Lordship's attention to is this: That from an inspection of the patent itself you cannot say whether extra-lateral rights would be in exactly the same form
of words as a patent issued in 1888 with extra-lateral
rights; in other v/ords, our form of patent is not
changed, although the law has been changed. Your
Lordship will find the form of patent set out under
section 82 in the Act of 1888.
The Court—It gives the form of patent which is
the same to-day.
Air. Bodwell—Which was the same in 1893. I
think it was changed in 1896, but we are not concerned with that.
The Court—I suppose there are really general
words in the patent granting such rights as he would
have according to law.
Mr. Bodwell—No; I was going to point out to
Your Lordship just how it came up. The patent is
a simple grant of all minerals, precious and base,
under the land, but section 82 says: "Such Crown
grant shall be deemed to transfer and pass the rights
to all minerals, precious and base, which may be in,
upon or under the land of said Crown grant mentioned, including the rights set forth in section 77 of
this Act." Now, the rights set forth in section yj are
the extra-lateral rights. A Crown grant in 1893
would be in the same form of words exactly, but a
Crown grant in 1893 would not include the rights
set forth in section JJ—those rights had been repealed.   The Act of 1892 not only repeals the Act of
1888, but as a matter of extra precaution	
The Court—The Crown grant of 1893 would not
include extra-lateral rights, because that had been
done away with? (Prelminary Motion of Plaintiffs
22 )
Mr. Bodwell—That had been done away with by
the Act of 1892, section 5, sub-section a.
Mr. Bodwell—The owner of a mineral claim shall
be entitled to all minerals which may lie within his
claim, but he shall not be entitled to mine outside of
the boundary lines of his claim continued vertically
downward; and it repeals the Act of 1888 and makes
a double-shotted repeal of the whole question of extra-lateral rights. As said in my opening, the right
to raise a defence of this kind has practically been
conceded to us by the amendments already made.
We have already raised similar questions and this is
an additional point which only came to our knowledge a short time ago, and in order to show Your
Lordship that it is founded upon fact and we have
some reasonable prospect of proving it, I read the
affidavit of Joseph Morris, the locator of these claims,
sworn on the 8th day of April, 1899:
"In the summer of 1890, and before the month of
July of that year, Joseph Bourgeois and myself went
out prospecting together for minerals. The agreement between us was that we should be joint owners
of any and all claims which should be discovered or
recorded in either of our names.
"Subsequently we jointly made a discovery of what
is now known as the Centre Star and Idaho mineral
claims in the present Trail Creek Mining Division
of West Kootenay District, and recorded the same
at Nelson on the 7th day of July, 1890.
"The Centre Star mineral claim was located and
recorded in the name of the said Joseph Bourgeois,
and the Idaho mineral claim was located and recorded in my name; but I was as fully aware of the position of the Centre Star (Preliminary Motion of Plaintiffs 23) posts and other particulars of said located as
the said Bourgeois, as we acted jointly in making the
said location and were jointly interested in both of
the same, but they were put in our separate names,
inasmuch as they were on the same van.
"I was frequently on the ground occupied by the
Centre Star, Iron Mask, War Eagle and Idaho mineral claims for a long time afterwards as both the
said Joseph Bourgeois and myself continued to be
joint owners of the said Centre Star and Idaho mineral claims down to the time when we gave a bill of
sale of the same to Oliver Durant and Alexander
Tarbet, dated, as I am informed by the solicitor for
the plaintiffs, the 4th day of June, 1892.
"The said Bourgeois and myself also discovered
the War Eagle, Virginian and Iron Mask 11 ledges,
but by "   Well, that has nothing to do with this
point.
The Court—In short, your point is this: That as
they did not follow the law, and in fact disobeyed
or disregarded the law, in taking up locations on the
same vein, each man taking up two locations on the
same vein, although only half-interested in each, the
locations were bad?
Mr. Bodwell—Yes.
The Court—And that, therefore, so far as the
Grown grant related back to them, it could not convey anything?
Mr. Bodwell—No.
The Court—But so far as it related back to their
joint record in 1892 or 1893, was it?
Mr. Bodwell—No: there was a joint re-record in
1891, but that would be bad, too.
The Court—There was a record in both names before 1891?
Mr. Bodwell—No.
The Court—Very well,
corded in  1891.
Air.  Bodwell—In  1891.
The. Court—Jointly.
Mr.  Bodwell—Jointly.
The  Court—How  coul
jointly of a record that did not exist?
Mr. Bodwell—No, we have two points on that.
The Court—Is that one of your points?
Mr. Bodwell—To keep the point before Your
Lordship's mind now, the re-record in 1891 would be
as bad as the original record, in 1890.
The Court—I know, but there was no joint record
in 1890, I understand.
Air. Bodwell—No; you are right about that.
The Court—But there could not be a re-record of
a thing that is not of itself recorded?
Mr. Bodwell—That is my point exactly.
(To be continued.)
and    these men then re-
they  make  a  re-record62
THE MINING RECORD.
ROSSLAND IN 1899.
By Horace F. Evans.
ON page 64 is shown a view of the City of Rossland in 1899. The observer is supposed to be
standing at a point on Columbia avenue, a little above
the Masonic Hall, which was recently destroyed by-
fire. The two buildings in the right hand lower
corner are the Government office, wherein presides
Alt. John Kirkup, Gold Commissioner, and a private
residence.
In this Government office has from time to time
bfen transacted a large business connected with mining locations for the office is also that of the Alining
Recorder, also vested in Mr. Kirkup.
present a good view without this thoroughfare, for it
is on this avenue that are located the Bank of Montreal, the Bank of British North America, the Bank of
Halifax and' the Bank of Toronto.
To one familiar with the landmarks most of the
buildings can be recognized, especially the prorninent
ones.
Looking well over the flat roof of the Athletic Club
the War Eagle tram and hoist are plailny visible for
the 1,200 feet over which this tram extends. To the
left is the Le Roi mine, and its cluster of mine buildings. Its tram, though not very plain, may be traced
from the dump through straggling trees until it
reaches the ore bin on the line of the Great Northern
Railway.
MAIN  STREET,   ROSSLAND,   1895.
The other Government building could not be
brought within the range of the artist's camera, even
from where this view was taken. A tail may have its
uses, but it is not as attractive as a school-house or as
interesting as a theatre, therefore it could not be
bi ought within range.
The location of St. Paul Street is easily determined,
it being the first street crossing Columbia Avenue. On
trie corner is the Montreal Hotel, and above it running north is the Athletic Club looking straight over
the roof of the residence next to the Government
building.
The view straight up Columbia Avenue is a typical
one of Rossland, for this aspiring city would hardly
"The view of the city is, perhaps, not as good as one
taken from a position further west, but then the view
of the mine would not be as complete.
The Centre Star mine and hoist are plainly in view.
They are at the foot of the War Eagle tram. Lower
dcwn'is the Nickel Plate, and looking northwest from
St. Paul Street is the fire hall, which runs up like a
chimney.
A group of level politicians are supposed to be earnestly conversing on the provincial situation near
Washington Street, but are lost in the' confusion of
awnings and telegraph poles.
The view is only a partial one of the city for the
south side of Columbia Avenue is shown only as aTHE MINING RECORD.
63
line of houses, while lower town is cut off by the inability of the artist to shoot around the corner.
Spokane Mountain and her neighbours appear in the
distance as silc t witnesses, while the Gertrude, a partially developed mineral claim, seems to be guarding
the western pcition of Red Mountain.
a floating population of 10,000. It is perched more
or less on Red Mountain, 4,000 feet above sea level,
and is scattered throughout the valley of Trail Creek—
if valley is a permissible word where mountain and
valiey seemed to be piled on one another in a promiscuous manner.
m
l"V,
3
m
wm
m
fa
v.
ROSSLAND  THE  BEGINNING  OF  1896.
The City of Rossland, it is understood, covers a The city is named after its founder, Ross Thomp-
large extent of country within its incorporated limits, son, who located a homestead here a few years ago,
It has a permanent population of at least 8,000, and    and soon began to sell lots instead of farm produce.
COLUMBIA AVE.  FOUR YEARS AGO
— n«iiii   niiiim64
THE MINING RECORD.
He then struck pay ore very much on the surface,
and the pay streak has not yet run out.
There are now two great lines of railways running
into Rossland, viz.: the Great Northern, formerly the
Red Mountain branch of the Nelson and Fort Shep-
pard Railway," and the Canadian Pacific Railway.
These railways connect Rossland with two of the
great transcontinental systems, and therefore it has
touch with the outer world.
The growth of Rossland since 1895, when its career
began, has been phenomenal.   The following figures
ment as denoted by the War Eagle hoist and tram,
and the car service o the Canadain Pacific Railway
will enable the management to add largely to produc-
tlCOn the strength of this growing industry the City
of Rossland has recently begun a system of street
grading and other improvements, which materially
add to its appearance facilitating traffic. There is a
well appointed fire brigade, with modern appliances
for the rapid extinguishment of fires.
Through the  courtesy of  Mr. A. S. G. Goodeve,
City of Roi
denote the progress of its mines from the year mentioned.
Tons of ore.    Values.
1894     1,856 75.5IO
!895   19,693 702,359
1896  38,075 1,243,360
1897  68,804 2,097,280
1898 111,282 2,470,811
7 months of 1899  77>5°o 1,305,000
3T7.2io       $7,984,320
Ore production from Rossland mines 52 per cent,
over the corresponding period of 1898.
The increased facilities of ore production and ship-
>sland—1899.
Mayor of Rossland, the following facts and I figures
have been furnished in relation to the progress and
management of the city:
The total value of assessed property according to
the last assessment roll is given at: Land, $1,302,130;
improvements, $529,530; total, $1,821,660. Rate for
1899 14^ mills, if paid on or before August 31, otherwise 16 mills.
Amount of civic indebtedness for loans, $132,000.
The arrangement, in brief, made by the city for water
and light amounts to $42,500. City controls the water.
Electric light rates will be $1 per lamp of 16 candle
pewer per month for business places and 50 cents per
month, 16 candle power, for residences.THE MINING RECORD.
THE TREATMENT OF DRY SILVER ORES
IN SOUTH AMERICA.
(By A. A. Watson, B. Sc., F.S.C., Assayer and Metallurgist,
Vernon, B.C.)
IN British Columbia dry silver ores are not of very
frequent occurrence, and when found usually contain enough copper to make smelting the most economical method of treatment; nevertheless dry silver
ores have been found containing so little copper as to
be valuable for the silver alone and there is every
probability that in time to come many of these ores
will be treated, either by the Russell process or by
amalgamation.
In Chili, Peru and Bolivia both these processes are
largely used, notably by the Huarhaca Company, of
Bolivia, and at Huantajaya, Cerro Gordo and Santa
Rosa, in the province of Tarapaca, Chili. The ores
are usually purchased outright by a custom mill, the
prices being based upon a scale carefully calculated
upon the principle of lower prices per ounce for the
silver in very low grade ore than for the silver in comparatively rich ore, for the reason that a higher percentage of extraction is obtainable from the higher
grade ore. Ore containing more than twelve parts
per ten thousand or thirty-five ounces per ton is usually treated by amalgamation, while ore from 35
ounces down to 18 ounces per ton is treated by the
Russell process, or by the ordinary process of extraction by hyposulphide of soda without using sulphate
of copper. The amalgamation process is very ancient, being employed by the Spaniards at Patosi, in
Peru, in the year 1574, and is fully described by Jose
Acsta in his "Historia Natural y Moral de las In-
dias," published in 1590. In his time the ore was
ground by a mill, termed an "Arrastra," worked by
mules or horses, the wet ore being then brought on
to a paved floor and thoroughly mixed with common
salt by the treading of mules. After standing for a
day the ore and salt were mixed with mercury, copper sulphate and ferric sulphate by the same means.
When the amalgamation was complete the mass was
washed in buddies to free the amalgam from the mud,
the amalgam being afterwards retorted.
The chemical re-actions involved have never been
really proved, but there seems little doubt that a double
decomposition of the chloride of sodium and the
sulphates of copper and iron takes place whereby cop-
rous chloride, ferrous chloride and sodium sulphate
are formed and the chlorine atoms while being transferred attack the silver sulphide forming silver chloride.
Cu    CI   +Aq   S=Cu   S+2 Aq CI
The silver chloride is decomposed by the mercury
forming mercurous chloride and silver.
Hg+Ag Cl=Hq Cl-f-Aq
In many districts, especially in Taxapaca, horn
silver or silver chloride is found and this form
of silver amalgamates very readily without the admixture of the sulphates of copper and iron.
The modern process of amalgamation is chemically
very similar, but in addition to mercury, zinc amal-
garh is used and zinc chloride instead of mercurous
chloride is formed. The method in use is a fusion of
the old Peruvian system with the Washoe system.
The ore is ground to the fineness of a mesh of from
t\ enty to forty to the inch, and then removed to
an algamation barrel revolving on an eccentric axis
so that a jigging as well as circular motion is imparted
to it. Here the ore. is mixed with water, salt, copper-
sulphate, iron sulphate, mercury and zinc amalgam.
When the amalgamation is complete the mass is allowed to settle, the mud run off by a' pipe placed
about a foot from the bottom and the amalgam run
off at the bottom and retorted, the silver being afterwards melted into bars. An extraction of about 95
per cent, is usually obtained and custom mills of this
-kind are generally very remunerative.
Lixiviation.—In the usual method of lixiviation of
silver ores in Chili, no copper sulphate is used, the
hyposulphide of soda alone being found sufficient to
dissolve the silver chloride in the ore.    The ore is
brought to the mill from the mines round about in
sacks on the backs of mules, and after weighing is
.dumped into the sampler, consisting of a hopper having at the bottom two exits, one nine inches square and
the other two inches square.   Through the large exit
the ore passes down a chute to the "Cancha," or yard,
while some of the ore passes through the small exit
df wn a two-inch pipe from which a branch pipe leads
back to the ore-chute so that the small quantity of ore
passing down the two-inch pipe is divided into two
parts, one part going back to the chute and the other
part to the sample bag.   In this way the whole shipment is sampled, and the sample thus obtained is
taken to the sampling room and an average portion
crushed fine on a circular iron plate by means of an
iron pestle, worked by hand, weighing about three
hundred pounds.    To work the pestle   requires not
only great strength zut considerable skill, a side circular motion being used, causing it to gradually travel
round the plate-and to the centre.    With a skilled
hand a sample can be crushed and ground fine enough
to assay in five minutes.   The site of the mill is usually
on terraces on the side of a hill, in   order to save
handling.    The ore is shovelled from the "Cancha"
through hoppers into ball-mills, of which there are usually two.   Here the ore is ground to a fineness varying with the nature of the gangue, in Tarapaca, where
the gangue consists of calcite and clay; coarse grinding
is the rule.    On passing out   of   the   ball-mill   the
giound ore is removed by means of a screw to an endless chain of buckets and emptied into a   revolving
caxiner of the Howell type.   The weight of ore each
bucket will carry is known and an amount of salt calculated at about four per cent, of the weight of the ore
is added by a workman stationed there for the purpose.   None of the mills appear to have adopted any
automatic arrangement for feeding the  salt,  partly
owing to the cheapness of labour.   The ore is heated
to a reddish yellow heat, sufficient for good chlorination, without volatilising the silver.   It has been found
that, contrary to expectation, the silver chloride ores,-
if tieated alone, are not so well adapted to the pro-
«ss as the sulphide ores, for the reason that salt does
not readily evolve chlorine at a low heat unless acid
fi mes exist in the furnace to decompose it.    When
si!ver chloride ores are treated alone the change to
th i soluble form only takes place at a temperature sufficient to volatilise the silver chloride, and it is cus-
tc mary to mix the chlorides with sulphides so that the
sulphurous acid evolved from the sulphides may de-
si.bsequent fresh chlorination of both  chlorine  and
subsequent fresh chlormation of both sulphides and
chlorides.   By this means both the silve/ sulphide and
the insoluble silver chloride are converted into the
chloride soluble in hyposulphite of soda.
After chlorination, the ore is   removed in   trucks,66
THE MINING RECORD.
turning on rails, to the cooling floor. When cold the
ore is removed to the lixiviation vats where the ore is
first washed with cold water to remove the salt and
all soluble lime and copper salts. The presence of
lime is very injurious, as it precipitates the silver
amongst the ore after its solution in the hyposulphite. The ore coming from the furnace is usually
analysed for the amount of caustic lime it contains,
and calculating the weight of ore in each vat a washing of weak sulphuric acid is given to it in sufficient
quantity to just neutralize the lime. After being given
one acid wash and three washes with water the solution is run on in three washings, lasting about twelve
hours each, generally from below as it is found to
penetrate the ore better from below than from above.
The'strength of the solution is about one per cent.
Precipitation.—The precipitation is carried out
by means of sodium sulphide manufactured
at   the   mill   by   blowing   steam   into   a   solution
its soluble chloride form as the insoluble sulphide.
On this account the solution is usually run away after
using half a dozen times.
In using ball-mills great care has to be taken to
use iron balls in good condition, otherwise they become chipped in grinding the ore, resulting in the intermingling of pieces of metallic iron with the ore and
ccr. sequent precipitation of metallic silver amongst
the ore itself in the lixiviation vat. In one mill in
Tarapaca the extraction sank from ninety per cent, to
forty per cent, from this cause alone. With ordinary
precautions, however, ball-mills have given great satisfaction. The precipitation vats are made of wood,
about ten feet high and four feet wide at the top, and
five feet wide at the bottom, and provided with two
laps, one for running off the solution and the other for
running off the precipitate.
The precipitate of black silver sulphide is run
through a sludge pipe to   filter  presses   where it is
BUNKEES  AND  LOADING WHARVES  AT  NANAIMO.—SIDE  VIEW.
of acustic soda mixed with sulphur powder.
Generally the sodium sulphide is added in such
quantities as to leave some sliver still in solution,
for two reasons, firstly, because the precipitate subsides quicker under those conditions, and secondly', to.
allow the same solution to be used over and over
again, which would precipitate insoluble silver sulphide amongst the ore if it contained an excess of
sodium sulphide. Owing to the presence of salt the
chloride of silver is found to partially dissolve out of
the ore with the first washing with water and the silver is precipitated from this salt solution separately.
The same solution of hyposulphide can only be used
a certain number of times, depending on the richness
of the ore, for although the soluble salts are removed
frcm the ore by the preliminary acid and water washings it still becomes in time saturated with sodium
chloride and weakened in power from the addition of
sodium sulphide in the precipitation of the silver from
pressed into cakes and finally dried in a hot room.
When dry it is placed in sacks and shipped to England. All the mills have a chemical laboratory and
asray office, where every parcel of ore purchased is
sampled and assayed and check assays and tests are
made from each department of the works.
A sample of the chlorinated ore is taken every day
fresh from the furnace, an assay made to show whether
any volatilisation of silver has occurred, and part of
the sample is washed with acid, water and fresh hyposulphite solution. If the silver chloride is readily extracted it is concluded that the chlorination of the ore
in the furnace was satisfactory.
An assay of the tailings is takeri at the.conclusion
of each treatment. If more than two ounces of silver
per ton are found to remain, two samples are taken,
one washed with pure hyposulphite and one with the
solution in use in the works. If more silver is extracted by both solutions the ore is   given   anotherTHE MINING RECORD.
67
washing, if only the pure hyposulphite extracts silver
the works solution is charged; if no silver is extracted
as sometimes happens, it has generally been through
carelessness in the works in the preliminary acid and
water washings.
The chloridised ore is daily tested for free lime and
daily tests are made of the strength of the hyposulphite solution by titration with iodine. The strength
of the solution is never allow to sink below one-half
per cent.
as well as the great steam and sailing ships, calling
for fuel and to load cargoes of coal, have been afforded admirable shelter, and fast holding ground
in the spacious waters of Nanaimo Harbour. We
present herewith three views from photos (by W. B.
Finley), showing parts of the harbour, with the bunkers and loading wharves- of the New Vancouver Coal
Company, at Nanaimo and on Protection Island.
Owing to the expansion of the company's operations,
and the introduction oi) steam colliers of the largest
BUNKERS  AND  LOADING  WHARVES  AT  NANAIMO,   FROM  THE  CITY.
Such is a general outline of the treatment of non-
smelting ores in South America.    The one approximates to the Washoe process, the other to the Russell
process, while both have been considerably modified
through local causes.
SHIPPING FACILITIES OF THE NEW VANCOUVER COAL CO., AT NANAIAIO.
THE Port of Nanaimo is the headquarters of the
chief coal mines, loading wharves, and the general offices of the New Vancouver Coal Mining and
Land Company, Limited. Nanaimo- is well known
throughout shipping circles, as having an easily accessible, safe and commodious harbour, where vessels of the deepest draft can lie alongside the dock
at all seasons of the year and in every stage of the
tide.   Some of the largest battleships of H. M. Navy,
and most improved type, as freighters of the company's coal, it was found that existing wharves and
loading appliances, were inadequate to meet the requirements of the increased volume of trade, and
shipping; modern commercial exigencies and economical considerations, also, demand the utmost
rapidity of loading and despatch of all coal carriers
resorting to the port. Mr. Samuel M. Robins, the
superintendent of the company, recognizing the pressing need of improved shipping facilities, projected and
has caused to be constructed an entirely new system
of loading, which, although necessarily involving a
considerable outlay of capital, have proved most satisfactory in action and successfully accomplishes all
that was essentially required by the shipping; it is at
the same time productive of economy in all respects.
The new works are extensie and bold in their conception. Two special approaches, built partly of
solid filling and finishing the last quarter of a mile68
THE MINING RECORD.
with substantial trestle work, standing on some of the
finest cedar sills ever hewn out of the forest (part of
the company's estate); these elevated railways had to
be on grades.of 2 per cent., in order to attain heights
of about 40 feet above the highest water, and they
appear to stretch out like two arms towards their
respective staiths, which stand about 1,500 feet apart
at the wharf ends. Before reaching the wharf each
railway runs on a level upon a plaform, bearing two
parallel tracks of lengths sufficient to accommodate
trains of full and empty cars at rest. The staiths
contain series of chutes, suitable to every state of tidal
water; the mouths of the chutes are opened from the
level platforms, between the rails of one of the tracks
holding six tons of coal) with a speed that has gained
the reputation of "lightning" despatch, for the fleet of
steam colliers employed by the company in conveying its excellent product of steam and household coal,
known as "New Wellington," "Southfield" and "Protection Island'" coal, to the ports of California, the
principal foreign market, where the New Vancouver
Coal Company is represented by the eminent firm of
John Rosenfeld's Sous, and to other over-sea ports
and destinations. The "Titania," one of the largest
vessls of the fleet, has received her load of cargo and
fuel coal (6,000 tons) in the remarkably short space
of ten hours and thirty-five minutes, including trimming of cargo at the finish; and other vessels have
■■-■■     ■.-,,.,-;      --_■■
5sgg*
aissKe&fissKSzffig
BUNKERS    AND  LOADING  WHARVES  AT  PROTECTION  ISLAND.
at places, from 3 to 20 feet back along the track; and
coal can be loaded continuously, notwithstanding the
rise or fall of the sea, with a minimum of breakage in
running into ship's hold. The weight-house and portions of the wharves are lit by gas, and the tracks by
electric arc lights.
Unique car-handling apparatus (designed and ably
executed by the engineer of the works, Air. W. H.
Wall, in the company's workshops) are built into the
staiths, which are constructed of massive timbers of
towering height, with over-head machinery for raising and lowering the heavy troughs that lead from the
ends of the chutes into the collier's hatches. This apparatus, of which steam is at present the motive
power, easily performs the labour of handling or moving the laden or nxpty coal cars (hopper-waggons,
been loaded, according to their ability to take on
cargo, in a proportionately rapid time. An important
part of the new system of loading, which has so reduced the time of detention of the costly freighters,
to the least possible delay, and has contributed to the
moderation of freight rates, will be noticed in the very
capacious coal bunkers (upwards of 10,000 tons at
Nanaimo side), for storing reserve stocks of coal,
which have been erected by the company at great expense. The loading appliances at Protection Island
comprise hydraulic lifts, auxiliary to the bunkers
there. At the Nanaimo bunkers 80 cars can be filled
simultaneously from the bunkers; the chutes are
opened and shut instantly by sets of levers and cutoffs; the laden cars are formed into trains of twenty
and pushed up to the level platforms, where they areTHE MINING RECORD.
69
TECHNICAL   PERIODICALS
.  MONTH.
OF   THE
CASSIER S MAGAZINE.
r^ ASSIER 'S Magazine for October Contains as usual,
V> many eminently interesting articles. Of these,
however, a lengthy and comprehensive account of the
"Lake Superior Iron Ore Mines and their Influence
upon the Production of Iron and Steel," by Jeremiah
and Archibald P. Head, which was originally presented in the form of a paper read at a meeting of the
British Institution of Civil Engineers; an article by
E. Riston, on "Aluminum Manufacture in Great Britain;" a contribution by A. F. Yarrow on "Nickel
Steel versus Mild Steel Boiler Tubes," and a capital
article on the "Comparative Advantages of Electricity,
Steam and Compressed Air for Alining Purposes," by
W. E. Garforth, M. Inst. C.E., will appeal more'par-
ticularly to our readers. We shall, meanwhile content ourselves with a brief review of the last-mentioned paper. Mr. Garforth. in making bis comparison between the relative merits of electricity, steam
and compressed air as used in mining, deals more
especially with the conditions existing in collieries,
and some of his conclusions might not therefore apply to metalliferous mine work. In his opinion, for use
on the surface, high-pressure dry steam is the mo^t
economical power; for transmission of power, electricity is both the most economical and convenient;
and undergrounc
compressed air is the safest.
author points out that in coal mines there are many
reasons against utilizing steam, when the engines and
boilers are placed underground; and of these objections, not the least are the "expense of maintaining
boiler flues, the danger of setting fire to the surrounding strata, the difficulty of dealing with the exhaust steam,  etc."    In the use of compressed air,
which, on the grounds of economy, is, it is here stated,
vastly inferior to electricity, for power purposes, there
is the compensating advantage of safety in coal mines
when fire-damp accumulates to any   extent.     The
author lays particular stress on this point and suggests that in coal mines there is always a sufficient
element of natural dangers without introducing artificial ones.    Nevertheless electricity is recommended
by some engineers for use at the coal face in all
mines on account of its greater economy, and of
course there are coal mines where it can be introduced with perfect safety.   The article concludes with
a' consideration of the two electrical systems—polyphase and continuous currents—each of which has
its peculiar advantages and drawbacks.   To quote the
writer:   "The chief points of the three-phase current
system are :—1. Absence   of  commutators   in   both
generators  and  motors  with  consequent  saving in
wear, reduction of repairs and renewals, and less need
of constant skilled  attendance.    2.     Complete  immunity from sparking.    3.    No starting resistance
required for motors up to 10-brake horse-power, unless exceptionally large starting torque is required. 4.
High pressure can be transmitted without risk to
generator or motor, and copper is saved in the line.
On the other hand, in the continuous current system,
only (1) "A single pair of conductors is required as
against three condustors; (2) Greater starting torque
can   be   obtained   with   the   motors;    (3) Accurate
measurements can be more readily taken."   The author sums up by saying that as a prime source, and,
under  certain  favourable  conditions  as  mentioned
steam possesses the greater advantages, but for the
transmission of power to a distance, "electricity is
most economical, efficient and handiest."
THE ENGINEERING MAGAZINE.    .
The October   number of this   magazine contains
several important articles, prominent among which are
contributions by Sir Benjamin C. Browne, on "Stan-
ardizing in   Engineering   Construction;" by   Henry
Roland, on "The Revolution in Alachine-shop Practice," and by J. Carter Lewis, on "Works Management for the Maximum of Production."   In considering this latter subject, Air. Lewis advances the- proposition that "in a close study of the relative efficiencies
of organization the key to future progress will be
found."    It is, of course, as he points out, obvious
that a  study  of the  efficiency  of organization  is  a
much more complicated and difficult matter than the
mere timing of operations, for "the factors entering
into comparisons of machine duty are very feew and
certain—speeds, shape and angle of cutters, nature
of material—all these are easy of re-duplication, and
variations in any of them can easily be allowed for.
The comparative efficiency of various methods of attaining the same end  .   .   .    can also be studied by
the technist with ease, and the results set against those
of known experience.   But when we widen the area
of enquiry and wish to know not what it costs us to
remove a given surface of material in mere labour
hours (i.e., in direct wages) but to arrive at the actual,
inclusive, and real cost of the whole operation, including the upkeep of the machine in a state of efficiency, the transport of the material from point to
point, the share of supervision it obtains whilst under
work, the amount of preventible loss and waste, due
to imperfect process work, necessitating costly hand
labour to finish and make complete—then, so far as
any possible comparison with the experience of others
goes,   we   are   at   sea  indeed."     The  writer  then,
after   stating   that    while one   frequently   hears   the
question, "What do you pay such and such class of
labour in your place?" the enquiry,  "What is your
percentage of shop efficiency?" is never made, goes
on to define the meaning of the term "efficiency of
organization."    This, he explains, is roughly speaking, the ratio of indirect and reproductive expenditure to  expenditure  on  saleable  goods  or  "stock."
"To place a machine in a shop and a   man and a job
at it appears very simple; but when we come to consider the case of 100 machines and men and jobs, it
may easily turn out that the cost of housing the machines, looking after the men and providing a constant and even succession of jobs, together with the
necessary maintenance of the patent in full working
order, is the larger half of the total expenditure."
The writer describes the difference between the high
and low standards of efficiency of organization which
leads him to consider how the efficiency of any given
organization, good or bad, may be studied and its
strength and weakness made manifest.   His solution
lies in the adoption of a "complete and well-digested
system of administrative record."
A great many persons entirely miss the point of
advantage to be gained by a carefully elaborated system of record in the internal administration of
'works,' but the object of modern organization is to
strengthen the administrative arm in its control of
routine, to which it acts as a sort of registering
barometer.70
THE MINING RECORD.
if
THE AIONTH'S MINING.
MOUNT SICKAR.
(By Our Special Commissioner. J
THE Tyee has a somewhat interesting history.
Rather more than two years ago two men named
respectively Smith and Buzzard, decided to prospect
Mount Sickar for mineral. There was no trail in
those days and the hillside, thickly studded with
timber and covered with underbrush, was not an
easy territory for exploration of this character, but the
two men persevered in their search and were rewarded by discovering some indication of mineral-
bearing rock upon which they located and staked the
Tyee claim. Well, neither of them had money to
prospect the property thoroughly, |so it was decided between them to go to Victoria and try and
interest capital there in the new find. It thus
came about that our two prospectors
the approached Capt. Irving, Mr. W. A.
tyee. Wilson and another well-known busi
ness man of Victoria, and offered to
sell them the Tyee claim outright for seven hundred
and fifty dollars. These gentlemen, however, refused to purchase the property at any price, and
Alessrs. Livingstone, Blyth, Dickie, Wood and Mol-
lander, of Duncans, who had acquired a controlling
interest in the Tyee, told the locators of the claim
that if they would uncover the lead on the property
they would be given another quarter interest in addition to the rights they already possessed in the
claim. Accepting these conditions Smith and Buzzard went back to the Tyee, and in three days succeeded in removing the diorite capping, upon which
they had located and exposing a good showing jf
mineral. Within a week they had sold their interests—a one-half, understand,—for five thousand
dollars. The owners then proceeded to sink a shaft
on the spot where the ledge had been uncovered to
a depth of approximately fifty feet in ore for the entire distance. Nothing particular was done after
that until May of the present year, when Mr. Livingstone, who, by the way, must be regarded as the first
man to interest capital in Mount Sickar mines, having succeeded in forming in London a development
company or syndicate with a modest wqrking capital
of £i5,000, resumed operations, by rimming out and
timbering the old shaft, which was further carried
down a depth of seventy-five feet in ore. From this
point the shaft was continued vertically in country
rock to the depth of one hundred and -fifty feet, a crosscut being here driven to the south, a distance of
twenty-one feet, and passing through twelve feet of
gold-bearing quartz of low value. At the same level
a drive was also made of twenty-two feet to the north,
encountering a seven-foot body of copper ore associated with a baryta gangue, followed by shales
impregnated with copper, and last of all, quartz, the
entire width of the pay chute being twenty-four feet.
The cross-cut was next continued to a distance of
fifty feet, when the hanging wall, which is very well
defined, was struck. A drive was then put in on the
shale to the south and the ore body was again five
feet in. A drive to the west was in ore for the entire
distance. Recently the shaft has been taken down to
a depth of two hundred feet, at which level the work
at present is confined to cross-cutting in a northerly
direction to strike the ore body. At Mr. Robertson's
invitation I  descended the shaft and examined  the
various workings. The shaft is a double-compartment one, six by eight feet in the clear, magnificently
timbered and lined and adequately ventilated by
means of a hand blower. The timber used is hewn
to dimensions of seven by seven and securely mortised together, the lagging of two-inch planking and
the lining of one-inch boards. The ladder-way is also
worthy of mention, the rungs being, of course, made
of iron. Both to the geologist and the mineralogist
the formation on Mount Sickar affords much ^.hat is
of interest. The Tyee vein appears to be a true fissure in a formation of unaltered schist. The filling
is very peculiar, and seems to consist of streaks of
varying thickness, first of country rock (talcose schist)
impregnated with iron pyrites; second, blake sha'c;
third, copper ore with a baryta gangue; fourth, shale
impregnated with iron pyrites; and fifth, quartz,
shale, baryta and coppery pyrites. Although this formation is not at all common in British Columbia, I
am informed it has a counterpart in the Sultana mine,
of the Rainy River district of Ontario. As regards
values, although I did not have the opportunity of
seeing the assay certificates, I was reliably told that
the average value of the ore in the Tyee was 5 Per
cent, copper, $6 gold and 5 ounces silver. The bary-
tic ore, however, carries much higher values in copper, the returns giving ten to twelve per cent, in this
metal. The strike of the vein is east and west and
the dip 70 degrees north, and elevation of the property above sea level being 1,750 feet. In addition to
the work already enumerated, the vein is being prospected 420 feet east of the main workings by a prospect shaft down at present some thirty feet, a crosscut to the north of 33 feet and to the south of 14
feet, in which the indications are most promising.
Under Mr. Robertson's superintendence, the average
amount of work performed during recent months has
been forty-eight feet*, the cost per foot being $25.
Most of the men—and no finer a crew could be got
together in British Columbia—are Canadian and
British miners from the Kootenays. Here at least
the eight-hour law does not seem to have created
strife, for while the miners are paid the three-dollar
wage, the management only charge the employees
the reasonable sum of four dollars and a half a week
for boarding them. There is no profit derived from
the boarding-house on this basis of charge, but then
a mining company has no legitimate right to expect
profit from this source. Another matter that has
contributed greatly to the local popularity of ihe
Tyee Development Company is the fact that residents
of the district are always given the preference when
surface labour is required at the mine. At present
there is accommodation at the Tyee for thirty-five.
Before very long, however, work is to be temporarily
suspended while the mine is handed over to a new
company, when the present horse-whim will' be superceded by a steam-hoist and other machinery, and
operations will be continued on a somewhat larger
scale.
But the afternoon is passing and T have yet the
Lenora to visit, so I descend the very steep hill and
introduce myself to the manager, Mr. Morris, who,
without loss  of time,  piloted  me  to
the    workings.      The    Lenora    was
staked in the spring of 1896, by the
same two men who located the Tyee
—Smith and Buzzard.    But their dis-
• covery was made, not on the copper showing that is
THE
LENOR
MINETHE MINING RECORD.
7i
now being exploited, but on a small quartz outcrop.
Thanks to a forest fire, the well-defined copper lead
was exposed, and in 1897 a Mr. Smith, of Glasgow,
Scotland, agreed with the locators to expend $500 in
preliminary development work on the claim in consideration of receiving a half-interest therein.    With
this money a tunnel was driven into> the hill, cross-
cutting two leads.   This result was so satisfactory that
early in January, 1898, the Mount Sickar and Brit:sh
Columbia Development Company acquired an option
on the property for a one-fifth interest on condition
of expending £5,000 in its further development. Work
was commenced by driving east on the lead and < on-
tinued for a distance of 500 feet, cross-cuts being run
at intervals, and thus the south and parallel vein was
encountered.    Later on at a depth of approximately
100 feet in the tunnel from the surface an upraise was
made, and at the same time a winze was sunk to a
depth of 100 feet.   The tunnel was then continued a
further 225 feet, which represents the work on the
property to date.    But during the spring of this year
the Mount Sickar Company acquired full proprietory
rights.   The formation at the Lenora is similar to that
at   the    Tyee,    but   the    ore    appears    to   be    of
somewhat    higher    grade,    there    is ,    moreover,
quite    an    extensive    body     of     pyrrhotite,    and
this    is    now    being    stoped    out.      The    tunnel
is   well   timbered   with   square   sets   and   provided
with tram lines.   As to the ore values, the following-
returns of smelter shipments give a fair idea, but it
must, of course, be remembered that the ore sent
away for treatment, with one exception,  has been
carefully selected and sorted, and therefore represents
the higher grade product of the mine. The first shipment was made to Tacoma, on Alarch 4th, 1899, and
the smelter returns were:    Weight,  16,399 pounds;
gold value, 18 ounces; silver value, 3.6 ounces; copper, 5 per cent.; value per ton. $13.05; net returns per
ton, $7.05.
This shipment consisted of ore from the old dump,
and was not sorted. The remaining returns are more
satisfactory :
Alarch 30th, shipment to San Francisco:   Weight,
23,978    pounds;' gold     value,     .35
smelter     ounces;   silver   value,   7.04   ounces;
returns.      copper, 10.7 per cent.; total value returns, $359-67; value per ton, $22.99
(copper is here valued at 10c).,
April 20th, shipment to Tacoma: Weight. 1 10,377
pounds; gold, 3 ounces; silver, 6.7; copper, 9.5 per
cent.; value per ton, $29.44; net returns, $1,388.87.
June, shipments to Tacoma: Weight, i44,3T2
pounds; gold, .3 ounces; silver, 6.9 ounces; copper,
9.5 per cent.; value per ton, $32.55; net returns, $1,
800.10.
Sept. nth, shipment to Tacoma: Weight, 203,348
pounds; gold, .32 ounces; silver, 5.4; copper, 9.69
per cent.;  value per ton, $30.25;  net returns, $2,-
465-59- 0   I
Sept. 18, shipment to Tacoma: Weight, 281,630;
gold, 2 ounces; silver, 5.1 ounces; copper, 10.8 per
cent.; value per ton, $30.54; net returns, $3,442. 93.
Sept. 23rd, shipment to Tacoma: Weight, 50 tons;
net returns, $963.94.
Returns were also made of two consignments of
ore made during August, but these the Mount Sickar
Company have refused to accept, and the points in
dispute have been submitted to arbitration. There
are now 340 tons of ore at the Tacoma smelter, upon
which returns have not yet been received, but from
the assays the copper contents of this consignment
should be 15 per cent, after deducting the 1.3 per
cent, moisture. The company are now producing
and sending out twenty tons of ore a day, and propose this week to increase the output to thirty tons,
but how long this production can be maintained with
the present stage of development is a matter of opinion. The cost of transportation at present.is $1.75
per ton for haulage from the mine to the railway station and $2.25 for carriage thence to Tacoma. It has
been found that the cost of freight to San Francisco
is too heavy to send the ore for treatment there. The
company are employing forty-five men, miners receiving $3 for a working day of eight hours, but ail
drilling is done single-handed, Mr. Morris telling me
that according to his experience more work is accomplished by this system. At the time of my visit
several commodious frame buildings were in the
course of construction, and among others a bunk-
house to accommodate twenty-five men is being
erected.
Besides the Tyee and Lenora there are several
other promising claims on Amount Sickar. The most
important, perhaps, is the Fortuna, upon which a
drift has been driven for 350 feet, exposing a body of
pyrrhotite ore. Then there is the
other Alona, on the Tyee lead, but higher
prospects up the mountain; the Queen Bess on
the Westholme waggon road, upon
which a Vancouver syndicate has taken a bond and
commenced operation; and the Baltic, upon which
work is to be shortly resumed, and others (to use the
phraseology of the auctioneer) too numerous to mention, for indeed the whole mountain is "staked out."
In conclusion, there is no reason why the Mount
Sickar camp should not in the near future contribute
very considerably to the mineral production of British Columbia. Both the Tyee and Lenora are excellent prospects, with better showings and in a more
advanced stage of development than many so-called
"mines" in Kootenay whereof a great deal of "boom"
nonsense appears in the press. The motto of the
Mount Sickar claim owners should be "festina lente,"
and if I do not take too much on myself I should like
to be allowed to add, that at this stage of the game,
the talk of erecting smelters, and goodness knows
what else, in the neighbourhood of the Lenora and
Tyee is surely somewhat premature, not to say absurd.
shoal bay.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
With the disappearance of fine weather work on die
mining properties of the district has somewhat fallen
off. This is most noticeable at the Dorotha Alorton
mine, where recently about thirty men who were
working outside were let out, but as soon as new
stoping ground has been prepared, will undoubtedly
be taken on again.
The Douglas Pine keeps on the even tenor of tis
way.    Work has lately been commenced on a new
tunnel which is to tap the main ore
work on     body at about a depth of 300 feet from
douglas pine, the surface.   Mr. Farquhar, our local
assayer,    has    lately    been    engaged
sampling the lower workings of the Blue Bells mine,72
THE MINING RECORD.
and also preparing a plan of the same, and it is confidently expected that work on this promising property will shortly be resumed on a large scale.
kamloops.
(From Our Own Correspondent).
Although there are yet no regular shippers in this
young camp, work is steadily going on in many
quarters. The Python property is being developed
steadily by sinking and drifting, and
the result of the work recently done is
very encouraging, the ore being of a
most satisfactory grade. A carload
lately sent to the Trail smelter yielded
the
python
■ AND
POTHOOK
.MINES.
per cent, copper, in addition to the
gold values.
The Poothook is temporarily closed down pending
reorganization. It will probably be about next spring
before operations are recommenced, but then it will
be with improved machinery, and the mine should
immediately be placed on a productive basis.
The work done by Mr. L. W. Nestelle, of Fairhaven,
on the Cyclone-Dewey group of claims, at the extreme
eastern limit of the camp, has shown up some very
fine chalcopyrite and chalcocite ore. A tunnel of 90
feet has been driven on the vein, and a trial shaft 18
feet deep sunk. This, together with 100 feet of surface work, has all been done this fall. Last year Mr.
Nestelle bestowed attention mainly on the Cyclone,
there showing up a large body of ore. The lead
opened up on the Dewey this year is of a higher grade,
so far as copper percentage goes, the gold assays
being much the same.
The Boillot brothers are developing the Wheel
Tamas group, and also a group of free-milling properties between Kamloops and Tranquille, on the north
side of the Thompson River.
Recent work done   on   the   mica
mica from    mines at Tete Jaune Cache has shown
tete jaune.   some beautiful mica, and the 400 lbs.
brought down last week could not be
excelled anywhere.
It is rumoured that the owner of the Alonte Cristo
is negotiating with Air. H. W. Treat for the sale of
this property.
Alost encouraging reports come from a new property, the Vancouver, situated on Stuart Island and
owned by Messrs. Tom Dunn and Tanner. This is a
copper-gold proposition, and it is understood that the
pay-streak runs about $7 in gold, and 14 per cent,
copper, with small silver values. Work is still progressing on what was formerly known as Cobeldick's
property, situated in Estero Basin, but which, it is understood, has been taken over by the B.C. Development Company. A very fine lead of bornite, three
feet wide, was encountered in the cross-cut quite recently, and the main lead is expected to be struck at
any time now.
News has just come in of a new copper property
on Helmcken Island, from which a sample shipment
of a ton was sent to the Van Anda smelter for treatment.
revelstoke.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
All weather indications seem to point to an
early winter, which would seem unfair after an extremely late spring and a cold wet summer, but un
fortunately the weather is a matter over which we
have no control as yet, though doubtless it will be
better understood in the future. Those mines, and
they are many, that will be working all the winter,
have already laid in ample supplies and have settled
down to steady, if rather monotonous, work for the
next six months at least.
The Big Bend, to which Revelstoke acts as the
base of supplies, naturally claims our attention first;
and much more activity will prevail there this winter
than usual.    The Carnes Creek Company intend to
push their work ahead, as also do the
future      Boston and B.C. Co.,   who,   by the
smelter     way, are guaranteeing a smelter near
facilities.    Revelstoke and a steamboat on the
river next spring.    It is to- be hoped
that enough ore will be forthcoming from the various
properties to keep the smelter going, because, as has
been repeatedly pointed out before, a smelter is not
exactly the same thing as a cooking stove and cannot
be put in and out with the same facility and economy.
Unfortunately ore is the last thing many people think
about when they talk of building smelters, though to
most men it would appear to- be the most necessary.
The Carnes Creek Company find their new strike of-
copper ore improving in quality and quantity, though
it is as yet quite distinct from their main body of
arsenical pyrites, rumiing indeed on one side of it and
quite readily  separated from it,  which may easily be
very advantageous.    If there was better communication with the Big Bend district than the present pack
trail affords, we should soon hear from some of the
other camps there,  such as the  Keystone and the
Laforme Creek camps, and ore would be plentiful
enough, but at present only high-grade stuff can be
profitably handled.   The Lardeau will certainly show
very  marked  improvement  next  year,   the  railways
now being rushed into that district will be an immense help; though, indeed, the Lardeau has so many
wonderfully rich claims that there is no difficulty in
disposing of the ore at a very fair profit, notwithstanding the expense oi freight.     The Nettie L., near
Ferguson, is still looking remarkably well, and will
be very busy this winter shipping the high-grade ore
for which it is famous; and there are many more just
waiting till the  snow becomes permanent to  do the
same thing.
The Tangier mine/(companion to the Waverley) has
closed down, for the winter only it is to be hoped,
though, many well-informed men think it will be for
a longer time; the management is seriously criticized,
but time and further development alone will show
on whom the blame, if any, should rest.    This will
make   the   Illecillewaet   camp   very
Tangier      quiet all this winter, and it usually is
closed       very   far from being a lively   place.
down.        On a recent, rather hurried, visit to
some of the mining camps round
here, I was struck with the remarkable absence of any
attempt at sanitary ararngements; old tin cans and
every description of kitchen refuse, together with
cast-off clothing, being permitted to accumulate close
up to the cabins used as living or sleeping rooms bv
the men. Now it certainly does seem a very likely
method to cause illness in the camp to allow such
rubbish close up to the cabins, but it is so very general that exceptions are extremely rare. There is no
lack of room to dispose of waste material, it seemsTHE MINING RECORD.
73
sanitation
IN
MIXING
camps.
purely carelessness on the part of the men themselves,
though it might well be questioned whether the foreman in charge is justified in allowing
such a fertile breeder of disease to
exist in the immediate vicinity. On
one property only, namely, the Venus,
near Nelson, B.C., does there appear
to be any notice takeri of this matter,
and that is said to be a. model of a clean, healthy
camp—possibly because a well-known M.D. had a
good deal to say about the arrangements. But considering the extreme inconvenience and danger arising from sickness in camp, miles away from any
medical aid, it seems well worth while to call attention
to this matter—indeed if it was not for the abundance
of fresh air, and the general good health prevalent on
account of it in mining camps, there can be no doubt
that much more sickness would exist, and it is sincerely to be hoped that these few "expressions of individual opinion" may be the means of inducing managers to insist on a more tidy, clean, and healthy state
of affairs in the camps over which they may have control. It will cost nothing at all, and will prove a paying venture, even if it saves one toothache!
A. H. FI.
BOUNDARY  CREEK.
(JTrom Our Own Correspondent).
A special article on the Alother Lode mine, in
Deadwood camp, was published in the September is-
, sue of this journal. This gave details of the mine
workings. It'- will- be remembered
deadwood that the preliminary work consisted
camp—the chiefly of a cross-cut tunnel run 42
mother lode, feet through the limestone on the
footwall side of the lode and thence
diagonally across the ore-body for 205 feet, the diorite contact having been encountered at 247 feet from
the mouth of the tunnel. The right-angle distance
across the lode where thus cross-cut was estimated
to be 185 feet. From about the centre of this tunnel
• an incline winze was sunk to a depth of 100 feet or to
about 200 feet below, where the lode outcrops on the
top of the hill in which it occurs. From the bottom
of the winze a cross-cut was run both ways. At this
depth the hanging-wall was met with—seventy-three
feet in from the centre of the winze, the lode having
apparently straightened up. The permanent development work described included the sinking of a large
double compartment vertical shaft, sunk 214 feet, the
cutting out at the 200-foot level of a station, on the
north side of the shaft, 18x20 and 15 feet high, and
a smaller one on the south side, and the running at
the same level of some 600 feet of drifts and crosscuts. Since that article was written the sinking of
the main working shaft has been resumed, and at the
present time of writing a depth of 285 feet has been
reached". At this depth the shaft is entirely in pay
ore, so that the whole of the rock now being taken
from the bottom of the shaft, the dimensions of which
are 9x13. outside timbers, is being placed on the
ore dump. At the 200-foot level the most important
working thus far developed is the north drift, which
at its present distance of 490 feet from the shaft is
calculated to be about tinder the winze in the old
workings mentioned above. The drift has for the
last rbo feet been continuously in ore that it will pay
to send to the smelter. For ventilation purposes the
winze in the old workings is now being deepened so
as to connect with the 200-foot level. A station has
been cut out and a hoist installed in the old crosscut tunnel and the winze is now down no feet, the
bottom being in ore similar in character and quality
to that met with in the level below. The old and new
workings having been started at different elevations,
it may be well to explain that the lower cross-cut in
the old workings is at a vertical depth of about 187
feet from the outcrop of the lode where it occurs on
the top of the hill and that the 200-foot level of the
new workings is about 175 feet deeper still (but 200
feet from the collar of the main working shaft), so
that this present main level is about 362 feet below
the outcrop mentioned. The British Columbia Copper Company also owns several claims adjoining the
Mother Lode, but its mining operations are just now
being restricted to the further development of that
valuable property.
The Sunset group, adjoining the Alother Lode, (he
Morrison,   Buckhorn   and the   Gold   Bug   (the last
named being a. claim to which the
other        Boundary Creek Mining and Alilling
properties.   Company    is   giving    attention)   all
merit notice in detail, but space restrictions prevent more than bare mention of them
this month.
Outside  of the  continuous  development  that  for
eighteen months past has been in progress on the
City of Paris group, there has been comparatively
little actual mining work done in Central camp for
many months.    Now, however, there
central      is to be a change for the better, for a
camp. mining company has been organized
in New York for the purpose of acquiring and working the No. 7 group of mineral
claims, which comprises the No. 7, Lady of the Lake,
Fanny H, Glasgow, Helen, AIcGregor and Tripod.
These claims were formerly owned by Messrs. J. F.
Tichenor and F. L. Underwood and Col. J. Weir, of
New York. The last named having disposed of his
interest they have for some time past been owned
by the other two gentlemen, who are also largely interested in the New York company owning the
Mother Lode group, to which reference has already
been made. The No. 7 company has already com-,
menced operations, men being now engaged in erecting the buildings necessary for the accommodation
of the miners and the housing of the plant and machinery which will shortly be obtained. This will
consist of a 50-horse power boiler, friction hoist with
drum, Knowles' sinking pump, with a capacity of 4.00
gallons per minute, and all the requisite gear and appliances. Pending receipt of the power plant the horse
winze (?) now on the No. 7 will be used in connection with the work of putting the present workings in
order, preparatory to further developing .he property. There is already a 139-foot incline shaft on the
No. 7, and 418 feet of drifts and cross-cuts at that'
depth. A second shaft, 400 feet distant from Xo. 1,
is down 66 feet, at which depth it entered the ledge.
No. 1 shaft will be enlarged and timbered to the bottom and the drift at the 139-foot level will be continued until under No. 2 shaft. The vein on the No.
7, so far as yet prospected, runs from about one foot
to six feet in width, averaging about 27 inches of ore
giving values of not less than $20 per ton. The ore
is quartz mineralized with galena, zinc blende ;nd a
small quantity of copper pyrites, values being chiefly
in srold and silver.m
It is reported that work will shortly be resumed
on the Norfolk adjoining the No. 7 group and
owned by the London and B.C. Goldfields, Ltd.
Operations are being continued on the City of Pans
group, where some 45 mem are employed. The
writer has not lately had an opportunity of either visiting this valuable property or of meeting the mine superintendent from whom to obtain information lespect-
ing it, but it is known that about 2,000 feet of tunael-
ling in cross-cuts and drifts have been done, and that
one of the leads known as the Lincoln vein is to be
sunk where intersected by the main cross-cut tunnel. This group will ship'ore to the Granby Company's smelter at Grand Forks so soon as the branch
railway line to the mine shall have been completed
and the smelter be ready to receive shipments.
This camp is very lively, with an increasing number of men being employed in mining, the town of
Phoenix rapidly building up, and several branch railway lines in course of construction, to the better developed of the mining properties.
greenwood. The Old Ironsides, Victoria and
camp. Knob Hill, which are practically under one management, though nominally owned by three separate companies, are together
employing between 7° and 80 men in actual mining
and about 40 more in erecting mine buildings, cottages for miners, etc. The Brooklyn, Stemwinder,
Idaho and Rawhide are grouped under another management, and it is stated that there will ere long be
a comparatively large number of men employed on
these claims. The Snowshoe, Gold Drop and Alon-
arch are separately owned and managed, and each
gives promise of developing into an ore-yielding
mine.. There are numerous other claims in the camp,
some with good showings, but those named above
have to date had most attention.
Much drifting and cross-cutting is being done at
the 200-foot and 300-foot levels of the Old Ironsides
and Victoria. There are five faces in ore at the
former level and two in the latter. Sinking is in progress at the Knob Hill. Sleeping and boarding accommodation for 200 men is being provided in connection with these three mines, besides which there
will be cottages for miners having their families with
them.
Mr. Anthony J. AlcMillan, of Rossland, managing
director of the British Columbia (Rossland and Slocan) Syndicate, Ltd., of London, England, was in
Phoenix recently visiting the Snowshoe, which is
being worked by his company. From him it was ascertained that about 20 men are em-
the ployed at the mine and that develop-
snowshoe. ments are so far considered satisfactory. A 40-horse power boiler, an engine and a hoist were installed some time since and
lately, in order to expedite the work of development,
a 5-drill compressor plant was purchased. For the
purpose of showing up the outcrop of the ore a lot of
surface work was done during the summer just ended.
Work below ground has been actively prosecuted
since the steam plant was installed. The main shaft
is now down about 200 feet and cross-cutting has
been commenced. Mr. McMillan expects to leave
for England during November, and, should his report be satisfactory and his syndicate take up the option they hold on the Snowshoe, it is probable a vigorous policy of development will be entered upon.
Wellington, Summit, and Long Lake are important
camps, meriting lengthy notice, but the writer has
had no opportunity of personally obtaining information respecting them. The manager
other of the Winnipeg mine, Wellington
camps. camp, is reported to have told a Rossland newspaper that this mine has a
large quantity of ore ready for shipment, and that
good pyrrhotite ore is being obtained from the 300-
foot level. The Golden Crown, adjoining the Winnipeg, is also reported to be looking well and to be
preparing to ship ore so soon as the rails are laid
along the grade already completed to this camp. The
Calumet and Hecla group, adjoining the Winnipeg
on the east and south, has been bonded by Mr. W. L.
Hogg, of Montreal, for $60,000. Work on this group
will shortly be proceeded with.
The B.C. and Oro Denero are developing well.
The B.C. has let a contract for deepening the main
shaft from 160 feet to 260 feet. With this work in
progress the mine will increase its working force to
about 40 men. The Oro Denero is employing 20 men
at surface work and in cross-cutting at the 200-foot
level. Other properties in this camp that will yet
come into more prominent notice are the Emma and
the Rathmullen group.
Particulars of the Jewel group, Long Lake camp,
were given in last month's Mining Record. Additional plant is now coming in for this mine. The Enterprise and Anchor Mines. Limited, intend working
continuously on the Enterprise and Anchor, which
adjoin the Jewel. These are very promising properties upon which work had already been done, but
now more extensive operations have been inaugurated.
The   Columbia   &  Western Railway   has   at   last
reached Boundary Creek, and probably before this
appear in print the tracklayers will have completed
their work to   Alidway,   the   present
railways,    terminus of the line.    The rails will
smelters, also be laid shortly along the several
etc. branch   lines to the   leading   mining
camps. The C.P.R. is pushing on
construction work with all possible expedition, and is
steadily bringing about a complete change in transportation matters, facilities for passenger travel and
bringing in of freight being both already much improved. Work on the Granby Company's smelter
at Grand Forks and that of the B.C. Copper Company at Anaconda, is being carried on. Telegraph
and telephone lines are either being, or already have
been, strung throughout the district, so that facilities
for communication are now greater. An improvement in mail matter will no doubt follow when a regular train service shall have been established
PERCY VERENS.
Alidway, B.C.
rossland.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
Since my last report much has happened to show
the great strides which the mineral industry here is
making, especially where capital is available for the
necessary development and improve-
the output   ments.   The output of ore from-Ross-
to date.      land mines exceeds by 23,000 tons the
entire output for   1898,  as   it    now
amounts to about 134,000 tons gross, and by the endTHE MINING RECORD.
75
of the present month, the output will be very close to
140,000 tons. Much continues to be promised, but
my experience here is that there is always a wide margin between promises and performances, though the
steady advance, so far as Red Mountain is concerned,
does not admit of any doubt, since the figures are not
wanting to prove this position. Nevertheless this industry has not increased as rapidly as it would have
done under more enlightened management as a whole,
for there has been much mismanagement, and in one
instance, at least, the mismanagement has been the
result of gross ignorance and inexperience. It may
be understood from this that capital is not always directed by a high order of intelligence, such for instance, as that which for years has directed the coal
and fish trade of the Alaritime Provinces, and that
which in its day brought the West India trade to a
high state of prosperity. The greater part of those
trades was conducted on the lines of private enterprise, there were no stocks on which to "bull" the
market and declare dividends out of the unearned
increment, or out of market manipulation, such as we
are reluctant to note occur these days. The profits
were declared out of earning derived in a legitimate
manner, a fact which is well worthy of remembrance,
since it is production, which is the base of real prosperity, though I have been credibly informed that the
average English investor does not care where dividends come from so long as they come. Perhaps this
may be so, but from this condition doubtless result
the uncertainty and the anxiety—the desire to unload,
an uncertainty which is mischievous in the end, because it may be traced to an unhealthy antecedent.
In this connection it may be mentioned that the Le
Roi management has declared a dividend of $250,000,
or five shillings sterling per share.   As there are 200,-
000 shares at the par value of $25.00
a le roi each, this dividend amounts to about
dividend,     one-twentieth of each share., which is
a good distribution. It goes without
saying, however, that this distribution is not entirely
from ore production. I am informed on good authority that it is ma>!? 1 y f-f th.i? • •■ "-- - * ' ?
the company at the time of the purchase of the mine
and smelter and of the enhanced value of the stock at
the time when that stock was first put on the market
by the "bull" operators. In any ca«e, the dividend Is
a distribution, few will question it, and the unthinking
public will take it for granted that a dividend is simply a dividend. Up to April, 1898, the Le Roi had
paid $825,000 in profits to its shareholders. The dividend now declared added to this makes $1,075,000
for the total dividend account. On October 16th the
War Eagle paid its regular monthly dividend of $26,-
250, making a total of profits since the mine was
opened of $440,250. These two amounts added give
a total of $1,515,250 to the credit of Rossland mines
as dividends. Now the nominal capital involved
amounts to $5,000,000 for the Le Roi and $2,000,000
for the War Eagle, or a total of $7,000,000, the average time about three years, and therefore the rate =
7 per cent, per annum for $1,515,250 -r- $7,000,000 =
21 per cent, nearly. Of course, this is on the basis
of nominal capital. On the basis of actual capital it
would amount to about double that rate, or .42 = to
at least 14 per cent, per annum, which is not a bad
showing. The news of the Le Roi dividend has been
followed by the welcome intelligence that the 1,320,-
000 shares which the Centre Star management re
cently offered to the public have all been taken up
without any advices from the west or the world's
great metropolis, London. According to the statement of Mr. J. B. Hastings, the manager, the vein,
1,200 feet in, has increased from 8 feet to 35 feet, and
the ore will average $20 per ton.
In a few weeks both the War Eagle and the Centre
Star will be giving more substantial proofs than ever
of their able management.
While the aforesaid sum of $1,515,250 represents
the total of dividends actually paid by the two great
producers, the Iron Alask has, though not actually
distributing profits, paid off nearly all, if not all, its
indebtedness, and the Centre Star-is about to enter
upon the dividend-paying era, so that it may be said
without fear of contradiction that Red Mountain is
only making a beginning, that extensions of the great
producers will for a long time to come furnish pay
ore in sufficient quantities to pay good dividends, and
therefore justify the great preparations which are being made to mine the ore which is known to be in
place in the heart of the mountain. Assuming the value
per ton of the 140,000 tons of ore credited to Rossland
for the end of the present month to be at least $17, the
total value is $2,380,000 gross. For the next two
months there will be shipped at least 30,000 tons,
making an output of 170,000 tons for 1899, but even
this may be exceeded, judging from the facts that the
Le Roi is about to ship the pay ore of its old dump
to Northport, and the War Eagle and Centre Star are
about to increase their output. Should 170,000 tons
be shipped this will be an increase of about 60,000
tons on the production of 1898, or about 54 per cent.
So far, then, as the actual trade, otherwise production,
is concerned, the progress of the industry here is
gratifying.
Le Roi.—The new tramway to the large ore dump
will not be completed for three weeks, when shipments of the best ore from the dump will be made to
the Northport smelter. Mr. Carlyle will dissolve his
connection with the company about December 1st,
and he will then leave for Europe. The new management is inaugurating a new system. The mine will
hereafter ship about 2,300 tons per week until the
shipments from the old dump begin, when it will ship
about 2,500 tons weekly. The War Eagle is shipping
about 2,400 tons weekly, and the Centre Star aboe.t
650 tons. The Le Roi shipments to date amount to
72,000, the War Eagle about 47,000, the Centre Star
about 10,000, and the Iron Mask 4,200, miscellaneous
1,800.
Centre Star.—According to recent statements made
by Mr. Hastings, joint manager of the War Eagle and
Centre Star mines, the present management of the
Centre Star has expended $275,000 in development
and other improvements. The joint management
have made arrangements for five new compressor
plants, and two of the new boilers have been tucked
in.   The mine is reported in fine condition.
Virginia.—Further developments of the new-found
ledge continue to be made. There is another ledge
running nearly parallel to what is known as the Fulton ledge. This runs through the Enterprise ground
and is claimed by the Great Western
Nickel Plate.—This ledge, it is claimed, is also on
the ground of this partially developed claim, and developments are expected shortly.
Iron Mask.—This company is making rapid pro-76
THE MINING RECORD.
gress and its output is nearing the 5,000 tons mark.
No. 1.—Drifting is in progress to the 400-foot level.
Josie.—The management is connecting the workings with the Poorman tunnel.
Gertrude.—Development work is making favourable progress.
California.—Ten men are at work connecting the
two tunnels by a cross-cut.
Coxey—Development work is in progress, and a
carload of ore will be shipped shortly.
Mascot.—There are no new developments to report.   Work continues as heretofore.
White Bear.—The cross-cut is in 12 feet at the 350-
foot level.   The indications continue favourable.
Sunset No. 2.—Development work continues as
heretofore; 26 men and two machines are at work.
Homestake.—The management is cross-cutting at
the 200-foot level.
St. Elmo.—A new compressor plant has been installed.   Development work is in progress.
Evening Star—Operations have been suspended for
the present.
Shakespeare Group.—Mr. F. R. Blockberger, manager of this group, is inaugurating a plan of systematic prospecting, and he is about to have a trial cut
between the Skylark and Blockberger claims on
Alonte Cristo Afountain.
The Okanagan Gold Mines.—The fact that this
company has paid a dividend of $4,000 on its capital
stock of $80,000 equal to 5 Per cent, on the investment ought to be accepted as such until it can be
shown that there has been no clean-up and, therefore, no dividend. This will be hard to prove, since
the two gold-bricks, weighing 260 ounces, have been
purchased by the Bank of Alontreal branch at Rossland, and were vouched for by Mr. Fraser, the. manager. We hear that a number of the green-eyed fraternity express doubts as to the reality of these bricks
and the dividend. The success of this company seems
to have annoyed those who hate to see their neighbours prospering. We do not claim that the Okanagan is an Alaska, Treadwell, a War Eagle.a Calumet
and Hecla, or even a Homestake, but it has placed itself in the list of dividend-payers, and its management
are to be congratulated on this auspicious event.
slogan.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
Alatters remain practically as they were a month
ago in this division, the principal mines being to all
intents closed, although work is still proceeding at
many in a half-hearted  manner.    The  necessity  of
keeping the workings in order pending a resumption
of operations gives   employment ;n
the the   aggregate to quite a number of
labour       men,   and  the  further  fact  that  the
situation, right to freely enter into contracts
has now been acknowledged by the
"Unions" has supplied an impetus in the right direction, although one would imagine that it might be a
matter of_ policy on the part of the mine-owners at the
present time to keep as many men from working as
possible. It is estimated that there are approximately
700 men employed in and around the mines commonly included in the Slocan, this, however, will
convey to outsiders an erroneous idea of the condition of affairs unless qualified by the statement that
the Silver Lead Alines Association—usually referred
to as the Aline Owners' Association—is now advertising for 2,500 miners at the new rate of wages; showing that after all only work that is really necessary or
is not affected, by the provisions of the eight-hour law
is being proceeded with. The Queen Bess and Slocan Star are among those which have availed themselves of the privileges of the contract system, though
not as yet to any great extent. The former is busy
driving right ahead on its long tunnel, while at the
Star excellent results are reported in the No. 5. The
Payne is employing only a few men on surface work,
exception having been taken to certain action on the
part of the Union, resulting in the laying off all men
employed underground. The Reco, too, is left with
only a watchman and will probably remain closed for
the winter.
One of the largest employers of labour is the Ivanhoe, which has recently completed the installation of
a compressor plant at the mine. The intention is to
erect a concentrator as soon as satisfactory arrangements can be made regarding a location.
The California, situated at the back of New Denver,
is again being worked in a small way, which added to
the activity displayed in connection with the Hartney
and Marion relieves somewhat the depression resulting from the temporary shut down of our principal
producer, the Bosun.
On Four-Mile prominence is being given to surface
work, the construction of the tramway and concentrator for the Wakefield, and the new buildings at the
Emily Edith absorbing all the idle men in that vicinity. The latter will be of the strictly up-to-date variety, following the lead set by the Payne, comprising
in addition to the usual bunk-house—which in this
case will be augmented with splendidly equipped
bath-rooms—special apartments for light recreation.
These arrangements will naturally prove an incentive
to the better class of miners to seek employment
where their temporal wants are most carefully; looked
after.
A'considerable improvement is noticeable in conditions around Slocan City of late, due in large measure
to the present and projected opera-
activity      tions   of   the   syndicate    backed  by
near Senator   Warner   Miller   and   repre-
slocan        sented locally by Mr. Percy Dicken-
city. sc*i.   Being imbued with ample capi
tal, they have commenced by bonding, among others, a number of claims at the'head of
Ten-Mile, intending to proceed vigorously with development during the winter. A'large proportion of
the required, supplies is being obtained from local
merchants, and this, together with the work going on
at the Arlington, -Skylark and Ranger, and the Chap-
leau has had a stimulating effect upon trade generally.
Good reports alone are heard from this latter property, and it is probable that operations of a more extended character will shortly be carried out.
To one who has known the Slocan in its glory it
is painful to refer to the present day shipments, but in
the name   of   truth and with   man)'
the apologies  it  has  to   be   done,   even
monthly     though one is   ashamed   of  it after-
output.       wards.    Last   month   less than   500
tons,  all told,  found  its wav to the
smelters, over half of which came from two properties
at _Whitewater, the mine of that name furnishing the
principal amount, 195 tons, and the Jackson being- re-THE MINING RECORD.
77
sponsible for 83. Of the others, the Payne alorie is
worthy of mention, having the same amount to its
credit, about 80 tons.
Silver still continues on the downward march, notwithstanding that every other metal without exception, including copper, tin, lead, zinc and iron, and
many of those in more restricted use, such as platinum,
mercury, antimony, etc., maintain an upward tendency. Just what effect the war in South Africa will
have it is impossible to predict, but the outlook taken
all round is none too encouraging, even in the eyes
of the most optimistic individual.
NELSON.
(From Our Own Correspondent.)
A well-known figure has returned to. Nelson,. In
the person of Air. "RoV' Tolmie, who ie even better
known at the Coast. It will be remembered that Air.
Tolmie, who was Mining Recorder here,, was ousted
from his position by the present Government for no
reason whatever, except that he apparently did not
agree with their ideas of governing a mining country.
Seeing that Mr. Tolmie is a man of great common
sense this is scarcely surprising. Mr. Tolmie then
went to Seattle, and we feared that he was lost to us
forever. He has now returned as the secretary of the
Aline Owners' Association, and in that capacity- will
probably watch the course of legislation in Victoria.
If the Government will condescend to take it, they
will find his advice on any matters connected with
this part of the world exceedingly practical and to
the point, but so far they have not shown themselves
at all prone to consult anyone who may De in a position to enlighten their- own most unfortunate ignorance of the subject.
The strike situation remains the same.   The Slocan
mines are all closed down, though work continues in
every other part of Kootenay, the men so far accepting the reduced pay offered for the reduced time.   It
is said that the unions over the border have refused
any support to the unions of Kootenay, because the
wages demanded here are higher than those willingly
accepted elsewhere.    If the local un-
lab our--yf ions therefore were to close down the
troubles     entire   country   there   would   be   no
at nelson,    working bees to supply the honey for
the.   great    army    of   drones   which
thrives on unionism.    So certain places remain unmolested.   There is, however, a distinct feeling of uneasiness  and  several  small  strikes   have   occurred.
There was some little trouble at the Iron Mask in
Rossland, with wet workings for an excuse.   At the
Granite mine near here, men working   on   contract
went out because the management refused any further supply of powder, fuse and light.   Both sides are
unsettled, and if the unwise legislation has done nothing else, it has created a feeling of dissatisfaction between masters and men, where all was harmony before.
Since the foregoing was written an important meeting of the Miners' Union was held in Nelson on Saturday, 21 st October. It was there decided to raise
the siege so far as Nelson was concerned, but to continue, it with redoubled vigour in the Slocan. Rossland somehow has escaped so far. This means that
the mines round Nelson and at Ymir and other
parts of the Salmon River country will be able to get
all the men thev want at three dollars a day.   Various
interpretations are placed on this action of the union.
By some it is supposed to be a sign of weakness and
indicates approaching dissolution, while others, probably nearer the mark, suggest that the union means
to concentrate all its energies on the unfortunate Slocan, and when that is subdued, Nelson
meeting     and Trail Creek will become easy vic-
of the       tims.   The counter moves on the part
miners.       of the  owners  is  obvious,  but  it is
doubtful if it will be made.      Every
mine in the districts now left free front attack should
be at once closed, thus shutting off the sources of
supply from the union and showing tne willingness of
mine owners here and at Rossland to stand shoulder
to shoulder with their brethren in the Slocan.    As
long as the camps remain divided the union is sure
to subdue them in the end, and the only successful
opposition to their attack is united action.
There has been "some excitement, accompanied by
an exhibition of good feeling, amongst all classes
over the departure of Captain Hodgins and three
men for South Africa. A fund of nearly $700 was
raised, out of which a sword was presented to Captain Hodgins, the rest being divided among the other
three to provide them with pocket money. The response to the invitation for volunteers and the hearty,
acceptance of the selection show that any little bickerings, whether political, social or racial, are merely on
the surface.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The Editor does not hold himself responsible for the
opinions which may be expressed in this column. No
notice will be taken of communications unless accompanied by the full name and address of the ivriter.
THE    B.C.   MINING   AND    EXPLORATION
COMPANY, LIMITED.
-T O THE EDITOR :—In 'your October issue I
1 notice in your criticisms on the British Columbia Mining and Exploration Company, Limited, you
state, "With regard to the concern itself there does
not at present appear to be much to promise that the
invitation to the public to subscribe for shares will
meet with any extraordinarily enthusiastic response."
It is immaterial, I may say, whether the public enthusiastically subscribe to the shares for sale (which
are solely for development purposes, with the exception of the ordinary office and legal expenses,
which will be exceptionally light, as the officers of
the company are giving their time free of cost for the
first year) or not, as the late owners have sufficient
confidence in the properties to purchase- treasury
stock themselves, independent of what the public
determine to buy.
You state in italics of your own "thereby availing
themselves of the development work that is being
done on a number of the adjoining mines," evidently
criticising the statement made in the prospectus.
Now, any sensible person must know that *t is an advantage in a new mining country like British Columbia to become interested in a number of the mining districts. I can name a number of properties
which have lately become very valuable simply on
account of adjoining properties proving to be rich
mines and securing railway connection, thereby in-78
THE MINING RECORD.
creasing the value of the adjoining properties whether theyr have the same vein or not. In a similar
way investors generally prefer strong corporations
whose interests are scattered, so that the risks ^re
sub-divided; this especially is the case in new countries where development work has not sufficeintly
proved the future of the mines.
You also state, "the owners of the various jirop-
erties have received 350,000 fully paid-up shares for
their interests and the present sale of the shares to
the public will be mainly devoted to the development
of the properties." The italics you state are your
own. The word mainly was "put in the prospectus
on purpose to avoid the mis-statement that generally
appears in prospectuses. Usually it is stated that the
sale of treasury stock will be devoted to devel jp nent
purposes; this is never done entirely, as some of the
money is used for office expenses and certain outlays which are necessary for a company to expend
but not used for the actual development of the mine.
In the case of the company herein referred to, the
monies received from the sale of the treasury stock
will be mainly (perhaps 190 per cent.) used for developing the properties, the balance being used in
ordinary office and legal expenses; these will necessarily be very light, as stated before, the officers of
the company not receiving any salary for the first
year.
The promoters of the company receive no consideration for their services from the company'.
I may say that this company has been formed on
very conservative lines. The late owners of the properties receive no cash, but are paid in shares on the
same basis of price as the treasury stock is sold at,
viz.: Ten cents per share. No salaries are paid officials the first year.
Trusting you will give this letter the same publicity as your criticism, I remain,
Yours truly,
HENRY CR3FT.
Victoria, October 5,  1899.
the various types of slide valves in use, and these art
all duly set forth in the work before us.
PUBLICATIONS.
THE Canadian Mining Manual, 1899, edited by B.
T. A. Bell, Ottawa. This excellent work, which
is _ really a comprehensive and accurate directory of
mining companies operating in the Dominion of Canada, is now in its ninth year of publication. The information it contains being compiled from Governmental and official reports, is, therefore, as nearly as
possible reliable, but necessarily not brought strictly
up to date. As a reference work covering a particular field the Canadian Alining Manual stands unquestionably alone and unrivalled.
W._ J.
Price
Report on the Geology and Natural Resources of
portions of the District of Nipissing, Ontario, and of
the County of Pontiac, Quebec: By A. E. Barlow,
M.A., The Geological Survey of Canada. Ottawa,
1899.   Price, 30 cents.
This report is accompanied by two maps, _ eaclt_ on
a scale of four miles to an inch, and constituting Nos.
130 and 138, respectively, of the Ontario series of
Geological maps.
"The Slocan District of British Columbia; Its Resources and Opportunities for Investment," by C.
Cliffe, editor of the Mining Review, Sandon, B.C.
This is an interesting and well-printed pamphlet of
some ninety pages, describing in detail the various
mines and mining properties in the Slocan district.
There is a pleasing absence of the kind of boom
twaddle one has learnt to associate with publications
of this character, and the information contained in
the brochure is, so far as we are able to judge generally accurate. In the Slocan silver-lead mines we
have a great heritage, and as. the author states, "more
dividends have been declared by the Slocan properties, in proportion to investments and expenditures,
than by any other lode mines in the world."
The Gold Mines of the World; by J. H. Curie, ffl
lustrated with plans and photographs. London.
Waterlow & Sons, Limited, 1899.   Price 16s.
Although entitled the "Gold Alines of the World,''
only mines in which English capital is invested are
dealt with in this book, and as'the author himself explains iri his introductory chapter he, in this respect,
deliberately sacrificed strict accuracy in the naming
of his work, to the desire for an effective title. It is,
meanwhile a matter for wonderment, that a man
should be able within the very circumscribed space of
time in which the author made his extensive tour, to
visit and inspect the underground workings of no
less than two hundred any twenty-eight developed
mines, and at the same time write so accurately and
so minutely of each. "The Gold Mines of the World"
is, in its way, one of the most remarkable books ever
published, and we hope next month to review it as
exhaustively as it deserves, having regard especially
to Air. Curie's well-considered report on the gold
mines of British Columbia.
We have to congratulate the new town of Phoenix,
in the Boundary Creek district, on the acquisition of
so well-edited and well-printed a newspaper as the
News, the first number of which appeared this month.
The "Slide Valve"—Simplv Explained.    By
Tenant and J. H. Kinrally, D.E.    New York.
$1.00.
This hand-bood is intended to assist students of the
steam engine in understanding the mechanism of
various forms of slide valves, and the proper adjustment of various adjacent parts of the steam engine.
The authors of the work have devised a graduated
rotary disc and represent the varying positions of the
crank-shaft and slide valve, by means of which the
student may readily comprehend the workings of th;
various parts of the mechanism. It is important that
engineers should clearly comprehend the functions of
PRODUCING MINES.
SLOCAN.
The total clearances of the Kaslo port on ore for
the month of September were :
Gross lbs ore 2>333>79i
Pounds lead, contents      371,800
Ounces silver      40,910
Value   $67,393
From the sub-port of Nakusp the following is reported :
Gross lbs.  ore 16,000
Value  $6,372THE MINING RECORD.
79
The following ore shipments are reported for the
four weeks ending October 13th :
Sandon—
.        .         , Tons.
American   Boy     20&
,rp^ne I v.'.'.'..:::::::::; go
A'lcGuigan—
Rambler-Cariboo       40
Red Fox    74
Whitewater—
Jackson     48
Whitewater    io6
Hillside Iplll      1
From January 1st to October 14th the total production of the Slocan is estimated at i8,o6oj tons.
nelson.
The report of the Athabasca mine for the month of
September is very favourable. The time run was 29
days, 11 hours. Number of tons crushed, 4i6f. Value
of bullion recovered, $7,453-55- Concentrates, $2,-
185.27. Total recovered, $9,638.82. Value of bullion recovered per ton of ore crushed, $17.88. Concentrates. $5.24.   Total value per ton $23.12.
The result of the Hall mines smelting operations
for the four weeks ending September 30th, are appended 5,142 tons of Silver King ore were smelted,
containing (approximately) 119 tons of copper, 80,-
000 ounces of silver.
LEAD  SMELTING.
116 tons of Silver King ore and 836 tons of purchased ores were smelted; 170 tons 6f silver-lead bullion were produced, containing (approximately) 165
tons of lead, 23,820 ounces of silver, 948 ounces of
gold.
The exports of ore and matte from the port of Nelson during the month of September aggregated in
value $175,000.
ROSSLAND.
The value of ore and matte exported from this port
during September was $380,000.
The production of the Rossland camp for the three
weeks ending Oct. 14, are approximately estimated
as follows:
Tons.
LeRoi    4,288
War Eagle    3.224
Iron Mask       403
Evening Star         120
Centre Star    1,333
Virginia   •    40
The total output to date is placed at 129,037 tons.
LILLOOET.
Last month the Ben D'Or mine, Cadwallader
Creek, produced two gold-bricks of the value of
$6,147.59 and $7,692.40, respectively.
COAL EXPORTATIONS.
The Vancouver Island   coal   exportation for the
month of September were as follows :
Tons.
New Vancouver Coal Co 41'753
Wellington    21,870
L nion      2,826
Total 66,449
The New Vancouver Coal Co.'s shipments for the
three weeks ending October 20th, were :
Date.        Vessel.                     Destination. Tons.
3—SS. San Mateo Port Los Angeles.. 4,443
3—SS. New  England... Alaska  38
5—SS. R. Adamson .... San Francisco  .... 4,455
7—SS. Mineola Port Los Angeles. . 3,431
10—Bark C. D. Bryant... .Lahaina, H.I  IA75
13—SS. Titania San Francisco  .... 5,080
13—Str. New  England... Alaska  43
18—SS. San Mateo Port Lost Angeles . 4,457
Total 23>431
THE METAL MARKET—OCTOBER.
[Compiled from the special telegraphic quotations
to the B.C. AIining Record from the Engineering &
Mining Journal, New York.]
The market has been devoid of any special feature
this month. The bank rates are exceptionally high
and the speculative markets have been generally
weak, but general business has not been greatly affected.
SILVER.
The silver market has been steady but dull. Prices
have, however, declined somewhat since last month.
The lowest point reached was 57! and the highest
58f-
LEAD.
Lead continues to be in good demand and inquiry
on the part of the consumers is reported as very fair.
There has been no change in prices, the metal being
quoted at 4.55 to 4.60, New York, and 4.47-^, St.
Louis.
COPPER.
The market has ruled quiet but steady, without
any special feature. Prices throughout the month
have remained stationary, with lake copper at 18-J,
electrolytic in cakes, wire-bards and ingots 17 to 17^;
cathodes, 16J to 16$; casting copper, at 17, nominal.
SPELTER.
Disquieting reports from the ore-fields resulted this
month in creating much activity in this market and
a large business was done at the following prices:
5.30 to 5.35, St. Louis; 5.45 to 5.50, New York.
THE LOCAL STOCK MARKET.
THE market is at last showing signs of recovering
from the depression of the last few months;
and generally business during October, on the Toronto, Montreal, Rossland and Spokane Exchanges
has been very much more active.
Since our last report Evening Star has declined
from 11 to 9 as a result of the closing down of the
mine. I.X.L. has advanced from 13J to 15J; War
Eagle has fallen from $3.30 to $3, and Virginia from
11 to 8^; St. Elmo from 8 to 6; Monte Cristo from
7 to 5; Iron Colt from 8 to 5-}: Homestake from 13 to
10. Iron Alask has been selling at 72 to 73, and
Jumbo at 24. I.X.L. has been very active at from 13
to 16 cents, about 90,000 shares having been sold
recently to mostly Western buyers.
AINSWORTH,   NELSON   AND   SLOCAN.
Of Nelson stocks Athabasca, Dundee and Exchequer have been the most active. Payne sold during
the month as low as 88 cents, owing to the reported
non-payment of the usual dividend. The monthly
dividend was afterwards declared and the stock recovered somewhat, and is now quoted at $1.06 to
$1.10. It is announced that Rambler-Cariboo will
pay regular monthly  dividends and this report, has8o
THE MINING RECORD.
caused the stock to advance from 49 to 60 cents.
Dardanelles have been selling at n to 12 cents, and
Noble Five at from 24 to 25.
BOUNDARY  CREEK.
Some very remarkable strikes have been made m
the Boundary district- by railway cuts, 25 feet
of ore has been shown up on the Brandon and Golden Crown, 46 feet on the Winnipeg and 100 feet on
the King. These strikes have created a considerable
demand for Boundary stocks. Winnipeg has been
in great demand and in one week 100,000 shares
were sold, principally in the West, at from 30 to 32
cents; Brandon sold at 29 and King at 21 to 25
cents. In the early part of October Rathmullen was
very active at from 8 to 8-J-.
camp m'kinney.
Cariboo is last quoted at $1.15; Waterloo has advanced from II to 13 owing to the recent strike and
the fact that crushing is to be commenced immediately. On the Fontenoy the Waterloo ledge has
been struck and the 120-foot level; but the shares
remain stationary at 16 to 17. Little Cariboo has
been selling at 1 cent and Minnie-ha-ha is quoted at
16 cents.
fairview.
Fairview Corporation has been in some demand
at 5 to 5J cents.
VANCOUVER ISLAND.
Several dealings in Mount Sicker and B.C. Development Company shares are reported for the
month at $4.85.
TEXADA  ISLAND.
Van Anda shares have been again active and have
advanced from 7\ to 9 cents.
CATALOGUES'AND TRADE CIRCULARS.
THE 1899 edition of Catalogue No. 15, of the
Gates Iron Works, Chicago, describing cement-
making, has just been issued. This catalogue is illustrated with some dozen plates, showing the Gates
Rock Breaker, Fine & Gyratory crushers, crushing
rolls, ball and tube mills and rotary cement ..kilns.
The catalogue is in its way quite unique, in that it
offers for the first time a complete line of modern
machinery designed for cement-making and embracing the whole process, made by the same firm.
■ We have received the fourth edition of Messrs.
Fraser & Chalmers, Catalogue No. 8, giving a list
of crushers and pulverizers, manufactured byr them.
The Hendrie & Bolthoff Mfg. and Supply Co., of
Denver, Colo., whose representative, Mr. F. H. Bos-
wick, recently visited British Columbia, have just
shipped a small electric hoist and an air-compressor
to Rossland. We anticipate that this is but the entering wedge of this enterprising concern into' the
trade of this side of the line. They have a most extensive line of steam, compressed-air and electric
hoists, and our readers would do well to correspond
■with them when in the market for machinery. In this
connection we might add that this concern has
placed twelve hoists in Washington during the past
six weeks.
Their new catalogue of hoisting machinery has
been received at this office, and every one of our B.C.
miners should send to them for a copy of this very
handsome little booklet.
A CARD.
From SELBY BROTHERS of SAN FRANCISCO, CAL.
Assayer? and Mining Experts.
To the Mining Public of the North West.
We beg to advise you that we have opened a branch of out
business at 205^ Washington St.. Portland, Oregon, to
accommodate our numerous clients in the North West. As our
name for prompt and reliable work in the past is known to every
mining man west of the Rockies, it will guarantee our future
success. Our Certificates are invariably accepted by Banks and
Mining Corporations as final. Numerous investors waiting for
sound mining property.
We are now ready for work. Send in your Samples with letter
of instructions and charges, and we will give you prompt returns.
Our charges are: Gold and Silver, ft.50. Gold, Silver and
Copper, $3.00.    Coal, Soils and other Minerals, $3.00 each.
Hand power stamp mills for tests for sale.
SELBY BROTHERS,
Assayers and Mining Experts.
205)4 WASHINGTON STREET,   -   PORTLAND, OREGON.
liliiiiia The Wilfley ©re Concentrator
Most Effective Concentrator
Known.
PS^| Descriptive Catalogue sent post free on application.
TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESSES:—"Wrathless,  London." j
Syndicate, Limited.
32 OLD JEWRY. E.C. LONDON.
Beg- to call the attention of Mining Engineers, Mine Superintendents and Managers, Machinery Dealers, and all connected
with the Mining Industry to
THE    "WILFLEY"   TABLE
The following strong claims are put forward for the "WILFLEY," and will be found more than fully substantiated in
actual working :
1. Simplicity of construction. No expensive wearing parts.
No belt renewals. Nothing to get out of order. Practically no
repairs.
2. Facility of adjustment to all ores treated. Once adjusted
it needs but a minimum of attention.
3. Its wonderful capacity. Will handle three to five times as
much material as any belt table made.
4. Reduction of maintenance charges. No skilled labour required. Reduction in initial outlay, as smaller number of
tables are needed.
5. The ore particles being separated into distinct streaks a
romplete separation of the different minerals contained is effected.
The " WILFLET" has only been on the market some
eighteen months, yet in that time nearly 800 have been sold,
and are in use in 200 mines, which speaks volumes for the rapid
and favorable recognition it has been accorded.
The most flattering Testimonials have been received.
The  "WILFLEY" can be seen in operation by appointment at
the offices of the Syndicate, 32 Old Jewry, London, E.C.
Samples of Ore, 50 Ib. to 1 cwt., tested free of charge.
Correspondence Invited.THE MINING RECORb.
IX.
Mining Stocks.
Prepar. d by A. W. More & Co., Mining Brokers, Victoria, B.C., Oct. 26, '99.
Company.
Capital.
Par
Value.
TRAIL CREEK.
Alberta  «i
Big Three
Bruce 	
Butte
Caledonia Con .
Centre Star	
Commander...
Deer Park	
Enterprise.	
Evening Star...
Georgia	
Gertrude ...
Golden Drip...
Gopher	
Hattie Brown..
High Ore	
Homestake..  ..
Iron Horse	
Iron Mask	
I.X.L.
Iron Colt	
Jumbo	
Le Roi	
Lilly May	
Mabel	
Mayflower	
Monita	
Monte Cristo	
Nest Egg-Firefly	
Northern Belle	
Novelty	
Palo Alto	
Poorman	
• R. E. Lee 	
Red Mountain View	
Rossland, Red Mountain.
St. Elmo	
Silverine	
Silver Bell Con	
Vic1 ory Triumph	
Virginia	
War Eagle Consolidatedf.
. White Bear	
American Boy	
Arlington	
Argo	
Athabasca	
Black Hills	
Buffalo of Slocan	
Chanue	
Dundee	
Dardanelles	
Dellie	
' Exchequer	
Pern Gold	
. Good enough	
Gibson	
Hall Mines	
Lerwick	
Leviathan	
London	
Miller Creek	
Minnesota  	
Nelson-Poorman	
Noble Five Con	
Ottawa and Ivanhoe.
Payne	
Rambler Con	
Reco	
Slocan-Reciprocity..
Slocan Start	
Santa Marie	
Silver Band	
Slocan Queen	
Star	
St. Keverne	
Sunshine	
Tamarac	
Two Friends	
Washington	
Wonderful	
Lardeau Goldsmith	
Consolidated Sable Creek Mining Co.
Lardo-Duncan	
TEXADA ISLAND.
Gold Bar	
Raven 	
Texada Proprietary	
Texada Kirk Lake	
Treasury Mines	
Van Anda	
Victoria-Texada 	
VANCOUVER ISLAND.
Alberni Mountain Rose	
Consolidated Alberni	
Mineral Creek	
Mineral Hill	
Quadra	
Mount Sicker & B. C. Development Co .
AINSWORTH. NELSON AND SLOCAN.
$1,000,000
$1
?    4%
3,500,001
1
If
1.000.00C
1
10
1,000.000
1
02   !
1,000,001
1
6%
8,500,001
1
500,001
1
10
1,000,001
1
f/*
1,000,000
1
20
1,000,00C
1
9
1,000.00c
%
3
500,000
1
' 11
500,00C
1
15
1,000,OOC
1
03^
1,000,001
1
03
500,OOC
1
05
1,000,OOC
1
10
l,000,O0C
1
&/2
500,OOC
1
75
1.000.00C
6
log
1,000,00c
1
by2
600.00C
1
25
£1,000,00C
£5
£7
$t,000,OOC
1
$0 20
1,000,000
1
15
1,000,00c
1
10
750.000
1
19
2.500,000
1
5
1 000,000
1
05
1,000,000
1
4
1,000.000
1
4
1,000,000
1
03
500,000
1
14
2,000,000
1
3
1,000,000
1
3
1,000,000
1
10
1,000,000
1
6
500.00C
1
6
500,00c
25
V4
1,000,000
1
08
1 00)000
1
m
2,000,00c
1
8 10
2,000,000
1
4Ji
1,000,000
1
11
1.000,000
1
6%
100,000
0 10
10
1.000,000
1
39
10(1,000
0 10
10
150,000
0 25
—
250 000
0 25
03
1.000.000
1
22
1.0 0.000
1
12
7 •o.ooo
1
12
1.000,000
1
U
200.000
0 25
20
800,000
1
11
650,000
1
1%
£300.000
£1
$1 500 000
$1
10
2,000,000
1
s'A
150,000
25
25
1,000,000
1
08
1,000.000
1
66
250.000
0 25
16
1,200,000
1
25
1.000,000
1
12«
8.800,000
1 00
1 10
1,000,000
1
60
1,000,000
1
1 00
1,000,000
1
—
500.000
50
1 25
1,000,000
u
05
250,000
0 25
12k
1.000,000
1
10
1,000,000
1
07
1,000,000
1
5
500,000
10
1,000 000
1
12Ji
240,000
80
06
1,000,000
1
25
1,000,000
1
6
200 000
1
04
1,500.000
1
5
1,500,000
1
05
loo.ooo
10
10
1,000,000
1
6
250,000
0 25
25
600,000
1
1 00
250,000
25
3
5,000,000
1
9
150,000
0 25
04
250,000
500,000
500,000
750,000
500.000
£125,000
1
1
1
1
1
£1
o»H
05^
05
05
4 85
CARIBOO.
Cariboo Gold Fields Ld	
Cariboo Hydraulic Consolidated.
Cariboo M. & D. Co	
Golden River Quesnelle	
Horsefly Hydraulic	
Horsefly Gold Mining Co	
Victoria Hydraulic	
LILLOOET DISTRICT.
Alpha Bell	
Cayoosh Creek Mines..!.!!!!!!!!!
Excelsior !.!!!!!
Golden Cache !.!!!!!!!"
Lillooet Gold Reefs	
FAIRVIEW  CAMP.
Smuggler	
Fairview Corporation .'	
£100,000
?5,000,000
300,000
£350,000,
$200,000
1,000,000
300,000i
500,000
500,000
500,000
500,000
200,000
1,000,000
1,000,0001
$5
1
£1
510
1
1
1
1
1
1 55
25
1 40
25
BOUNDARY CREEK.
Boundary Creek M. M. Co  l
Brandon and Golden Crown.             l
King   i
Knob Hill     77 77777 777!!!!"!
Morrison '.. 7.! 7.'. 7.!!      !
Old Ironsides   '!!	
Pathfinder	
Fay Ore !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!""!
Rathmullen .77.7 7.7 7 7.7       !
Winnipeg 7777!!!!!!!!!!!!
CAMP MCKINNKY.
Camp McKinney Development Co	
Cari boof	
Minnehaha '.'.7.7.7.7.7!!!!!' 7!
Waterloo '... .7.7.7
Fontenoy	
O'Shea '..'.'.'.'.7	
Waterloo No.  2 " ''	
Mammoth 7.7! 7
Little Cariboo !!!.!!!!!!!!!	
Shannon 77!!!!!!!!!'
Sailor 77777!!!    .' ■
Silver Bell, Consolidated!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!'.
,500,000
,500,000l
500,0001
,500,000
,000,000
,000,000
,000,00
,000,000
,500,000i
,000,000
600,000
,250,000
000,000
100,0001
,000,000
.'0,00 '
6(),000
50,000|
100,000
50,000!
,-?50,000
500,000
10
10
10
02%
06
•09
30
25
98
15
1 10
16
07%
&ys
32
23
1 15
16
13
17
02
02
02
02
03
15
m
REVELSTOKE
Carnes Creek Consolidated...
EAST  KOOTENAY.
Crowls Nest Pass Coal Co	
North Star	
Sullivan	
1,000,000
2,000,0001
1,500,000
1,000,000|
lf-11 00
1 00
IS
V.Y.T.eo.|
m      .LAKE BENNETT, B.C.
OPERATING THE ONLY
Saw^Planing Mills
At the head of Navigati
To the    ..    	
YDKON AND ATLIN GOLD FIELDS!
Builders of_
Boats, Barges and Scows.
Two-thirds of the freight bound for Dawson was carried by-
barges constructed by us. You can save from $100 to $150 per
ton by shipping to Bennett, thence by barge, as against through
rates.
We are prepared ti furnish all kinds of iumber for construction of Steamers, Barges, or Boats.
We also have the largest and best assorted stock of General Merchandise in the North at
LAKE BENNETT, B.C.
Consisting of Groceries, Provisions, Dry Goods, Furnishing Stoves, Tinware,
Enamelware, Window Glass, Hardware, etc. Call on or write us before sending to the Coast for your supplies. Information cheerfully given by applying to
The Victoria Yukon Tradino Go., Limited,
Lake Bennett B.C.
Head  Office, Victoria.    B.C.THE MINING RECORD.
TABLE   OF   CONTENTS.
The Month -
Etiect of Transvaal War   45
Labour Tioubles in Slocan and Nelson   46
Lead Admitted Free
Canadian Iron for U. S. Battleships ...
Dorothoy Morton Mine 	
Alaska Modus Vivendi	
Telegraph Line to Dawson completed .
Mount Sickar Company  	
Golden Cache Mines Company
46
46
47
47
48
48
48
Tangier Mines Shut Down"... 1 48
Le Roi Monster Shipment  49
Mr. E. Jacobs, Editor Midway Advance 60
Columbia & Western Railwav completed   50
B. C. Mining and Exploration Syndicate, Lid  51
Notes on the Ymir Mine, &c, (Illustrated)    53
Iron Mask v. Centre Star—Verbatim Evidence  56
Rossland in 1898 (Illustrated)  62
Treatment of Dry Silver Ores in South America  65
Shipping Facilities New Vancouver Coal Co. (Illustrated)  67
Review Technical Periodicals  69
Month's Mining—
Mount Sickar  ,  70
Shoal Bay  7j
Kamloops and Revelstoke 72
.Boundary Creek, etc  73
Rossland  : ■  74
Slocan  76
Nelson 77
Publications and Producing Mines 78
The Metal and Stock Market   79
Cat-logues and Trade Circulars   80
Mining Stock quotations 1X
DIRECTORY   OF   ADVERTISERS.
ASSAYERS' SUPPLIES—
F. W. Bratm & Co., Los Angeles	
Ainsworth, "Ware & Son, Denver, Col	
B.C. Assay & Chemical Supply Co., Vancouver, B.C..
Denver Fire Clay Co., Denver, Col	
Taylor, John & Co, San Francisco, Cal	
Page.
X.
II.
II.
II.
n.
ASSAYERS—
Selby Bros., Portland, Oregon  X.
Best, W. F., Victoria, B.C  XVI.
Holdich, A. H., Revelstoke, B.C  XVI.
Archibald & Pearson, Nelson, B.C  XVI.
Harvey, W. Pellew, Vancouver, B.C  XVI.
Haggen, E. A., Golden, B.C  XVI.
Ogden Assay Co., Denver, Col  XVI.
Cuno, Chas. F., Denver, Col  XVI.
Redman & Outhett, Kamloops, B.C   XVI.
British Columbia Agency, Vancouver, B.C  XVII.
Watson, A-. A., Vernon, B.C  XVIII.
BELTING—
McLennan, McFeely & Co., Vancouver and Dawson.. Cover.
BOILERS AND ENGINES—
Fraser & Chalmers, Chicago, HI ,  HI.
Bacon, Earle, C, New York  I.
BOILERS AND ENGINES—(Continued.) Page.
Robb Engineering Co., Amherst, N.S       IV.
Albion Iron Works, Victoria, B.C    XHI.
Hamilton, The Wm. Mfg. Co., Peterboro, Ont., and Back
Vancouver, B.O Cover.
BANKS—
Bank of British North America	
Bank of British Columbia	
Merchants' Bank of Halifax	
VHI.
XIV.
IX.
CABLES AND TRAMWAYS—
Trenton Iron Co., Trenton, N.J         V.
Beatty, M., & Sons, Welland Ont         V.
Jack & Robertson, Montreal Back Cover.
COAL AND COKE—
New Vancouver Coal Mining and Land Co.
Nanaimo.   XIX.
CRCJSHERS AND ORE BREAKERS—
Sturtevant Mill Co., Boston, Mass Cover.
Gates Iron Works, Chicago, 111 Cover.
Fried Krupp GrusonwerJt, Germany and Montreal... Cover.
Bacon, Earle C, New York  I.
H. W. TRERT,
Pres., Treas. and Gen. Manager.
THOS. KIDDIE,
Smelter Manage
Van Anda
eoppER & gold eo„
Purchasers and Smelters
—OF—
COPPER HNO e©PPER=GOLO ORES
Rates on application.      Cash paid on settlement of assays.
Works at Van Anda, Texada Island, B.e.
JOHN    HAWLEY,
MINING  BROKER.
British Columbia Mines Bought ard Sold.
Only First-Glass Properties Handled.
fBedford-Neal,
Codes-] Moreing-Neill,
I Clough's.
611  Hastings St.,
VANCOUVER, B. C.
fanfain tA7illistm« M P 'ate superintendent of Tyee Mine
V^dpidin Williams, lYI.C, Mount Sicker, is now in position
to inspect and give reliable reports on that or any other mines or mineral
claims in Brliish Columbia at moderate1 charges. He has a large and extensive experience in conducting mines of various descriptions for over 40 years '
Address : Queen's Hotel, Victoria, B.C.
atent Pending.
PERFECT CUPELS.. •
can be made by anyone with
ease and dispatch, with
HAWKINS'
Cupel Machines
Compact, easily operated, can't
get out of order.   Everlasting.
No   Assay   Office   Complete
THE »UT0MaTie, Without One,
This machine will make 5 sizes cupels ~^—^**
of ideal perfection.   Capacity, 600 an      Descriptive Pamphlet  and  Price
hour. List mailed on application.
l. & e.
Combination Melting and Muffle
Assayers*
Furnaces
Are   Economical,  Convenient   and
Efficient.
PaTBNTED.
This illustration shows L. & ('. Fur-
I   nace in op* ation.   Melting and Cu- _.
• pelingat same time with one burner. Blowpipe Outfits
Gasoline Tanks,
Hydro-Carbon
F. W. BRAUN & CO.,
inPORTERS, EXPORTERS,
Manufacturers and Jobbers
I Los Angeles, California.THE MINING RECORD.
XI.
DIRECTORY  OF  ADVERTISERS-Contitmed.
CRUSHERS AND ORE BREAKERS—(Con.)—   Page.
Fraser & Chalmers, Chicago, 111       HI.
Hendy, Joshua, San Francisco, Cal       VI.
Hamilton, The Wm. Mfg   Co., Peterboro, Ont., and Back
Vancouver, B.C Cover.
CARS, CAGES, CHAIRS—
Fraser & Chalmers, Chicago, HI.      .        . HI.
Bacon, Earle O, New York .' I.
CARBONS—
Lexow, Theo., New York  I.
DREDGES, DITCHERS AND STEAM SHOVELS—
Beatty, M., & Sons, Wetland, Ont         V.
ELECTRICAL SUPPLIES AND MACHINERY—
Hinton, Geo. C, & Co, Victoria and Vancouver Cover.
Royal Electric Co., Montreal, Vancouver and Victoria. Cover.
Link Belt Machinery Co., Chicago, 111  I.
Canadian General Electric Co, Toronto and Vancouver, B.C        VII.
Hendrie & Bolthoff Mfg. Co., Denver, Col      XII.
ELEVATORS AND CONVEYORS—
Link Belt Machinery Co., Chicago, 111  I.
ENGINES AND BOILERS—
Bacon, Earle C, New York  I.
FILTER PRESSES—
Perrin, Wm. R., &Co., Chicago, 111  I.
FHiE BRICKS AND POTTERY—
Denver Fire Clay Co.. Denver, Col     H.
B.C. Pottery Co., Victoria, B.C      XII.
GENERAL MACHINERY & POWER PLANTS—
Jenckes Machine Co., Sherbrooke, Que., and Rossland. VI.
HOISTING MACHINERY—
Fraser & Chalmers, Chicago, 111  TTT
Bacon, Earle O, New York  I.
Beatty, M., & Sons, Welland, Ont  V.
Hendrie & Bolthoff, Denver, Col  XII.
HYDRAULIC PIPE & MACHINERY—
Armstrong & Morrison, Vancouver  V.
Hendy, Joshua, San Francisco '.  VI.
Albion Iron Works, Victoria   XIII.
MINING.   ENGINEERING AND  SURVEYING
INSTRUMENTS—
Hearn & Harrison, Montreal         II.
Wittstock, P. & R., Berlin, Germany         X.
MACHINERY AGENTS—
Heaps, E. H., & Co., Vancouver, B.C  VI.
MINING BROKERS—
Grigor, R. W., Rossland. B.C  XIII
Pemberton & Son, Victoria, B.C  XVH
Thornton^Langley S., & Co., Rossland, B.C  XVH
Nicholson, Henry, Camp McKinney  XVII
Mackinnon, J. M., Vancouver, B.C  XVH-
Hawley, John, Vancouver, B.C  X-
More, A. W., & Co., Victoria, B.C  XV-
Pnrgold, George, Rossland, B.C  XV.
MINING ENGINEERS—
West, Howard, New Denver. B.C    XVI
Bromly, A. H., Vancouver, B.C    XVI
Trethewey & Bucke, Vancouver, B.C    XVI
Harvey, W. Pellew, Vancouver, B.C    XVI.
Archibald & Pearson, Nelson, B.C    XVI
Groves, F. W., Greenwood, B.C    XVI.
Tytler, F. J. L., Vancouver, B.C    XVI.
Redmond & Outhett, Kamloops,.B.C XVI
Selby Bros., Portland, Ore          X.
Brewer, W M., Victoria, B C  XVII
Tyrell, J. B., Dawson City, Yukon XVII
Mackinnon, W. M., M.A.C., Vancouver, B.C  XVII
Fergusson & Crofts, Vancouver  XVII
METAL JOBBERS—
Robertson, James, & Co., Montreal, Vancouver. .Back Cover
ORE PURCHASERS—
Van Anda Copper and Gold Co., Van Anda         X
PUMPS AND AIR COMPRESSORS— Page.
Fraser & Chalmers, Chicago, 111  m.
Taylor Air Compressing Co., Spokane, Wash  IV.
Hendy, Joshua, San Francisco, Cal- '. VI
James Cooper Mfg. Co., Montreal and Rossland ...... VIH.
Hendrie & Bolthoff, Denver, Col  XH.
Albion Iron Works, Victoria  XIIX
Canadian Rand Drill Co., Montreal Back Cover!
PLATINUM REFINERS—
Baker & Co., Newark, N.J       VI
POWDER—
Hamilton Powder Co., Nanaimo       VI
PAINTS—
British American Paint Co    VHI.
Robertson, James, & Co., Ltd., Montreal and Van- Back
couver Cover.
PUBLICATIONS—
Mining Journal, London, Eng XVIII.
Scientific Pub. Co., New York  ixVHL
PHOTOGRAPHIC SUPPLIES—
Edwards Bros., Vancouver XVHI
ROCK DRILLS—
James Cooper Mfg. Co., Montreal and Rossland XVIII
Canadian Rand Drill Co., Montreal Back Cover.
STAMP AND CONCENTRATING MILLS—
Hendy, Joshua, San Francisco, Cal       VI.
Fried Krupp Grusonwerk, Germany and Montreal Cover.
Wilfley Ore Concentrator Syndicate, London, Eng         X.
SURVEYORS AND CIVIL ENGINEERS—
Gore, Burnett & Co., Victoria ^nd Nelson         X.
Cleveland, E. A., Vancouver  XVII
Fergusson & Crofts, Vancouver  XVH.
Mackinnon, W. M., Vancouver  XVH.
Silver-Lead Mines Association    XVII
Tytler, T. J. L       XVI
Groves, F. W., Greenwood    XVI.
SHAFTING, PULLEYS AND GEARING—
Link Belt Machinery Co., Chicago, 111  I.
SCREENS AND PERFORATED METALS—
Fraser & Chalmers, Chicago, 111       HI.
SMELTING AND ROASTING FURNACES—
Fraser & Chalmers, Chicago, HI       HI.
STOCK COMPANIES—
Referendum Gold Mining and Milling Co., Rossland..   XIII
SHIPPING AND INSURANCE AGENTS—
Ward, Robert, & Co., Victoria    XIV.
Rithet, R. P., & Co., Victoria      XX.
TRADING CORPORATIONS—
V. Y. T. Co., Lake Bennett  XI.
TECHNICAL SCHOOLS—
Van Der Naillens', San Francisco  XIH.
Michigan College of mines, Houghton, Mich XVEII.
International Correspondence Schools, Scranton, Pa.. .XVHI.
TRANSPORTATION COMPANIES—
Canadian Pacific Railway Co  XX.
Canadian Pacific Nav. Co., Victoria  XX.
WATER WHEELS—
Pelton Water Wheel Co., San Francisco  IV.
Leffel, James, & Co., Springfield, Ohio  IV,
Stilwell-Bierce & Smith-Vaile Co., Dayton, Ohio  IV.
Hendv, Joshua, San Francisco   VI.
WHOLESALE MERCHANTS—
Stemler & Earle, Spices, Etc., Victoria  XII
Smith, M. R., & Co., Biscuits, Victoria  XII
Fraser, Walter S., & Co., Hardware  XIV.
Ward, Robert, & Co., Ltd., Commission   Merchants
and Importers  XIV.
Leiser, Simon, & Co., Groceries  XIV.
Weiler Bros., Furniture  XV.
Lenz & Leiser, Dry Goods  XV.
Turner, Beeton & Co., Dry Goods and Liquors,  XV.
Hudson's Bay Co., General Merchants Back Cover.N
L
!,:i
Xll.
THE MINING RECORD.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Holsttag
nerjoo.o
We manufacture a very complete line for
STEAM,   ELECTRICITY  and
COMPRESSED AIR.
ALL SIZES.
ALL TYPES
If in the market for anything in the line of FRICTION Geared, or
First Motion Hoists investigate our line.    It is unquestionably the
largest carried by any one concern in the TJ. S.
Correspondence   Solicited.
The Hendrie and Bolthoff
Mfg. and Supply Co.,
1601 Seventeenth Street,     DENVER, Colo., U.S.A.
PIONEER STEAM COFFEE & SPICE MILLS,
ESTKBLISHED   IS6S.
Manufacturers of Coffee, Spices, Cocoa, Cream
Tartar, Mustard and Baking Powder.
STEMLER & EARLE, Pembroke Street
Between Government and Douglas, VICTORIA, B.C.
B. C. POTTERY CO., limited
VICTORIA, B.C.
Manufacturers of . . .
Fire Bricks, Pressed Bricks, Sewer Pipe and
Fittings, Chimney Pine, Flower Pots, etc.
Mining and Surveying Instruments.
Light Mountain Transits and Transit-Theodolites.
Scott's Mine Tachymeter.
Most improved constructions.    Best workmanship.
Send for list.
P.   &  R.  WITTSTOCK,   Berlin S. 59    GERMANY.
M. R. SMITH I CO. •
ESTABLISHED   1858.
MANUFACTURERS     OF"
HIGH CLASS BISCUITS & CONFECTIONERY
Gold Medals awarded at Royal Agricultural Exhi-
> tion, '9&-'96-'97-'98.    Medal and Diploma awarded
at Colonial and Indian Exhibitions.     Silver Medals
at Provincial Exhibitions, 1886.
BRANCH
430    Cordova     Street,
VICTORIA, B.C.
T. H. GORE.
H.  BURNET.
j, h. McGregor.
GORE, BURNET & CO.,
Provincial and  Dominion Land  Surveyors
AND    CIVIL    ENGINEERS.
Five Sisters Block. VICTORIA and NELSON.THE MINING RECORD.
xin.
MISCELLANEOUS.
The  British Columbia  Review.
Subscription £2.50 Per Annum.
^L^OODjyWESTMEjNiT.
To Brokers, Mining Engineers, Owners of Mining Claims,
Assayers, Journalists and others.
Advertise in the B. C. REVIEW—The Only Representative B.C.
Journal in Europe.
39 Bishopsgate St, within.
LONDON, ENG.
R. W. GRIGOR,
-MINKS
ROSSLAND,   B.C.
Operating in Bast and West Kootenay with special knowledge
of Windermere division and Eort Steele, of East Kootenay, Trail
Creek, Nelson, Slocan, Lardeau, Boundary, Similkameen and
Okanagan in West Kootenay District.
Personal knowledge of mining properties in all the above-
named subdivisions.
Special attention given to the Windermere division at present.
Cable Address : GRIGOR.
Use Bedford McNeil and Moreing and Neal's codes.
ADMINTON
'hotel....
Late Manor House.
W. H. MAWDSLEY,   -Manager
VANCOUVER, B.C.
Corner Howe and Dunsmuir Sts.
Tel. 223. P.O.  Box 372.
T he Recognized Headquarters
for Mining Men.
Re - furnished, re-decorated and
under new management. The
best cuisine on the Coast.
N.B.—The Manager will be glad
to r ceive ore specimens for the
Hotel collection.
A. VAN PER NAILLENSJ
School of Practical, Civil, Mining,
Electrical Mechanical Engineering.
Surveying, Architecture, Drawing and Assaying, Cyanide, Chlorination,
Metallurgy, Assaying of Ores, $25; Bullion and Chlorination Assay, $25; Blow
pipe Assay, $10; Full course of Assaying, $50. Established 1864. Open all year
Send for Circular. 933 Market St., San Francisco, Cal
The Referendum Free Gold Mining and Milling Co'y, ra
NON-PERSONAL LIABILITY.
CAPITAL   STOCK $500,000, in 2,000,000 shares of 25c. each.
Rossland, B.C., May 19, 1899.
We submit to the public as a safe and profitable investment the second issue of 100,000 shares in the Referendum Free Gold Mining
and Milling Company, Limited, non-personal liability, just   organized and   registered during the  first week of July.   The capital stock of the Company
will be $500,000 in shares of 25 cents per value.   Of these800,000 snares are set aside to be sold to develop further the property and operate the mine.
The Company's property is situated on Forty-Nine Creek, about 8 miles from the City of Nelson, B.C., and in the well-known free-gold belt, in which are
also the Athabasca and Poorman mines, which have yielded excellent profits to their owners. Two shafts 35 feet deep have been sunk on one vein, and numerous cuttings have been made, showing the continuity of the ore body for one thousand feet. Assays from ore from these works are as follows : $80, $87,
$246, $361, $412. Dr. P. Langhammer, mining engineer, estimates this vein to average $43 in value and 20 inches in width. This showing has enabled the
Companv to conclude arrangements for a plant to treat the ore, to be installed before snowfall. The gold being free and capable of extraction on the ground
the expensive charge-" of transportation and smelting are obviated, and the profit- will be correspondingly larger than from a base ore of equal assay value.
The Company has thus Its property proven and arrangements made to mine profitably from its inception and to pay dividends at an early date.
The Company recently purchased a 5-stamp mill, b dler and engine with cyanide and chlorination plant. This plan will be operated within 90 davs
from August 10. A stage of progress has been reached when the mine can be worked throughout the winter. The flan of operation includes the addition
of five more stamps in the spring and running a tunnel to the boundary of the Referendum claim which is expected to cross-cut five more leads which now
show on the surface.
All that was outlined in our circular of May 15 has been carried out.
Applications for stock and remittance for first payment of two cents per share may be made through any chartered bank or direct to the undersigned.
Bankers for the Company : Merchants Bank op Halifax, ROSSLAND. B.C.
E. N. OUIMETTE & CO.,
Brokers for the Company, ROSSLAND, B. C.
MERSHANTS BANK of HALIFAX
INCORPORATED   1869.
Capital, $2,000,000.00.
Rest, $1,500,000.00.
f. E. KENNY,    President.
HEAD   OFFICE     HALIFAX,  N.S.
D. H. DUNCAN, General Manager. ED80N L. PEASE, Joint General Manager.
BRANCHES   IN   CANADA:
Antigonish, N.S.
Atlin, B. C.
Bathursr, N. B.
Bennett, B.C.
' Bridgewater, N. S.
Charlottetown, P. E. I.
Dorchester, N.B.
Fredericton, N.B.
Q-uysboro, N. S.  ■
Grand Forks, B. C.
Halifax, N.S.
Kingston, N.B.
Londonderry, N. S.'
Lunenburg, N.S.
Maitland, N.S.
Moncton, N. B.
Montreal, P. Q.
Montreal (West End).
Montreal (Westmount).
Nanaimo, B. C.
Nelson, B.C.
Newcastle. N.B.
Ottawa, Ont.
Pietou, N S.
Port Hawkesbury, N. S.
Rossland, B C.
Saekville, N.B.
Shubenaoadie, N S.
Summerside P. E. I.
Sydney, N. S.
Truro, N. S.
Vaucouver, B. C.
Vancouver, (Bast End)
Victoria,B. C.
Weymouth, N. S.
Woodstock, N. B.        Ymir, B. C.
Branches in Newfoundland.—St. Johns.
Branches in United States.—Havana, Cuba.   New York.   Republic, Wash.
A GENERAL BANKING BUSINESS TRANSACTED.
Drafts and Letters of
Credit Issued.
GOLD DUST ASSAYED AND PURCHASEDL
m
xiv.
THE MINING RECORD.
MISCELLANEOUS.
To Kootenay Hardware Dealers.
For Lowest Prices on Iron, Steel, Picks, Shovels, Pipe, Fittings,
Brass Goods, Barrows, Trucks, etc.
ADDRESS
MILL  AND   MINING  SUPPLIES,
Walter S. Fraser & Co.,
Limited.
Established 1862.
Wharf St., Victoria, B.C.
Tel.   3.
P. O. Box 423.
RobLWard&So.,
Temple Building, VICTORIA, B.C.
Metropolitan Building, Vancouver,   B.C
70  Baslnghall St., London, E.C.
Ltd.
Commission Merchants and Importers.
Shipping, Insurance and Financial Agents.
Royal Swedish and Norwegian Consulate.   Royal Belgian Consulate.   Royal Danish Consulate.
GENERAL AGENTS for The Royal Insurance Co. The London & Lancashire Fire Insurance Go. The Northern Assurance Co.
The Standard Life Assurance Co., The London and Provincial Marine Assurance Co., The Western Assurance Co. (Marine.) The London Assurance
Corporation (Marine).   La Fonder Campagnie d'Assurances.   Swiss Marine Insurance Companies.   The Ocean Accident ana Guarantee Corporation
SOLE AGENTS for Curtis' & Harvey's Sporting and Blasting Powder ami " Amberite " (Smokeless Powder.)
CANNERY AGENCIES.—Ewen & Co.—Lion and Bonnie Dundee Brands.   Bon Accord Fishery Co.—Consul and Bon Accord Brands.
Canadian Pacific Packing Co.—Flagship Brand.   West Coast Packing Co    Currie, McWilliams & Fowler,   Imperial Cannery.
Managers and Agents for
The   British Columbia Corporation,   Limited,
Mortgages, Debentures, Trusts, Estates
Managed and Rents Collected.
Importers of Oilmen's Stores, Tin Plates, Portland Cement, Pig Iron and
General Merchandise.
Managers and Agents for the Moodyville Sawmills.
Charters Effected and  Indents Executed for every Description of British
and Foreign Merchandise.
Tug Boat Agents.
SIMON LEISER &e©.
Wholesale Grogers.
VICTORIA,  B. C.
Headquarters for Mining Supplies.
The Bank of British Columbia.
(Incorporated by Royal Charter, 1862).
CAPITALCwith power to increase) £600,000     $2,920,000
RESERVE • £100,000      $  '486,*666
Head Office—60 Lombard Street, London, England.
branches:
In British Columbia—Victoria, Vancouver, New Westminster,
Nanaimo, Kamloops, Nelson, Sandon, Rossland.
In the United States—San Francisco and Portland.
AGENTS AND  CORRESPONDENTS:
In Canada—Canadian Bank of Commerce, Merchants' Bank of
Canada, The Molson's Bank, Imperial Bank of Canada, Bank of
Nova Scotia and Union Bank of Canada. In United States—
Canadian Bank of Commerce (Agenoy), New York : Merchant's
Bank of Canada, New York; Bank of Nova Scotia, Chicago In
Australia and New Zealand— Bank of Australasia In
Honolulu—Bishop & Co.
YUKON   AND  ATLIN   GOLD   FIELDS
Drafts, Letters of Credit, etc., issued direct on Dawson City, Atlin City and Skagway
SAVINGS   BANK   DEPARTMENT.-Deposits received from fl upwards, and interest allowed thereon
Gold Dust purchased and every description of Banking Business transacted.
GEORGE   GILLESPIE, Manager.THE MINING RECORD.
xv.
BRITISH   COLUMBIA  WHOLESALE   SUPPLY  HOUSES.
roc
Office Furniture
We have in stock or made to order
ROLLER CURTAIN DESKS,
FLAT TOP DESKS.
Office and Library Tables,
Typewriter Tables.
OFFICE   FURNITURE of
EVERY DESCRIPTION.
Inlaid Linoleums,   Plain  and   Printed    Linoleum,   Cork Carpet
For anything in House Furnishing write to us.    We are headquarters.
WEILER  BROS.,
vieTORm, B.e.
L.ENZ. <& LEISER, 9 a 11 yates street.
—importers of —
GENERAL   DRY   GOODS.
-manufacturers of-
CLOTHING, SHIRTS ftND UNDERWEAR.
A Large Supply of Goods Suitable for thje Kpoterjay and KJondiKe Trades.
ONLY   WHITB   LABOR  EMPLOYED.
Special attention given to packing Goods for the Klondike Trade and other Mining Camps.
A. W. MORE & CO.   *
MINING and STOCK BROKERS.
Codes used:    Bedford-McNeill's, Moreing &
Neal's, Clough's, and A.B.C, Fourth Edition.
86 Government Street,
VICTORIA, B.C.
George   Purgold,
Stock and Share Broker.
Rossland, B.C
Wallace Building,
Columbia Avenue,
P. 0. Box 73.   Cable Address: Purgold.
Codes : A.B.C, Fourth edition Moreing aud Neals, Cloughs and Bedford
McNeals.
TURNER,  BE ETON & CO.
Victoria, Vancouver, and Nelson, B.C.
 AND AT	
H. C. Beeton & Co., S3 Finsbury Circus, London, Eng.
WHOLESALE     I     MERCHANTS.
Dry Goods, Eiqttors, Cigars, Flotir, Etc.       goods indented from all parts
Manufacturers of Clothing, Etc. ...of the world...
^TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESSES	
"TURNER," Victoria.      "BEETON," London.       "TDRBEET," Vancouver and  Nelson.xvi.
THE MINING RECORD.
PROFESSIONAL,  ADVERTISEMENTS.
i E. H. HHGGEN,
assayer and Metallurgist,    *   Golden, B.e.
Galena   and   Copper Ores   Purchased.    Reports and information furnished regarding mineral properties.
Cable address :—" Kanagan,*
Moreing and Neal codes.
Golden. Bedford, McNeill and
A. H. BROMLY, M. I. Mech. E.
M. Inst. M. E. M. Ameb. I. M. E.
Mining and Consulting Engineer.
Code:— Belford McNeill.
Eldon Street,
LONDON, E.C.
'Christopher, Iokdon.
P. 0. Box 308,
VANCOUVER, B.C.
(" Bromly, Vancouver.")
WM. F- BEST,
ANALYTICAL CHEMIST.
(Heidelberg and Leipzig.)
ASSAYER.
Late Official Analyst for the Province of New Brunswick.
28 Broad Street. - VICTORIA. B.C
HOWARD WE T
MINING ENGINEER
Makes a specialty of suppl
reliable iuformation
(Associate of Royal School of Mines, London, Eng.)
Five Year's Residence In West Kootenay.
2JlM Reports on Slocan Properties,
New Denver, B.C.
Telegraph Codes used: Bedford McNeill's,
A.B.C. fourth edition and Moreing & Neal's.
HReHBOLO   &  PEHRSON,
MINING    ENGINEERS
ASSAYERS-
Cable Address : Archpe. r, Nelson.
Codes: Bedford McNeil, A.B.C.
P.O. Box 583,
NELSON,
British Columbia.
A. K HOLDICH,
ANALYTICAL    CH EMIST
and METALLURGIST.
Royal School of Mines, London.
Seven years at Morfa works, Swansea.
Seventeen years chief chemist to Wfgan Coal & Iron Co.
Late chief chemist Hall Mines Co., Ltd.
Assays and Analyses made on all varities of mineral and
many organic substances.
Special experience in Smslting—both Swansea and American process.
REVELSTOKE,  B.C.
F. W. GR©YES,
CIVIL and MINING ENGINEER,
PR©YINemL LftND SURVEYOR.
Mineral Claims Crown Granted and reported upon.
Bank of British North America Bldg., GREENWOOD, B. C.
W.   PELLEW-HARVEY,   F.C.S.
(Mem. Fed. Inst. M. and M.E.)
ASSAYER and MINING   ENGINEER.
Established 1890.
The Vancouver Public Ore Testing and Sampling Works.
Purchaser of COPPER, SILVER, GOLD and LEAD ORES and
MATTE for the following houses whom he represents :
VIVIAN & SONS, Swansea.    ELLIOTT'S METAL CO..  LTD.,
Burry Port.    Smelters, Refiners, Desilverizers and Manufacturers.   Also agent for the Cassell Gold Extracting Co., Ltd.. Glasgow,  (Cyanide process).
Works and Office—17-719 r'ender St., VA  CCUVER,
15 Broad St., VICTORIA, B.C.
RELIABLE ASSAYS.
Copper $1.00
Gold,.silver and lead  1.25
Gold, silver copper  1.50
Gold, silver, copper, lead  2.00
Gold	
 $ 50
      40
      50
Highest price paid for
©GDBN  ASSAY C0.,  1429~16th St., DENVER, Colo.
Samples by mail receive prompt attention.
Bullion.
CHARLES     F\     CUNO,
ASSAYER and CHEMIST.
Gold, silver, lead, 75 cents ; any two $1.00 ; all three
$1.23. Copper, $1.00: Znlc, $1.50; Iron, Manganese, Silica, $2.00
each, all three $5.00. Prices on other chemical work furnished on application. Amalgamation, cyanide, chlorination
tests, $5.00 each. Contracts for Ore made with smelters and"
sampling of same attended to. The only perfect Concentrator on exhibition.    Write us.
1733 Champa St., P. 0. Box 784, DENVER, Colo.
SEND  YOUR  ASSAYING  TO THE- ■■
INLAND LABORATORY,
KAMLOOPS, B.C..    ■*
REDMAN & OUTHETT, "ETAUURGM^CH^LNSHEE^TESERs.
Mailed specimens receive our special attention. Parcels of ore sampled
and treated.
F. J. L. TYTLER,
CONSULTING ENGINEER,
Notary Public in and for B. C, Commissioner of Oaths.
Office, 23 Mackinnon Block, Granville St., VanpA.nra.
P.O. Box 39.  Telephone 750. Vdlll/OUVcr.
ABC Code, Bedford McNeill Code.
Student of Glasgow University.
Pupil of Messrs. Hawkes Crawshay, Gateshead-on-Tyne.
Late Civil Engineer, Oude & Rohilkund Railway, India.
Late Civil Engineer, Department of Public Works, India.
Late Manager Sirmoor Iron Works.
Late Inspector of Dykes, British Columbia.
For several years Consulting Engineer to the Government of B. C.
All business with mines transacted, reports made, assays supplied Plans
estimates and specifications lor general engineering purposes made and
works managed and supervised.
Wm.J. Trethewey, E  M.
Maurice A. Bucke.M.E.
TRETHEWEY & BUCKE,
MINING ENGINEERS
Fifteen years' experience
Silver. Lead Mining. . . .
Codes :     Moreing   &   Neal's;    "Bedford-McNeill"
Cable address, "Warrus."
Specialties—Reports,    Mine   Management,    Underground Plans and Models.
Departments in—Provincial Land Surveying. J  M
R.  Fairbairn, P.L.S.
Assaying—James   Cook,   G.A.C.,  late   of   Tharsis
Sulphur & Copper Co.
OFFICES t
Y»Ne©OYER, B.C. KftSL©, B.e.THE MINING RECORD.
xvn.
PROFESSIONAL  AND   BROKERS.
Wm. n. BREWER, MINING ENGINEER.
MEM. N. of ENG. INST. MINING & MECH. ENG.
and AM. INST., M.E.
P.O.  Box 130. —      VICTORIA.,    B. C.
J. B. TYRELL, M.A., B.Sc, F.G.S.,
Consulting
Mining Engineer.
Fifteen years Geologist on the Geological Survey of Canada.
Dawson City, Yukon, Canada.
W. M. MfteKINNQN,
Assoc. M. Inst. Q. E.
Civil Engineer.
Specialty:    Hydraulic    Engineering.
Water power; Water Supply for Mines and Towns; Gold Dredging; Bridges;
Structural Iron work, etc.
P.O. Box 262.
MACKINNON BUILDING,
Granville 3'.,
VANCOUVER   B.C
One of the Oldest Established Firms  in Rossland
Mining Properties Developed.
Confidential Reports on Mines
S. THORNTON LANGLEY & 00,
Mine and Share Brokers.
Partially developed Mines for sale
Brokers and Financial Agents lor The Okanagan Free Gold Mines, Limited.
Cable Address: " Langley."
Codes: Clough's and Moreing <& Neal's.
p.o.box 178   ROSSLAND, BRITISH COLUMBIA.
ERNEST  A. CLEVELAND,
Dominion and Provincial Land Surveyor.
Surveys of Mints and M.neral Cliims.
CI Q Hastings  Street
O 117 (Over
er Tisdall's)
VANCOUVER, B.C.
FERGUSS0N & eR©FTS,
Civil, Mechanical. Mining and Hydraulic   Ft1Qitieet*S
Valuations, Arbitrations, Surveys, Reports, Estimates and Specifications.
Agents for n^BEaa^
The San Francisco Bridge C- mpany.
The Kisdon Iron Works—The new patents make the E:sdon Gold
Dredger the most efficient gold dredger in the world.
The Hallidie Ropeway—The best serial conveyer.
Km; & Homale's Automatic Safety Hook—Over 6.000 in use.
William Cooke & Co's Wire Ropes—For all purposes.
W. T. Gakbatt's Steam Pumps—The Lightner Quartz Mill, etc.
Ex/sting Plants Inspected.   New Work in Progress Supervised
Machinery Plants of all kinds supplied and erected.
P. O. Box 423.
Phone 595.
603 Hastings St., Vancouver, B.C.
23500
MINERS
WANTED!
To work in the Metalliferous Mines of British Columbia, at the following
prices per day of eight hours :
Hand Drillers  $3.00
Machine Men  3.50
Miners in shafts  3 50 to $4.00
Carmen  2.50 to   3.0j
Shovellers   2 50
Laborers  2.50
Blacksmiths  3.50 to   4.00
Timbermen  3.50 to   4.00
Apply to THE SILVER LEAD MINES ASSOCIATION,
Sandon, British Columbia.
HENRY NICHOLSON,
NOTARY PUBLIC, MINING AGENT,
MINING NEGOTIATIONS TRANSACTED.
OBTET-ICE:   CAMP McKINNEY, B.C.
N B.—Some valuable mining properties in Camp McKinney and vicinity for
disposal.   Correspondence solicited.
PEMBERTON St SON
JUtlNINC    BROKeRS,
Real Estate, Financial and Insurance Agents.    Mining Properties for sale.    Agents
for the Townsite of Alberni.     Farming Lands for sale in all  parts of the Province.
FORT STREET,
Victoria, B.C.
Cable address:
"Cortez," Vancouver.
Codes : Brownhall's.
Moreing & Neill.
ONLY FIRST-CLASS PROPERTIES HANDLED
MINES BOUGHT AND SOLD
For authentic and thorough information, call or address :
J. M. MACKINNON, Mackinnon Building, Granville Street, VANCOUVER, B.C.XVHI.
THE MINING RECORD.
MINING   PUBLICATIONS, &&.
THE MINING  JOURNAL,
RAILWAY   AND   COMMERCIAL  GAZETTE.
Established 1835.
The Mining Journal circulates all over the world amo.igst
Miners, Engineers, Manufacturers and Capitalists.
The Mining Journal offers unusual advantages for Advertising Sales of Mineral Properties, Machinery, Commeiclil
Notices, Inventions and all articles for the use of those engaged in Mining, Engineering, and Mechanical work.
The Mining Journal was established 65 years ago, and still
maintains its position as the leading- organ of the world s Pross
devoted to Mining and its allied interests.
Annual Subscription, including postage, £1. 8s.
Advertisements 1 inch, single column, $1 per insertion.
46 Queen Victoria St, London, England.
The Boundary Country.
For information about tbe mineral resources and for
the most reliable news of this important district,
subscribe for
The Greenwood Miner....
Published by the Greenwood Miner Ptg. Co., Greenwood, B.C., and edited by R. E. Gosnell, late Provincial Librarian,
Subscription Price $2 payable in advance.
Advertising rates on application to
The Greenwood Miner Ptg. Co.
Edwards Bros.,
534 Cordova St.,
 VANCOUVER, B. C.
DEALERS IN
PUotoQrapHic Stock
Agents for the Rochester Optical Go, and the Eastman
Kodak Co.
LARGE STOCK OF	
Film and Plate Cameras
 ON HAND.
PRICES SENT ON APPLICATION
PREHO B. $15.
To Bring your Business Before
English Financiers, Brokers, Etc.,
©
You Must Advertise
in the LONDON PRESS.
You will save time and money if before doing so you consult C.J. WALKER,
The Canadian Advertising  Press and General Agents,
24 Coleman St., London, K.C., Kngland.
Lowest office rates. Estimates and advice free. Write for
"C. J. Walker's Guide to the Press." Letters can be addressed
care C. J. Walker, to await arrival in London. Introductions
arranged. Commissions of all kinds executed. Highest references.     Cut this out and stick it in your diary for reference.
j*♦♦♦♦♦»♦♦»♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦»♦»♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦»♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦»♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦
-* STEVENS RIFLES AND PISTOLS *-1
HAVE FOR MORE THAH 35 TEARS BEEN CELEBRATED FOB THEIB EXTREME ACCUBACT
MM
We make our
"Diamond"
JPistol With two   Stevens-Diamond Model Tabcet Petol
lengths of barrel, 6 and 10 inches.    Every
one guaranteed. Price, Postpaid, $5.00 with
6-inch barrel; $7.50 with 10-inch barrel.
We make a full line of rifles ; Price, from..
upwards.    Every arm, we turn out is warranted
SAFE,   SOLID   AIVP   ACCUBATE.
J.   STEVENS   ARMS   &■
Send Stamp for Catalogue.
ARMS
P. O. .Boas
TOOL   OO.,
CHICQPEE FALLS, MASS. 4
^♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦»
The New System
OF EDUCATION
Steam
Engineering
Meohi
Electrical.
W
and
the
THE
Civil and Mining Engineer-
ins; Architecture; Draw-
in g; Surveying; Chemistry;
Shorthand ; Book-keeping
and English Branches
TAUGHT BY MAIL.
Students qualified
to pass examinations.
e have helped thousands to better positions
salaries.   Send for free circulars, stating
subject in which you are interested.
INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS,
Box 1177,   Seranton, Pa,
A. A.  WATSON,
B. Sc. F. I. C.
Assayer and Metallurgist.
VERNON,  B.C.
Honours Graduate in chemistry, Victoria University, Kngland; Fellow of
the Institute of Chemistry of Great Britain and Ireland.
Six years experience in Australia, South America, England and British
Columbia.
&S~ Special attention to Samples by mail.
MICHIGAN    COLLEGE   OF   MINES.
A State Technical School. Practical work. Elective System. Summer
term. College year, 45 weeks. For catalogues, giving employment of
graduates, address MRS. F. H. SCOTT, Sec'y, Houghton, Mich.
THE MINERAL INDUSTRY, ITS STATISTICS, TECHNOLOGY AND
TRADE, VOL. VII. 1898.
Among the many valuable technical treatises Incorporated in this notable
volume are the following, with the number of pages assigned to each particular article; a page of the Mineral Industry is equivalent to about two of a
treatise ot ordinary size.—Recovery of Ammonium 'Sulphate from Gas
Liquor, by H. A. Fra*ch, (20 pp.); Asphaltum Refining, by H. A. Frasch,
(12 pp.); The Hydraulir- Cement Industry in the Ui ited States, hy F. H. Lewis,
(6 pp,); The Principles of Fire Rrick Manufacture, by Charles Ferry, (6 pp.);
The Ma' ufacture and Use of Paving Brick in the Middle West, by H. Foster
Bain, (13 pp.); Kaolin, Its Occurrence, Technology and Trade, by T. C. Hopkins (13 pp.); Coal Mining Methods »nd their Economic Bearing, by W. 8.
Gresley, (19 pp.); The Occurrence and Utilizntion of Peat, by Earnest A.
Sjosteiit, (8. pp.); The Electrolysis and Refining of Copper, by Edward
Keller, (32 pp.); Feldspar, Its Occurrence, Mining and UseB.by T.C. Hopkins, '
(7 pp.); The identification of Gems, by Leopold Claremont, (9 pp.1; Progress
in the Metallurgy of Gold and Silver, by W. R. Ingalls, (26 pp.); The Hydro-
Metallurgy of Silver, by Ottokar Hofmann, (27 pp.); The Technology of
Gypsum„by (J? P. Grimsley, (6 pp ); Progress In the Metallurgy of Steef, bv
H. M. Howe, (20 pp.); Present Practice in Silver-Lead Smelting at Denver and
Puebelo, by L..-. Austin. (7 pp.); Recent Improvments in Lead Smelting, t»y
H. O. Hofman, (21pp.); The Bedford Oolitic. Limestone, by ('. E. Si brnihal,
(4 pp.); Lime and Lime Burning, by H. A, Fra^ch, (14 pp.); The Manufacture
of Acid Phosphate of Lime, by Peter S. Gilchrist. (10 pp.); Present Practice in
the Metallurgy of Quicksilver in California, by R. B. 8ymingt»n, *(7 pp.);
Occurrence and Rscovi ry of Sodium Carbonite in the Great Basin, by K. A.
Knapp, (9 pp.)j"The Manufacture of Chamber Sulphuric Acid, by F. J. Fald-
ing, (54 pp.); Developments in the Metallurgy of Zinc and Cadmium by W. R.
Ingalls, (16 pp.); Progress in Ore Dressing in 1898, by Robert H. Richards,
(4 pp.); The Progress of Metallography in 1898, by Albert Sauver, (11pp.); The
Manufacture of Nickel Steel, Titus Ulke, (4 pp.).
THE SCIENTIFIC PUBLISHING CO., 253 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.THE MINING RECORD.
XIX.
VANCOUVER   ISLAND   C0AL.
COALTCOAL!
The New Vancouver Coal
Mining & Land Co,
(LIMITED.)
(FORMERLY THE VANCOUVER COAL COMPANY.)
Are the Largest Coal Producers on the Pacific Coast.
NANAIMO COAL
(Used principally for Gas and Domestic purposes.)
SOUTHFIELD COAL
(Steam  Fuel.)
Protection Island Coal & New Wellington Coal
(House and Steam Coal), are mined by this Company exclusively.
THE NANAIMO COAL gives a large percentage of gas, a high illuminating power, unequalled
by any other bituminous coal in the world, and a superior quality of coke.
THE SOUTHFIELD COAL *s now used by all the leading steamship lines on the Pacific.
THE NEW WELLINGTON COAL, which was introduced in 1890, has already become a
favourite fuel for domestic purposes. It is a clean, hard coal, makes a bright and cheerful fire, and its
lasting qualities make it the most economical fuel in the market.
THE PROTECTION ISLAND COAL is similar to the New Wellington Coal. This coal
is raised from the submarine workings under the Gulf of Georgia and is shipped from wharves both a
Protection Island and Nanaimo.
The several mines of the Company are connected with their wharves at Nanaimo, Departure Bay and
Protection Island, where ships of the largest tonnage are loaded at all stages of the tide. Special despatch
given to mail and ocean steamers.
SftMUEL M. ROBINS, Supt., Nanaimo, B.e.THE MINING RECORD.
1
TRANSPORTATION GOMPANIES.
Canadian Pacific Railway
ip THE WORLD'S HIGHWAY TO THE PACIFIC COAST, THE ORIENT AND THE ANTIPODES.
THE BEST, CHEAPEST AND QUICKEST WAY TO
British Columbia, Japan and China, Oregon, Hawaii, Washington,
Fiji and Australia,
The Gold Fields of Cariboo and the famed Kootenay Country in British Columbia are reached
only by the Canadian Pacific Railway via Revelstoke, B.C.
FOR   FURTHER   INFORMATION,   APPLY  TO   ANY   AGENT   OF  THE   COMPANY OR TO
A. H. NOTMAN, District Passenger Agent, St. John, N.B.
H. J.  COI/VIN, District Passenger Agent, 197 Washington St.,
Boston, Mass.
E. V. SKINNER, General Eastern Agent, S53 Broadway, New
York.
G. E.  McPherson,  Asst.  Gen.  Passenger  Agt., 1 King St.  E.,
Toronto,  Ont.
J. F. LEE, District Passenger Agt., 232 S. Clark St., Chicago, H.
M.  M.  STERN, District Passenger Agent, Chronicle Bui
San Francisco, Cal.
E. J. COXLE, District Passenger Agent, Vancouver, B.C
W. R. CALLAWAY, General Passenger Agent, Soo Line,
neapolis, Minn.
ROBERT KERR, General Passenger Agent, Western and
fie Division,  Winnipeg, Man.
ARCHER  BAKER,  European  Traffic  Agent,  67  and  63
William St., E.C, and 30 Cockspur St., S.W., London,
7 James  St.,  Liverpool. Eng.,  67 St.  "Vincent St.,  Gla
Scotland.
ldlng,
Hi.-i-
Paci-
Kinpr
Eng.;
SJOW,
C. B. USSHER,
D. McNICOLL,
Asst. Gen. Passenger Agent,
MONTREAL
General Passenger Agent,
MONTREAL.
R P. KITHETI & CO.,
WHOLESALE MERCHANTS, SHI'PING AND INSURANCE AGENTS.
PROPRIETORS OF VICTORIA WHARF, OUTER HARBOUR, GOLUMBIA FLOURING MILL, ENDERBY, AND VERNON MILLS, VERNON.
Agents for Victoria Lumber and Manufacturing Company, Ohemainus, V.I.; Victoria Canning Company of British Columbia;
Fraser River, Skeena River, and River's Inlet Canneries; Skeena River Packing Company, Skeena River ; Pacific
Coast Steamship Company, San Francisco ; Scottish Union & National Insurance Company of Edinburgh ;
Lancashire Insurance Company of England; Queen Insurance Company of America (Fire);
and English and American Marlne Insurance Company.
LLOYD'S   AGENCY.
HAWAIIAN   CONSULATE.
WHARF STREET,
VICTORIA,  B.C.
Canadian Pacific Navigation Co., Ld.
TIME TABLE NO. 36.
(Taking effect September 1st, 1898.)
VANCOUVER  ROUTE.
Victoria to Vancouver daily except Monday at 1 o'clock.
Vancouver to Victoria daily except Monday at 13 o'clock or '.n
arrival C.P. Railway No. 1 Train.
NEW WESTMINSTER ROUTE..
Leave Victoria—For New Westminster, Ladner and Lulu Island Sunday at 23 o'clock; Wednesday and Friday at 7
o'clock. Sunday's steamer to New Westminster connects
with C.P.R. Train No. 2 going east, Monday.
For Plumper Pass—Wednesdays and Fridays at 7 o'clock.
For Moresby and Pender Islands—Friday at 7 o'clock.
beave New Westminster—For Victoria Monday at 13.15 o'clock.
Thursday and Saturday at 7 o'clock.
For Plumper at 7 o'clock.
For Plumper and Moresby Islands—Thursady at 7 o'clock.
FRASER  RIVER   ROUTE.
Steamer leaves New Westminster for Chilliwack and way
landings every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday at 8 o'clock
during river navigation.
NORTHERN ROUTE.
Steamship of this Company leave Victoria for Fort Simpson
via Vancouver and intermediate ports on the 10th, 20th and S>0th
of each month, and for Queen Charlotte Islands on the 10th of
each month.
KLONDIKE ROUTE.
Steamers of this Company leave weekly for Wrangel, Juneau, Skagway and Dyea.
BARCLAY   SOUND   ROUTE.
Steamer "Wlllapa" leaves Victoria for Alberni and Sound
ports the 1st, 7th, 14th and 20th. Extending leatter trip to
Quatsino  and  Cape Scott.
The Company reserve the right of changing this Time Table
at any time without notification.
A.  CARDETON,
General Aeent.
JOHN IRVING,
Manager,pie Hudson's Bay Companv
HAVE
Bale de Feres
Battleford
Calgary
Chapleau
Dauphin
Deloraine
Edmonton
Fort William
Kamloops
Langley
Lethbridge
AT
Lower Fort Garry
Macleod
Mattawa
Korden
Nelson
Fincher Creek
Fortage la Prairie
Fort Simpson
Prince Albert
Qu'Appelle
Quesnelle
Bat Fortage
Biding Mountain
Shoal Lake
'' Sudbury
Touchwood Hills
Vancouver
Victoria
Vernon
Whitewood
Winnipeg
And at other principal points in British Columbia, Manitoba and Northwest Territories.   Purchasers will find at these
Stores the best goods at moderate prices, imported direct from all the principal markets of the world.
•'elten & Guilleaume. Carlswerk Mulheim on Rhine, Germany
 Manufacturers of -—
Electrical Leads and Cables
Wire Ropes for Mining
Electric Lighting Cables for Coal Pits
with arrangment for avoiding fire-damp explosions in case of the cable breaking.
Eonnd and Flat Wire Ropes, " Albert," or
so-called "Lang's" Lay Ropes, Patent
Locked Coil Wire Ropes, Patented Flattened Strand Wire Ropes.
Iron, Steel, Copper and Bronze Wire
Superiorqnalltles...
3 Sole Agents for Canada
jack * Robertson
7 St. Helen St.
MONTREAL.
phe James Robertson!Co'y, Limited,
VANCOUVER,   B.C.
Manufacturers of Lead Pipe, Lead Traps, White Lead, Ready Mixed Paints,Shot Saws, Colors in Oil, Varnishes, Lacquers, &c.
Jobbers in Wrought Iron Pipe.        f
Malleable and Cast Iron Fittings, Brass Globe, 1A# RITE      FO R
: Angle and Check Valves. PRICES.
BRANCHES,
Toronto,  St. John, Winnipeg,  VANCOUVER.
IVIETALS.
Office and Warehouse. 151  Hastings St.
Phone 629. VANCOUVER.
Head Office,   Montreal.
Ontor
o Gold Mining
District.   .
Sultana Mine.
Foley Mine.
Mikado Mine.
Olive Gold Mine.
Cameron Island Mine.
Hammond Reef Co.
A few Mines
who Use
Brinisn Columbia.
Le Roi Mine.
War Eagle Mine.
Monte Christo Mine.
Centre Star Mine.
Crown Point Mine.
Slocan Star Mine.
CANADIAN RAND DRILL CO.,
MONTREAL9 VANCOUVER,
WORKS:   PETERBORO, ONT.
PUBLISHED  BY  "THE MINING  RECORD,"  LIMITED  LIABILITY,  VICTORIA  AND  VANCOUVER,   CANADA;
—-       — w- ■  __