TL.«     Hi I.L. GOAT RIVER MINING (Illustrated.)
IS    IMOnTn ! ODOWN THE QUESNELLE RIVER IN A DREDG
■ HIU    I   IVUUH     BOUNDARY DISTRICT IN 1902 (Illustrated.)
E (Illustrated.)
VOL. X$[
FEBRUARY, J903.
No/m
TfflWftOK ELECtlCiOMPANi
Elecffic Motoi^'*!    Blowers.      Motors.
Fanls.   Dynamos.
ElectricvJoining  Apparatus.
•
•
||SLXMITED.
Electrical Const^^pS
v-^pand Suppltes.ffi^p
\#SICOUVE»B»
lip.DpriilWipSIQO.
115 Jackson St.,„S||uTLE.   1746-17&8 Pacific^|t^ TACOMA.
MINifJG, CANffife, SAWltftfLL a$& l#DRAULI^»
fcAOHIJNilT^|METiCHAN|si
Agents for Rand:.-i>ttll Co.; Hendrie & Bolthoff Mfg. Co.; Astoria Iron Works, DeLoach Mill Mfg. Co.^f^ikCam-
erbn Steam Pump Works; Cassels Automatic W&ter Motor Co., etc*^/        WM mm     WSffl
The most completej<£tock of Hoisting Engine&iXompressors, Drills §ncl Portable  Saw  Mills carried on  the
Padfic Coast.       &Wl &§JP
Pacifif  Coast Smiting anp RefiringftWoi^?
PURCHASERS, SAMPLERS AND SMl||rERS^^OLD, SILVER and ||PPER
ORES AND FURNACE PRODUCTS*!
ADDRESS:
■HE.: COPPER KI|{Gp-IMITf d.
OFFICES: Crocker Building, San Francisco, Calj^ornia;   Basildon House, 7 to II Moorga|| Street,f|ndon, E.C.IF ii AREJBUllllI A jOUSE
We Carry in Stock the Largest Assortment
in Canada of p»j!|
MAMTI  CC   In Oak,  Maple, Cheip,  Birph, White and
1B&' PLACJ GJ|teJ|1 1s^^^
LING     F0R HOORS, HEARTHS,  BATHROOMS, &c.
BrassfpFenders, Fire Sets, Fire Dogs, Brass
Coal Scuttles, &c.
PAR&lKrE' flooriSg. ■
House Hardware in  Latest and Best Designs.
itcLenffjn, ||cFfJ||: di^jf
P$lli> Limited vlllr?
p||fcLE§ALE HARDWARE
VANCOUVER, B.ipl DAWSON, Y. T.
jenfkel Cfpss
m
With oigr7Jmproved-(^&^
ernor and Safety Device,
new patent gab/££bd and
hook, and other^special
features,- of 'ibltr design of
this type of enginjg^will
commend themselves to
those requiring
Durability, Economy & Easy Handling
In this principal item of a steam-power plant.
Complete Ste^lnJPower^^^ilts Designed,built and
installed for operat^gn." Our figures, ;jbre at your service,
and we think you will find them reasonable. Send for cat-
alogu£sbf anything in the Mining Machinery line. Free
on request.
Thi^jen^^^lacH^^^^
':'^^HER^^pE, Qu^^^S
Rossland, Greenwood, B.C., Toronto^Jjjbntreal, Halifax.
pED KRUPP|GRUS§)NWERKJ
(Madgeburg-BuOl|a;@^ermany^|/
M^fCRUSHING:
Stone Breakers of Especially Strong
construction. Roller Mills, Chilian
Mills, Ball Mills, for dry and wet
cruslljng—more than 1,800 at work.
Stamp Batteries—Shoes and Dies of
Krupp's Special Steel-
AMALGAMATION:
Amalgamation Tables and Pans, Las-
rio'sGold Amalgamators, Settlers, 4c
Separation and Concentration -Separators, Exhausters, Hydraulic Classifiers, Percussion Tables, Jiggers,
Rotating Round Tables.
HTM«C HI NGvp LA N T.
lis*
COJPWlpETE GO:tgE^KDRESSING;^^^|||
(a) For treating bjphe Wet Method with Stamp Batteries, Amalgamation affij
gN^ncentaij&tion.
(b) For Dry Testing by Ball Mills, Dust Extraction and Leaching.
IpJOAL WASHING PLANT—Large Testing Station for Crushing and Dressing Ores at
the Works.
MGENTS:
For CANADA—Jas. W. Pyke &. Co, 3$!$>£.' Francois Xavier   eet,   Montreal
For the UNITED STATES—Thos. Prosser & Son, 15 Gold Street, New.York
For -lf|XlC0—Pablo 6ej|ner, Apartado 549,  Mexico
For SOU^fAFRIC^^^p^ngineering^^^pny, Ltd., P.O. Box 399, Johannesburg, A. RTHE MINING RECORD.
[.
ELEVATORS AND CONVEYORS.
•C. M. PINCKARD, President.
E. L. EYRE, Vice-President.
J. M. GRAHAM, Secretary and Manager.
VULCAN IRON WORKS
Manufacturers oi
VULCAN
DOUBLE-ROPE
TRAMWAY.
VULCAN
ROPEWAY,
(Single Rope System.)
SAW-MILL
MACHINERY.
MINING
AND MILLING
MACHINERY.
Vulcan   Ropeways and
Tramways.
Office, 505 Mission St., Works, cor. Kearny and Francisco Streets, SAN  RRAISICISCO, CAI	
Link-Belt ELEVATORS AND CONVEYORS
For Handling Ores, Matte, Slae, Crushed Stone, Gravel,
Cement, Sand, Water, Etc. .
PICKLING TABLES, SHAKING
AND REVOLVING SCREENS,
COAL WASHING MACHINERY,
SHAFTING, ROPE SHEAVES,
PULLEYS, CLUTCHES,
GEARING,   Etc.
Send for Catalogue.
•'Link-Belt" Coal and Coke Breaker
"Link-Beit" Box Water .Elevator.
Capacity 300 to 10,000 gallons per minute
LINK BELT MACHINERY CO., CHICAGO, U.S.A., Engineers,  Founders, Machinists.
CALCUTTA ORE SACKS
40 in. Hessians, Fire-Bricks, Fire-Clay, Galvanized Sheet Iron.
SOLE AGENTS FOR THE DISTRICT FOR THE CELEBRATED     .
"Valvolifie" Cylinder and Machine Oils, Tk^S"^r,iJ8
Steel Rails a Specialty.
C.     I.    JACKSON    **■    vOij     LCl>|    COMMISSION AGENTS.
WHARF-Heatley Ave., Vancouver. 151 Hastings St., Vancouver, B. C.Sainton's Patent Pocket Transit.
The accompanying illustration shows an operator taking vertical angles with the Brunton Patent
Pocket Transit It is the most accurate and reliable instrument made for preliminary surveys of every
description. Case of aluminum 2J^ by 2^ by 1 inches ; weight 8 ounces, Nearly 1,000 in use by prominent mining engineers, mine managers, civil engineers and geologists everywhere.
Denver, Col., U.S.A.
SEND FOR CATALOGUE B-4 FOR FULL PARTICULARS
FOR SALE BY
B. C. Assay and Chemical Supply Co., Vancouver, B. C.       C. M. Fassett, Spokane, Wash.
W. F. Teetzel & Co., Nelson B. C.      F. W. Braun & Co., Los Angeles, Cal.
John Taylor & Co., San Francisco, CaJ.
MADE IN VICTORIA.
ENGRAVINGS and ETCHINGS.
Sole agents in British Columbia'
for Morgan Crucible Co., Batter-
sea, England; F. W. Braun & Co'g
Patent Cary Furnaces, Burners,
etc.; W. Ainsworth & Sons' Fine
Balances
Write for our prices
ADDRESS
733 Pender St.,
Vancouver, B.6.
Mining and Surveying Instruments
Tight Mountain Transits and Transit-Theodolites.
Scott's Mine Tachymeter.
Best Workmanship
Send for List
P. & R. WHITSTOCK, Berlin S. 59, GERMANY.
A* Van Der Naillens'
School of Practical, Civil,  Mining,
Electrical Mechanical Engineering.
Surveying, Architecture, Drawing and Assaying, Cyanide, Chlorination, Metallurgy.   Assaying of ores, $25;  Bullion and Chlorination Assay, $25; Blow
Pipe Assay, $10; Full Course of Assaying, $50.  Established 1864.   Open all year
SEND  FOR   CIRCULAR.
113 FULTON STREET, One Block West of City Hall, SAN FRANCISCO.
The Cuts used by .the Mining Record are made by us.    Halftones and Line Etchings executed on short notice.
Samples forwarded on application.
BRITISH COLUMBIA        I
PHOTO=ENGRAVING COMPANY,
26 BROAD STREET, VICTORIA, B. C
THE DENVER FIRE CLAY COMPANY,
I742 to I746 CHAMPA ST.,
DENVER, COLORADO
PLATINUM REFINERS
New York Office-
121 LIBERTY STREET
WE are always in the Market for
CRUDE OR NATIVE PLATINUM.
BAKER & CO.
NEWARK, N. J.THE MTNINOx RECORD.
III.
CABLES, PUMPS, ETC.
;-»;;vi
||S ESTABLISHED    1857       H
INNHMi p SOHSJ&m^CO.
920-922  N.FIRST ST.WBM LJ>$&J\0.
AERIAL WIRE ROPE TRAMWAYS  iSgli '^A
SINGLE AND DOUBLE ROPE "'h^     *
5YSTEMS.ANDTWO BUCKET /%B&^  br*nch offices:
TRAMWAYS '^^L   92 CENTRE ST.NEW YORK,N.Y.
137 E.LAKE ST. CHICAGO. ILL.
85 FREMONT ST. SAN FRANC1SC0.CAL,
£3
tmkji
DESCRIPTION FOR MINES,
Ql)ARRlES,ELEVATORS,ETC.
W^^^^^^^^^^^R^^^^i^^M^m^^^X
DOW PU
PS
Are manufactured in great variety
FOR MINING PURPOSES.
Operated by Steam, Air, Electric or Water Power.
Vertical Sinking Pumps, Bucket or Double Plunger Pattern
Deep Mine Station Pumps.
MAKE   KNOWN YOUR "WANTS TO THE  J             	
GEO. E. DOW PUMPING ENGINE CO.,
SEND FOR CATALOGUE
SAN FRANCISCO, CAL
S^ES^^^^SSSlE^^^i
IMSMITH-VAILE STEAM PUMPS
Are built with special reference to perform the service for which they are intended with a minimum use of steam.
We Build Steam, Power and Electrical PUMPS for Every Possible Duty.
Victor Turbine Water Wheels.    Air Compressors and Filter Presses,
^interested, address THE STILLWELL-BIERCE & SMITH-VAILE CO., 293 Lehman St., DAYTON, OHIO, U.S A,
L
\VmTHE PATENT
Locked Coil
Track Cable
BLEICHERT WIRE ROPE TRAMWAY. Superior to an other systems
Manufactured bv
THE TRENTON IRON e©., TRENTON, N. J.
Manufacturers, Engineeis and Contractors and sole licensees In North America for the Bleichert System.   Also, Wire-Rope Equipments for Cable Hoist-
Conveyors, Surface and Underground Haulage, Transmission of Power, etc.   Illustrated book upon application.
New York Office—Cooper, Hewitt & Co., 17 Burling Slip. Chicago Office—IH4 Monadnock Building
Denver Office—R. D. Seymour Manager, 1711-1713 Tremont St. 	
Miners
Will find the Steel List published by
CANTON STEEL e©'Y,
DENVER,   e©L0„
contains much information which will prove of
interest.    Mailed upon application.
McLennan, McFeely & 60.,
Agents for
VANCOUVER, B. ©.
Equal to
Jessop or Firth's Steel
n Rock Work.
AERIAL WIRE ROPE TRAMWAY
SINGLE and DOUBLE ROPE SYSTEM
For trans porting ore, fuel, earth, sugarcane, etc., by wire rope
Simple, Economical,  Practical,   Durable.
Lo  u Mechanically, Dum s Automatically
CABLEWAYS.
INCLINE PLANES.
LOGGING BY CABLES.
TRANSMISSION   BY WIRE ROPE.
CABLE GRIPS. 9
AUTOMATIC LOADERS.
Plowing, Scraping and Transporting by Wire Ropes, Designed, Supplied
and Erected.   Estimates Furnished.
Improved GRIP PULLEY
Patents Nos. 483,442; 610,353.
Effective, Simple, Automatic.
SAVES WEAR on^WIRE ROPE and CABLE..
Send for Illustrated Pamphlet.
Correspondence Solicited.
Hallidie-Painter  Tramway Co.
to CALIFORNIA WIRE WOR   S, .46-4-8 Fremont St., San Francisco, California.
MACOMBER & WAYTE ROPE CO., CHICAGO, ILL.
The Dominion Wire Rope Co., LcL
MONTREAL,    CANADA
Manufacturers of All Classes and Kinds of WIRE ROPES FOR ALL PURPOSES.
:-^^^gBg§»-s:
LANG'S " PATENT WIRE ROPES FOR COLLIERY AND GENERAL MINING   PURPOSES.
ranches :-Halifax,N.S.: St. John, N.B.; Ottawa, Toronto, Rat Portage, Ont.; Winnipeg, Man.; Vancouver, B. C, Nelson and Rossland B. CTHE MINING RECORD.
V.
GENERATORS AND MOTORS.
Do You Need
A New Hoisting Engine?
We Offer the flost Complete Line of Patterns and Designs
to Select From of Any Concern in the United States.
Our Vulcan
Hoist is Built
With or Without
Link Motion, With
or Without Band
Friction Clutches.
Witti Band or Post
Brakes.
Brakes,   Hand   or
Steam Actuated.
Any   combination
of the above  features desired.
Single   or   Double
Drums or Reels.
WRITE US
l"      O OSAHMfl 8        *
of the conditions
under which you
desire to operate
your plant and we
will send you complete specifications
of a hoist suitable-
to your requirements.
The Hendrie & Bolthoff Manf g and Supply Co.
DENVER, COLO.,
U. S A.VI.
THE MINING RECORD.
ELECTRICAL MACHINERY.
Electric Power Plants
of All Descriptions
To Suit Any Conditions.
§k
m
FORM L GENERATOR, Direct Connected to Simple Engine.
AN AD! AN I ENERAL INLECTRIC
LIMITED.
Head Office, TORONTO, ONT.
• Factories:
TORONTO, PETERBORO, MONTREAL.
District Offices:
MONTREAL,   HALIFAX,   OTTAWA,   WINNIPEG,   VANCOUVER,    VICTORIA,    ROSSLANDTHE MINING RECORD.
VII.
MISCELLANEOUS MACHINERY, ETC.
THE FAIRBANKS COMPANY
flONTREAL and VANCOUVER.
Mine, Mill, Railway, Factory, Engineering and
j Transmission Supplies.
OUT Agents for  Canadian  Rand  Drill Company.   Full
supply of parts in stock.
151 to 155 Hastings St.,
VANCOUVER, B. C
747 to 749 Craig St.,
MONTREAL, QUE.
p. s.«*HLse seaLES and yalyes.
G E LI G N I     'E—Strongest and Best Explosive in the Market.
MANUFACTURED BY
HAMILTON   POWDER   COMPANY
(Incorporated 1861.
Manufacturers of High Explosives, Blasting, Mining and Sporting Powder,
Dealers in Electric Blasting Apparatus, Safety Fuse, Detonators, Etc., Etc.
branch office:
VICTORIA
HEAD OFFICE: MONTREAL.
LOCAL OFFICES:
VANCOUVER, NELSON, ROSSLAND and GREENWOOD
NANAIMO
Vancouver Engineering Works, Ld.
ENGINEERS,
Machinists, Iron Founders, Blacksmiths, Pattern Makers and Sheet Workers.
Hydraulic Riveted Steel Pipe,   Hydraulic Monitors and Water Gates,    Hydraulic Elevators and
Hand Derrick, Riffles, Grizzlies, etc.
Boilers. Engines, Pumps, Hoists, Heaters, Pressure Blowers, Crushers, Marine Engines and Boilers.
Complete Stock of Iron Pipe and Fittings,  Boiler Tubes, Shafting, Etc.
ESTIMATES   FURNISHED   CPON   APPLICATION.
Office and Works. Heatley Avenue, - VANCOUVER,   B.C.VIII.
THE  MINING RECORD.
Manufacturers
The JAMES COOPER MANUFACTURING CO., LTD.
MONTREAL, P. Q.
INGERSOLL=SERGEANT MACHINERY,
Rock Drills, Straight Line, Duplex, and Corliss Air Compressors.
Complete fline Equipment of AH Kinds.
Agent for STANDARD DIAMOND DRILL CO)      R. A. C. McNALLY, Rossland, British Columbia.
Catalogue and Details on Application to > FRANK DARLING, Molson's Bank Building, Vancouver, B.C.
ftE&S
Mine Superintendents and Engineers will
find it to their interest to refer to us
when in need of anything in the Pump
hue. We manufacture Pumping Machinery of all types, for all'services.
Send for catalogues and specifications.
cunliffe& McMillan,
Agents at Kossland.
VANCOUVER ENGINEERING WORKS,
Agents at Vancouver.
ies.
THE
1
We also manufacture the NORTHY GAS and GASOLINE ENGINE, a handy, convenient and
economical little motor that is gaining favor all over Canada, where any one of these
characteristics—or all three—are particularly desirable.   Send for Booklet.
"S>
962 King St. Subway
The Brackman &, Ker Milling Co., Ltd.
VICTORIA, BRITISH COLUMBIA,       Manufacturers of the Celebrated
Facilities Unequalled for Supplying the West with
the Best Quality of
|| Grain, Hay or Mill Feed.
B.&K.
ROLLLD1
OATS.
*
(Registered.)
;; Victoria. Nelson.
j s        Vancouver. Rossland.
!', New Westminster. Strathcona.
Unequalled in the World. |
BOYD, BURNS & e©.
Plumbing and Engineering Supplies
and Ship Chandlery.
Ir n and Brass Pipe and Fittings, Boiler Tubes,   Injectors, Oil Cups,   Lubricators,   Asbestos   Board,
Sectional Covering and Asbestos Cement, Leather, Rubber   and   Link Belting, Wire and Manilla
Rope, Paints and Oils, Chain, Spikes, Loggers' Supplies, Sheet Iron and Other Metals.
5J-55 Hastings Street and
342 Water
11 VANCOUVER, B.C.The Mining Record
VOL. X.
FEBRUARY,   1903.
No. 2
BRITISH  COLUMBIA
MINING  RECORD
Devoted to the dining Interests of the Pacific Northwest.
PUBLISHED   BY
THE BRITISH COLUMBIA RECORD, LIMITED
H. MORTIflER LAMB,   nanaglng Editor.
Victoria, B. C, Office, Province Building.
Vancouver, P. W. Charleson, Hastings St.
London Office: 24 Coleman Street, E. C,
Denver, Col.: National Advertising Co.
San Francisco: Dake's Agency.
SUBSCRIPTION TERMS:
Canada and the United States, one year   -
Great Britain and Foreign^ one year   -    -
Advertising Rates on Application.
$2.00
$2.50
Address all communications to
The Managing Editor, B. C. Record, Ltd.,
P. O. Drawer 645, Victoria, B. C.
A PROPOSED PROVINCIAL
MINING ASSOCIATION.
IT is impossible to overestimate the far-reaching importance of the results that may be expected to
follow from the inauguration during the past
month, of a movement to organize an association on
lines so broad and comprehensive as those suggested
by the promoters of the plan. The objects for which
this association is to be formed are, in brief, the promotion of the welfare of the mining industry, and invitations have been issued to practically every resident
of the Province, on the assumption that he must
necessarily be either directly or indirectly interested
in the development and prosperity of this our principal industry, to become a member of the association
and assist in sending delegates to a convention that is
to be held in Victoria on the 25th of February next.
So far the project has met with a most enthusiastic
reception, and the only criticism that has appeared
has been on a matter of minor detail and not directed
against the principle or general aim of the movement. These are that by the co-operation of all
•classes an improvement in conditions may be brought
about. It will be for the convention to adopt a line of
action and decide upon a plan by which the organization may be made to serve a really useful purpose.
But it is clear enough that the opportunities in the
direction indicated are boundless. The opening sentence in the circular issued by the provisional executive committee of the new association states that the
"conditions surrounding the mining industry of the
Province have become so burdensome that capital has
ceased to flow into this country."
This statement expresses, we fear, something very
like the truth. It is strictly true that capital is not
being invested in -the mines of the country, except in
very limited amounts, and that British capital, at
least, has ceased to flow into the country; it is true
that the silver-lead mining industry of the Slocan and
East Kootenay is in a terribly depressed condition,
that the copper mines of the Boundary are operated
on a very slender margin of profit; that hydraulic
and placer mining effort is badly handicapped, and
that in the whole country there is not a single mine
on a regular dividend-paying footing. If these are
facts, we must either admit that the mineral resources
of the country have been grossly over-valued, or that
they have not been exploited to the best advantage.
But there is not a mine manager or mining engineer
in British Columbia to-day who would express the
opinion that the present unsatisfactory state of affairs
was attributable to any but removable causes, or
refuse to share the belief of the late Dr. Dawson and
other eminent scientific men who have made a special
• study of our mineral deposits, as to the wonderful
opportunities for mining operation in so vast and rich
a territory. Some months ago we attempted to investigate the causes responsible for the depression that
then existed, and which still continues to overshadow the industry, and the following hypothetical
reasons were offered: Exaggerated anticipation on
the part of investors; extravagance and incompetence
on the part of representatives of investors; bad mining laws; unstable relations between labour and capital; over-taxation and injurious incidence of taxation;
extensive swindling on the part of company promoters; and abnormally high cost of production from
inefficiency of labour. To these may now be added
the low price of metals, inadequate marketing advantages and high costs of transport. Of the causes
suggested some are merely imaginary and some are
real; some have exerted a slight and some a-strenuous
influence in retarding development and discouraging
the  further investment  of capital;    but if the   realand removable evils of which we do agree exist can
be remedied, so that legitimate enterprises will have
a fair chance to succeed, we shall have made a big
stride towards bringing about prosperity to the Provr
ince. It will be the part of the Association to ascertain
what are real evils and what are imaginary, to suggest
remedies, to devise improvements, to reconcile conflicting interests, to advertise the resources of the
country and generally to take such a stand in the
community as will best serve the great interests we
all have at heart. .
The work that has been undertaken so far by a provisional executive committee is, of course, of an entirely preliminary character, and the Association will
not be a properly constituted body until after the convention in February, when a constitution will be
adopted and organization finally effected. It is, therefore, to be hoped that the general value and importance of the movement will be adequately recognized
throughout the country, and that all sections and
classes will enter into a friendly rivalry to send a
large and representative body of delegates
to the meeting. The present movement is
not an original conception.- Some twenty years ago
conditions in the State of California were a great deal
worse than they are in British Columbia to-day, and
mining, especially- that carried on by hydraul-
icing methods, was practically at a standstill. In
consequence, the California Miners' Association was
formed, to whose efforts is directly traceable the prosperity which the mining industry in that State has
since uninterruptedly enjoyed. Among the members
of the California association are the Governor of the
State, judges, professional men, merchants, farmers,
teamsters, as well, of course, as mine operators and
mine labourers; and that is what we want in British
_ Columbia, the earnest co-operation of all classes for a
work in which we are all vitally interested.
We have magnificent timber resources, the salmon
fisheries are' important, there is much land that may
be turned to agricultural uses; but none of these industries will ever by themselves make British Columbia great and prosperous. It is to mining we look to
do that. Once the mines begin to pay, as under
normally favourable conditions they assuredly will,
the confidence of capital will be revived, new fields
. will be opened up, and we shall have what we require
most—settlement and population. Considering the
drawbacks and difficulties, the obstacles that have had
to be overcome, the engineering and metallurgical
problems that have presented themselves at every
turn, it is no less wonderful than satisfactory that the
mining industry of the Province has progressed so far
as it has. Remember that hardly a dozen years ago
Kootenay was an unexplored waste, a wilderness of
mountains and pine forests; that when the first mines
were discovered it was no uncommon thing to pay
twenty and thirty dollars a ton transportation charges,
and then after railways had been built, came one
trouble after another, such as are to be expected in a
new country situated as we are, The difficulty of
securing efficient labour, the high cost of
smelting, the ruinous cost of marketing, injudicious
legislation, lack of capital, and last but not least the
visitation of the fraudulent promoter.
We hope to see the new Association do much both
to ameliorate existing conditions and prevent the occurrence of difficulties which should be avoidable.
The Association for instance, cannot regulate the
prices of metals, but it can assist in removing the
burdens imposed on the industry by the Dominion
Government in the form of heavy duties on mine supplies; it can bring about a better understanding between employers and employees to the avoidance of
strikes; it can by proper suggestion, representing the
majority view of those chiefly interested, prevent the
introduction of injudicious legislation and see that
the mining laws in future are framed in such a manner as to encourage not only the investment of capital
in the Province, but to stimulate exploration and prospecting; it can, as the Miners' Association has done
in California, compel the Government to increase the
efficiency of the Mines Department; it can do much
to advertise the great mineral resources of the country,
and inspire confidence by discouraging "wild-catting"
and dishonest promotion; in short, if now for once
prejudice and apathy can be overcome, and capital
and labour induced to join, hands for the common
good, we confidently assert that the new Association
will be the means by which at no distant date British
Columbia will become one of the - most productive
and most prosperous mineral areas on the American
continent.
COKING AND   NON COKING COALS.
HHIS question is of such general interest that a few
notes thereon should not be out of place.
The districts to which this article refers are, generally speaking, those valleys of the interior plateau
of British Columbia where tertiary coal basins exist,
such as the Similkameen and Tulameen Basins, Nicola Valley, White Lake, etc. But the following remarks would apply to any further discoveries of a similar class of coal. These small basins are probably all
due to similar geological causes and are of approximately similar age, the cause being the filling of pre-
tertiary lake basins, or enlarged river valleys, by vegetable debris and the further growth of coal forming
plants on the marshy land thus formed. Periods of
uplift and depression alternated with, in some cases
the addition of beds of volcanic ash, either deposited
directly in the lake from adjoining craters or brought
down in  floods from outlying centres of eruption.THE MINING RECORD.
Fossils, both vegetable and insect, abound, and
are, generally speaking, of similar type. These
have been referred by the Geological Survey of Ottawa to the oligocene period of the tertiary.
.It is not proposed here to enter into a lengthy discussion as to how coal is deposited, but as to the actual composition of coal it might be well to clear up
some points upon which misconception exists.
The general division of coals is made by the amount
of carbon shown to exist by a proximate analysis.
Coal analyses may be of three kinds, viz : Proximate,
which shows the amount of carbon, volatile matter,
ash (non-combustible), moisture, sulphur, and sometime phosphorus.
Sometimes this analysis is given after the coal is
dried, thus increasing the constituents apart from
moisture proportionately.
2. Destructive analysis gives the further subdivision of the volatile matter into hydrogen, oxygen,
nitrogen.
3. Assay of the per cent, of combustible only, vol-
atile*and non-volatile matter.
The coking analyses show the capacity of the coal
for coking and its percentage. In this connection it
should be 'noted as important that no estimate as to the
coking quality of a coal or the nature of the coke if
made can be deduced from its analyses. They do indicate, however, the probable purity of the coke made.
It must be remembered that the ash is, in the case of
an unwashed coal, made part of the coke, and in the
case of a coal making 50 per cent, coke, i.e., two tons
of coal making one ton of coke and containing 7.5 per
cent, ash, there will be possibly 15 per cent, ash in
the coke. For metallurgical purposes it may be said
that a coke should be firm, tough and bright, sonorous, of long fibre, and should not contain more than 1
per cent, sulphur or 6 per cent. ash. A dense coke is
objectionable by not allowing the air to penetrate and
a very porous coke will not probably sustain the weight
of the ore in the furnace. All the tests so far made
seem to have been made for iron furnaces, where a
weight of 50 to 60 feet of iron ofe is supported by
the coke. In a copper furnace there is probably never
more than 8 feet of ore on the coke and therefore the
question of strength may not be so important.
. Roughly speaking it may be stated that with less
than 20 per cent, volatile matter the coal will not fuse
properly and with more than 30 per cent, the strength
of the cell walls may be so small that the coke will be
non-coherent. This refers mainly to the ordinary coke
-made in bee-hive ovens, unwashed. With washed
coal and externally fired or narrow ovens these limits
may be considerably expanded, and at the same time
coals well within these limits will not coke at all.
Probably the cause of this may be in proportions of O.
H. and N., but this point has never been settled.
It is important in looking at a coal analysis to know
which of the three styles of analysis has been used, as
the following table will show :
Ordinary     Analysis     Per Cent.
Proximate of of
Analysis.     Dry Coal. Combustible.
Moisture         10   ..:■...
Vol, Matter          30 33.33 37.50
Fixed Carbon          50 55-56 62.50
Ash         10 11.n 	
of moist moisture includ's ash
. coal. eliminated, in carbon.
The general classes of fossil fuels are : Peat, lignite,
bituminous, semi-bituminous, semi-anthracite, anthracite.
The following analyses of coals, American and English, are given in order to define the boundaries of the
various classes of coals. For the sake of clearness the
decimals have been omitted, but the tables are taken
from the best authorities.
Great misconception exists as to semi-bituminous
coals. These occur between the bituminous and the
semi-anthracites. Authorities differ somewhat as to
the limits of these, but speaking generally it may be
said that in a proximate analyses :
«/r • i Volatile Fixed .  ,
Moisture.      m ,. r*    u Ash.
Matter. Carbon.
Peat *2o to 30 *25 *4o *io and up
Lignite *io to 20 *35 to 50 *35 to 45 *5 to 20
Bituminous...    1 to 10 30 to 40 45 to 60         3 to 10
Semi-B     1 to   5 15 to 25 60 to 75         3 to 10
Semi-Anth ...    1 to   3 7 to 10 75 to 85         3 to   6
Anthracite...    2 to   4 3 to   5 80 to 90 .       5 to 10
♦Physical properties enter larger into tbe classification of
these.
As an instance of the unreliability of analyses as to
coking qualities ef coal the following may be of interest :
Montana coal 29 per cent. vol. comb, matter, un-
cokeable.
Colorado coal 30 per cent. vol. comb, matter, very
good coke.
Cornellville, Pa., 31 percent, vol. matter, standard
coking coal of U. S.
Montana coal 32 per cent., uncokeable.
British Columbia coal 36 per cent., makes good
coke.
When the volatile matters are divided up with O.
H. and N. the matter becomes more complicated, but
within one individual coal field it is possible to establish some limits.
It is also doubtful whether the ordinary laboratory
test is of much value as to coking qualities, that is to
say, a good coking coal may, and possibly will show
coke in an analysis, but a poor coal may refuse to do
so in a small crucible but might coke in a coke oven
under proper technical direction. A good deal may
also be done by using some of the later pattern coke
ovens and finding which system is suited to the particular coal in question. The ash may be s6 disseminated through the coal as to form a barrier to its fusing
properly.    This can be eliminated by  washing.    The472
THE MINING RECORD;
washing of coal is a very easy matter in most cases,
and can be done on similar lines as ordinary gold mining, viz : by having long runs of 12 in. x 12 in. sluice
boxes, doubled for a portion of the distance so that the
water and coal may turn from one race to the other
while the dirt and impurities are being shovelled out.
This necessarily entails breaking the coal and screening it. Putting through coarse rollers is the simplest
method of breaking. The larger dirt can be picked
out on sorting belts. In many cases, this- wetting and
breaking up the coal increases its value for coking
purposes.
It must also be remembered that in the coke oven
a certain proportion of the volatile matter or hydrocarbons is deposited on the coke in the upward passage of the gases through the fused mass. Thus a
coal will sometimes yield a larger percentage of coke
than its analysis shows of fixed carbon. This is seen
in the coke in the form of globules or films of bright
carbon in the cells of the coke and no doubt increases
in some degree its heating capacity and its lasting
power in the furnace.
It is generally assumed that the class known as
bituminous coal is the normal condition and that the
lower volatile matter and higher carbon is due in part
to geological flexure and folding through long ages.
It does not seem that speaking generally the actual
contact or proximity of a coal bed or field to volcanic
or trappean rocks affects it the same as the heat and
pressure developed by the stress and strain due to the
actual folding of the beds. Undoubtedly age has
something to do with it and the coals comparatively
low in carbon are seldom found in the same basin and
having undergone the same strains as an underlying
bed of anthracite.
It has been assumed that a coal field which on its
outcrop shows bituminous and lignitic coal may with
depth develop into a semi-bituminous or semi-anthracite coal. There is, it would seem, absolutely no
authority for such an assumption. Of course the coal
at the outcrop will certainly contain more moisture
and probably more ash, and as these diminish the
percentage of carbon will appear higher and so will
the volatile matter, but that anything more than that
will happen is improbable, the truth of the matter
being that the outcrop in these cases was not a fair
test of the coal. Undoubtedly the coal which is non-
coking at the surface may develop into a coking coal
with depth.
There is one point, however, in this matter that
appears to have been neglected in assuming
that anthracite may have been formed by
flexure pressure and heat exerted on bituminous coals,
viz., the amount of ash. It is hard to see on the face
of it how a bituminous coal carrying, we will say, 8
per cent, of ash, can be converted into an anthracite
carrying only 4 by any amount of pressure and heat.
Anthracite  is  as  a rule denser  and heavier, which
would be explained by this local metamorphism.
Many of the seams in the small coal basins have
been fired by the burning roots of trees, etc., and the
influence of this combustion mav extend for long distances, nearly destroying the volatile matter. It
would appear as if it would be a fairer way to test a
coal by the amount of its volatile matter and not as is
usually done, by the percentage of its carbon.
It is not probable that the amount of sulphur in coke
for copper smelting would affect it in any way or possibly phosphorous through the latter is deadly for iron
smelting. If the ash were to any extent lime it would
be no deterrent. Whether anthracite coal has ever
been tried for copper smelting is not known. At any
rate no records have been published of tests. Sulphide of lime is volatilized in coking—sulphate is not.
There is a general impression that coke made from
beehive ovens is much superior to what is known as.
retort oven coke. This would appear to be quite unwarranted ; at any rate, so far as the iron industry is
concerned, it has been found that retort oven cpke,
whilst not so brilliant in appearance, serves its purpose just as well. Probably so far as B. C. is concerned
the by-products of tar, ammoniacal liquor, etc., may not
be disposable, but the sulphate of ammonia certainly
should have a value to our farmers and market
gardeners.
Coals which are uncokeable in the ordinary beehive
oven owing to small percentage of bituminous matter
may be made to return good coke in these byproduct ovens. Coal which is too high in bituminous matter may also be made to yield a fine coke by
firing under pressure by mixture with other dry coals
or by washing or slacking.
The nature of the ash in the coal makes considerable difference in its quality. For blacksmiths' purposes sulphur is objectionable, making the steel or
iron " short " in its nature and poor weld; for domestic purposes the amount of ash is the main feature.
If the ash is in the form of iron sulphide it is more
fusible and increases its tendency to clinker on the
bars, which prevents the ingress of air. As a rule a
white ash or a light red or yellow is the best providing
it be light and pulverulent. Bituminous coals, apart
from the question of smoke, make better steam raisers than anthracite. But semi-bituminous are probably the best for this purpose.
Probably the fairest system of judging the value of
a coal for heating purposes is by the number of B. T.
U.'s (British Thermal Units) it contains. A B.T.U.
is the quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of water 1 degree F. at or near 39 degrees F.
Lignites will carry from 6 to 10,000 B.T.U.
Bituminous coals from 10 to 14,090 "     "
Semi-bituminous from, .....,..., 14 to 15,000 "    ••THE MINING RECORD.
Anthracite and semi-anthracite coals do not go any
higher.
Petroleum has a heating capacity theoretically of
20,000 B.T.U.
It may be of interest at this point although outside
the question, to compare oil as fuel with coal. It has
been found by repeated experiments that 1 lb. of
petroleum under the same boilers will equal practically 1% of coal, therefore a gallon of petroleum will
equal 12 lbs. of coal. That is that oil at 3c. per gal.
equals coal at $4.70 per ton; one ton of average coal
should be equivalent in heating value to i*A cords
of good dry wood, fir or pine.
These calculations depend so largely on the qualities of the coal and wood that they are probably of little
value except for the purposes of comparison.
THE RARE METALS IN BLACK SANDS.
SOME comment has been made in the press lately
on a letter addressed by the Provincial Mineralogist to the sender of a sample of black sand from
Cariboo. This sample on assay gave a value of $1.42
per ounce of gold and $10.65 for platinum. Osmirid-
ium, we believe, is $10.00 per ounce. This
would add about $5 in osmiridium to the value,
which must have been highly concentrated, as in tests
of black sand made from the Tulmeen River over a
long period a value of about $1 per lb. only was obtained from the ordinary black sand from sluice boxes.
What this would have given on assay is another matter. The Tulameen sand contained little or no osmiridium. One Chinaman working out the gravel under
an old cabin obtained 40 ounces of platinum in one
day, which had evidently been discarded by earlier
gold workers.
It must also be remembered that the. price of metal
platinum so called as found in these sands varies considerably from pure platinum. The platinum dust as
brought in by the miners, even if properly cleaned by
them, is only saleable at probably half the finished
price of the metal. This is on the principle that
although gold is at $20.67 per ounce, placer gold
rarely fetches $18.00 and may run as low as $12.50.
It usually carries more or less iron and
contains other metals of the same group, viz.
iridium, osmium, vanadium, ittyrium, etc., etc.,
either in separate grains or alloyed. If these individual grains could be separated they could be sold
at very high values, but this is not practicable under
ordinary conditions and they become a deterrent to
value. Osmiridium is usually found in small flat
scales which seem to bear evidences of having been flat
hexagonal table crystals with a more silvery lustre
than platinum, which is usually in rounded or irregular grains more or less black according as they approach or recede from the matrix.    The question of
this matrix is assuming a more interesting aspect
every day and it would certainly appear advisable for
any prospector owning copper or quartz prospects in
locality where placer platinum has been found in any
quantity to have one assay made for this metal. The
price of platinum approaches very close to gold now
and is not unlikely to pass it before long. Native
platinum has, so far as we are aware, only been actual! seen in rock on one occasion. Mr. Carmichel, Provincial Assayer, in his report published in 1895 mentions having seen it in a dyke rock from Vancouver
Island and that the assay was very high. The actual
specimen was unfortunately lost, and the owner states
that he spent several hundred dollars on assays made
by various parties in the States without having succeeded in getting, not even a trace, in any sample
other than the ore mentioned above. It has been reported from Wyoming in corellite, in copper claims in
the Similkameen District, Christina Lake, B. C, and
sperrylite (an assenide) from Sudbury, Ont., where
it is associated with the nickel ores. In placer form
it occurs in Colombia, S. A.; Trinity and Shasta
Counties, California; Rio Pardo, Brazil; Sonora,
Mexico; Yukon, and New South Wales. Russia still
continues to ship 90 per cent, of the world's output.
It would seem to occur almost unreservedly associated
with the heavier basic magnesian rocks, peridotites,
pyroxenites, etc., which easily become serpentized, and
wherever chrome iron or chromiferous magnetite is
found it should be carefully examined for by crushing
and panning the rock in as large a quantity as
possible.
The report of Mr.W. F. Robertson, Provincial Mineralogist, and of Messrs. Faulds and Shepherd, M.E.'s,
on the Fernie explosion is now issued. It consists
almost entirely of a diary and list of places examined
with a resume as to the probable source of the explosion such as was found at the inquest. No speculations of any interest a*e entered into as to this mysterious explosion. There is one thing pretty evident,
and that is that instructions should have been sent
immediately to the mine officials to stop any work of
clearing the mine up, except to save life, until after
examination by the Government officials. The question which arose as to McDonald's room having been
the source could then have been properly settled. It
would not appear that tamping being in a hole is any
evidence of a shot not having fired gas, as it might
fire from the back, particularly in the case of
machines undercutting long faces. The system of
working while possibly eminently suitable to the roof
and floor in question is certainly an expensive system
to ventilate, entailing considerable expenditure in
cloth and temporary air stops, etc. The long wall
system where the roads are made more or less in the
waste, while in some cases difficult to maintain, is one474
THE MINING RECORD.
in which the dust on the roads is largely composed of
non-inflammable material, and gas, if it does come off,
may rise to the higher parts of old wastes where it is
unlikely to be disturbed. In one case with which the
writer is acquainted gas fired by a shot-lighter
burnt out in the roof of the "goaf" without spreading at all, and gas lit by the spark from a petroleum
pump burnt along the roof of the slope (packed goaf)
without finding a particle of coal dust to hang on to.
The writer spent several months experimenting with
various new explosives in gassy mines in England,
and out of many thousand shots fired never saw the
least sign of a spark. The worst feature of these new
nitro-explosives is the fumes, which require good ventilation and all shots to be fired nearly at one time to
drive them off.
As we go to press an important announcement is
made of a rich strike of ore at the Silver King mine,
by Mr. M. S. Davis, who last year leased the property
from the Hall Mining & Smelting Company. It is
said that Mr. Davis has by this discovery, encountered the main lead which was lost in 1897, ana that the
values are very high. We sincerely trust that this
report will prove to be true, as under the terms of the
lease, the Hall Mining Company can under certain
conditions resume operations at the mine, and in consequence may yet have a successful career. Some
short time ago a London financial paper made an
attack on the company, suggesting fraud, on account
of the arrangement with Mr. Davis. We gladly avail
ourselves of the opportunity to declare the insinuation
to be absolutely foundationless, the company having
only ceased to operate the mine upon the advice of
two independent mining engineers who were called in
to report.
lishing its own smelting works; but we gather that
this step is now under contemplation. We have,
meanwhile, strong reasons for believing that the Government has already decided to abolish the tax in
question, or rather suspend taxation on mines until
conditions improve.
It is reported that the Cariboo Consolidated Company has leased, with the option of purchase, the
property and works of the ill-fated Golden River
Quesnell, on the Quesnell lake and river. As Mr.
Hobson never believed that the latter concern could
be successfully undertaken, on the grounds that the
river had been thoroughly wing darned and mined both
by whites and Chinese in the pioneer days, the idea of
the present lease is probably that a utilization may be
made by conveying to the Cariboo mine the water from
Quesnell Lake, at the foot of which the large dam was
constructed.
In British Columbia, and in Rossland in particular,
the London directorate boards of both Le Roi and Le
Roi No. 2 have been suspiciously regarded, the exit
of Mr. Whittaker Wright notwithstanding. It has
been thought for some time, whether rightly or wrongly, that the mines were being worked with a view
more to stock-manipulating purposes rather than with
the legitimate object of earning dividends for shareholders, and quite recent events have not tended to
better opinion in this regard. We are, therefore, glad
to note the election of such men as Mr. G. S. Watertoh
and Mr. Anthony J. McMillan to directorate positions
on the Le Roi Board. It is some assurance at least
that this mine will be managed in the future in an
honest and businesslike manner.
The shareholders of the Snowshoe Gold & Copper
Mines, Limited, have every reason to be satisfied with
the position of affairs as explained at the second ordinary general meeting last month. 'Ihe mine is being
developed, under a good and careful management, in
a very satisfactory manner, and ultimately will without doubt pay handsomely. If all British-owned
mines in British Columbia had been administered in
the same way as is the Snowshoe, the proportion of
successes to failures would have been entirely reversed.
The chairman referred in his speech to the "unjust
two per cent, tax." This tax bears exceptionally
hard on the Snowshoe Company, although the ore is
of somewhat higher grade value than most of the
other large mines in the Boundary District. The reason for this is, that the Snowshoe has not jet, probably with justifiable caution, followed the example of
the other Boundary companies in the matter of estab-
The half-yearly report of the Mount Lyall (Tasmania) Coy's Reduction Plant should be worth studying. It appears that economies have been effected as
the result of experience admitting of the smelting by
two furnaces at No. 2 plant of 1,000 tons per day, entirely without coke; at No. 1 plant one furnace is running without coke, the other will be ere long. A saving has thus been made of atleast $100,000 per annum.
Furthermore, by reducing the amount of hot air used
in the furnaces the number of men firing hot air stoves
has been cut down from 24 to 6, and in a few months
it is hoped hot air will not be required at all. The air
from six blowers is now concentrated into two. furnaces, instead of four or five. From the condensed
report from which the above is taken it would seem as
if the company would soon be able to smelt without
furnaces.THE MINING RECORD.
:/0
MINING MEN OF THE PROVINCE.
TITfR. JOHN B. HOBSON is a native of Ireland,
A"■*" where his father was for many years engaged
as manager of coal mines. In 1848 Mr. Hobson's
parents arrived in New York, where he resided until
1857, in which year he accompanied them to California, where he studied metallurgy and mining engineering and became closely identified with many of the
large quartz and deep gravel mining enterprises in the
central part of that State.
In the fall of 1891, Mr. Hobson, associated with
the Hon. Jacob H. Neff—the present Lieut.-Governor
of California—Mr. D.
W. Lubeck, of the
Placer County Bank,
and other gentlemen,
met at Auburn and
formulated plans for
the organization of
the California Miners'
Association, which
has done so much to
place the mining industry there on a prosperous footing.
Prior to the organization of the California Miners' Association, Mr. Hobson published in San Francisco the Mining and Industrial Advocate, for
the purpose of calling
public attention to the
necessity for uniting
in an effort to secure
at the hands of the
National and State
administration the
legislation necessary
to improve the conditions of the mining industry and to remove
the many disadvantages under which miners were laboring. Immediately upon the organization of the California Association, that body selected Mr. Hobson as one of the legislative committee, where he had associated with him
the Hon. Niles Searles, ex-Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of California; the Hon. J. K. Luttrell and
others. They were sent to Washington to draft a bill
and urge its adoption by Congress. They did this so
effectively that Congressman Caminette introduced the
desired measure, which was finally passed and resulted in the complete rehabilitation of an industry which
has since produced from ten to fifteen million dollars
annually.
Mr. J. B. Hobson.
In 1892 Mr. Hobson was invited by Sir Wm. Van
Home and the directorate of the Canadian Pacific
Railway Company to visit British Columbia and explore the vast areas of auriferous deep gravels in the
northern districts of the Province and determine their
value. As a result of his investigations the Consolidated Cariboo Hydraulic Mining Co. and the Horsefly
Hydraulic Mining Co. were formed to take up the
large properties here, the equipment and opening of
which for production on a very extensive scale has
been in progress for the past ten years. Prior to Mr.
Hobson's departure for British Columbia he had been
associated for many years with the Geological Department of the California
State Mining Bureau,
and the results of his
field work may be seen
in the annual reports
of tnat institution.
Shortly after Mr. Hobson commenced mining operations here he
encountered many of
the difficult and objectionable features of
the Mineral, Placer
Mining and Water
Clauses Acts, and for
the past seven years
he has been urging on
Parliament the necessity for adopting such
remedial legislation as
would result in throwing the country open
for exploration by individual miners, prospectors and investors
in such a manner as
would encourage the
settlement of the province and the development of its mineral
resources.
We have not seen the report of the Anglo-Klondyke
Mining Company, but a notice of a contemporary
states that the result of working by drifting 20,000
yards (presumably cubic) gave an average of $13.50
per yard. This seems very rich. Under the hydraulic monitor 29,000 yards were sluiced showing a value
of $1.25 per yard. It is stated that 80 per cent, of
this ground had been previously drifted, which would
imply that the value was in the top gravels. Costs
per cubic yard including cost of plant and cleaning
bed-rock amounted to 30 cents per yard. Exclusive
of plant, which is now paid for, the cost of hydraulic-
ing is estimated at 14 cents per yard. The company
have a water supply which was exceptionally good
last year.476
THE MINING RECORD.
B. C. MINES IN LONDON IN 1902.
THE COURSE OE PRICES.
. (From our own Correspundent.)
THE course of prices for British Columbian mining
shares in London during the past year has been
depressing in the extreme, quotations having in.
many instances   dropped to merely  rubbish prices.
For instance, Le Rois have been as low as £r, or 80
per cent, discount, while LeRoiNo. 2 were at one time
no better than 9-16, or at little more than 10 per cent,
of their face value.     Then we had the fall in Ymirs,
which,   after  having been  as   high  as   £2   5-8   in
1901, have been quoted at one time during 1902 at no
better than 2-6.    London  & B.   C.  Goldfields also,
which it was freely predicted was to take rank as the
leading London financial concern connected with B. C.
mines, have also fallen from' their high estate, and in
the last month of the old year could be bought for a
few shillings, after having stood at one time at about
£1 7-16.    Hall Mines were as low as 6d., whilst the
weakest quotation for Enterprise Was 1-16, the same
figure representing the lowest point reached by New
Goldfields of B. C, a Tupper concern, which was at
one time expected to take a high position in the ranks
of B.C. companies.    Whitewater fell once to 1-16, and
are little better now, whilst apparently so little was
thought of the prospects of the united Kootenay Mining and Rossland Great Western Companies' shares
that they were quoted as low as 5s.     Velvets were
never regarded by the market as worth more than 8s.
and fell once to 2s. 3d.      About the sole exceptions to
the general rule are furnished by Snowshoe—which has
just held a satisfactory meeting—and  Tyee  Copper;
the former have remained remarkably firm at 14s. 6d.
to 15s. 6d., the extremes of the year, whilst the Tyee
after having been as high as i)| and as low as y?, close
firm  at  7-8.    Otherwise the whole list   has   shown
extreme weakness, prices  have  been  at the lowest
points, I believe, since the mines of British Columbia
were  first regarded  as  of  sufficient   importance  to
merit the attention of the London Stock Exchange.
No doubt the general conditions have been adverse;
but they can hardly be said to have been sufficient to
.explain the inveterate condition of the B. C. market.
The fact of the matter is that British Columbia has
been under a cloud the whole year.    Ever since the
collapse of the London & Globe group the public have
looked askance at anything British Columbian.    So
many people were badly hit over the fall of the B. A.
C. that it can hardly be surprising to find them unwilling to run any  further risk in  this direction at
present.     There is no fault found with the industry,
and generally speaking the London press have shown
every desire to give prominence to news about the
mines.    As an instance of this I may cite the fact that
London Financial News (a leading daily newspaper)
has published a series of articles week by week from
the pen of a well-known special correspondent.    But
the public, although following the news from  the
Province carefully, have throughout the year shown a
decided disinclination to meddle with British Columbian interests.     Even the loan, tempting as it looked,
—and in fact was^-was only successfully issued owing to the precautions taken by its sponsor to have it
fully underwritten.    Certainly the energetic Agent-
General and those working, with him  deserve every
credit for obtaining this loan in London, especially
when we remember that Natal, which was a borrower
the same week, fared no better than British Columbia.
If any of your   readers will refer to back numbers
of the Record they will find that I have frequently
drawn attention in the past to the evil results likely to
attend  the machinations  of the London promoter.
We  are   now suffering   for the sins of the wildcatters and promoters of indifferent properties  absurdly
over   capitalized.     There    are    thousands    of   investors loaded   up with B.C. shares who would only
be too delighted to have a chance of marketing those
shares at 50 per cent, of what they paid for them, and
not all shares in English registered companies either.
I seem to remember the arrival about five years ago
of provincial brokers with bags full of dollar shares
of locally registered companies which they left behind
them in England, taking back instead British sovereigns.    Have any of these local companies ever sent a
sixpence over to England in the way of dividends ?
Is it a wonder, then, that English investors have in
their own minds formed a bad impression of B. C.
mining shares, and are only desirious of cutting their
loss as soon as possible ?    Whether or no they will
ever recover their confidence in the Province remains
to be seen; but it is a reassuring fact to note that the
Government have  seen the wisdom of keeping the
ehief points of the country before the public; whilst
it is also fortunate that they are so efficiently represented in London.    Mr. Turner is always accessible,
always  courteous, and ready to accord information
to those who need it.    He cannot, of course, be expected to interview every dissatisfied investor, but by
means of circular matter, lectures before the members
of various societies, and judicious advertising, he can
at all events in a .measure counteract the ill effects of
the boom of five years ago.    So far it is only the promoter who has benefited  from that untimely event,
but despite the depression of the past year, it is confidently predicted by people whose long acquaintance
with the Province entitles their views to respect, that
the country is inherently sound—especially in regard
to its mines—and it will yet justify those who have
pinned their faith to it as a country which will take
a front place amongst the producers of both precious
and base metals.    It is to be sincerely hoped, however, that it will never again suffer from the malevolent attentions of a Whitaker Wright.    Every effort
has been made to obtain a Government prosecution of
those concerned in the management of the London &
Globe group of companies, but despite the efforts of
Mr. J. Flower and others, the Attorney-General in
the last days of the year decided that not enough
matter had been produced to him to justify a Government prosecution.    It is yet possible that some of the
shareholders of the collapsed companies may combine
to bring about   a   reopening   of the  whole of   the
matters involved, and effect more than an official censure of the directors responsible for the remarkable
financial jugglery which characterized the management of the blobe group—an end most devoutly to be
desired.THE MINING RECORD.
477
THE ELMORE PROCESS IN BRITISH
COLUMBIA.
(By H. Hayman Claudet, A.I.M.M.)
THE Mining Record of August of last year contained a very interesting article on the concentration of ores by means of oil, written by Mr.
H. E. T. Haultain, in which he gave an historical and
descriptive account of the Elmore Process. As interest on this subject is being keenly revived just now in
this country through the Canadian Ore Concentration
Limited, who hold the patent rights for the process in
Canada, having started a small testing works in Rossland, and as everyone concerned in low grade properties is expecting great things from this process, probably a short account of the experimental plant, together with a few details as
to costs of working on the
commercial scale may be of
use to your readers.
In the experimental plant
exactly the same operations
take place as on the commercial scale, only without
some of the appliances
which make the latter auto
matic, but the method is
identical, and if an ore will
give good results on the
small scale it is practically
bound to do so on the large.
For convenience the process may be described in
three stages :
i. The mixing of the
pulp with oil during which
operation the oil comes in
contact with the mineral
values and holds them in
suspension.
2. The separation of the
oil from the mineral in a
centrifugal machine with a
specially constructed solid
basket.
3. The drying of the product from (2) in a second
centrifugal machine with a
perforated basket.
In the hand plant (1) the
mixing is performed in a
three-foot drum, shown in
the photograph, about one
foot deep which revolves vertically and has an opening
in the front through which the sample in the form of
pulp is poured in. The oil is then added in about the
proportion of one-quarter to three-quarters the amount
of sample taken, depending on the quantity of mineral
therein. "There are small baffle plates inside the drum
which cause the mixture to get thoroughly agitated
simply by turning the drum slowly a few times by
hand. When the oil has picked up enough mineral
it is skimmed off the water and the tailings are run out
through a plugged hole in the circumference of the
drum. The tailings are allowed to settle and then are
dried, weighed and assayed.
2. The separation of the oil which has been collected takes place in a small type of centrifugal machine
The Canadian Ore Concentration Company's
Experimental Plant at Rossland.
which has a speed of 2,000 revolutions per minute and
is driven by an electric motor.     (See photo.)
3. The .drying is accomplished with the same machine by interchanging the solid basket for the perforated one, which has a cloth bag fitting inside and in
which the concentrates are dried.
These are weighed and assayed, and both the actual
recovery of values is obtained and also that by difference between the original sample and the tailings.
Having proved in the testing plant that any particular ore is thoroughly suitable to the treatment it must
next be considered, before going further, if the local
conditions allow of the concern to be a commercial sue-'
cess, and it may be well to look into these conditions
as they would affect the oil process.
It must be expected that the field for the Elmore
Process will be greatly on low grade properties, which
■will necessarily mean that
everything must be designed and worked on the most
economical lines, and while
it is possible to treat at a
profit certain ores which
could not be worked by any
other method the margin
must not be cut too fine and
it should be proved beforehand that there will besuf-
" ficient profit to allow for
the fluctuations in the metal
market and any other contingencies which are likely
to crop up.
There should be sufficiency of water, a good site
for the mill, allowing the
pulp to flow from the battery to the oil plant by gravity, also suitable space for
depositing tailings and a
fairly accessible position for
the transportation of stores
and oil, and for shipment
of the concentrates to smelter
If water power is not
available electricity should
be used, if there is an installation anywhere near,
as the power required is
very small and a plant capable of handling 100 tons of
ore per day could be most
economically worked by arranging a few small motors to drive the different
machines, and in this way a lot of shafting .and frame
work for same could be dispensed with.
Let us now view the cost of buying and erecting an
oil plant of 100 tons daily capacity, not going into the
milling machinery or power:
1. Price of 100 tons plant, which is approximately
$10,000.
2. Cost of freight of machinery to mine.
3. Cost of erection, including excavation for foundations, concrete, timbers for buildings, etc.
4. Cost of running and up-keep.
The first item to go into in detail is the cost of freight
ot machinery. At present this is made in England
and the weight of a 100 ton plant is approximately 43tons, the freight to Rossland being about $48 per ton,
including shipping and railway.
The cost of erecting will depend on the amount of
blasting, if any, required in connection with the excavating on the site of plant, the amount of concrete
to be put in, the price of labor and timber, and will
vary at different places. The size of building required
would be approximately 33 ft. high by 35 ft. long by
40 ft. wide and should be built on the side of a hill in
order that the least amount of foundation work will be
required to arrange the plant so that the pulp and oil
flow by gravity.
The last item, namely, cost of running plant, includes labor, supervision, loss of oil and royalty.
Three hands per shift should be enough to attend to
the ido ton oil plant, say one man at $3 and two at
$2.50 each.
Reckoning two shifts of 12 hours a day each
the labour per day treating 100 tons of ore
may be taken at $16 00
Power, electric     5 00
Loss of oil and royalty       45 00
Adding, for supervision, repairs and  depreciation    10 00
Total expenses per day of 24 hours $76 00
This on 100 tons equals $0.76 per ton of ore treated.
Although from the above figures the total expenses
in connection with the oil process are only 76c. per ton
including everything in that department, it should be
noted that in many cases it will be even less, as for
instance in the event of water power being available,
or an existing company having two or three hundred
horse power, or more, at their disposal, it would cost
very little for an additional thirty horse power to drive
the oil plant.
Further, the charge against loss of oil and royalty
is put high to allow for the heavy freight on the oil,
viz., about double the price of the oil itself, and probably this may be considerably reduced when dealing
with large quantities. The loss of oil may be taken
between 1 to 1% gallons per ton of ore treated.
Thirdly, the $10 per day for supervision, etc., is no
doubt high, as repairs and depreciation should be very
small, and generally the supervision could be shared
with that of another department, but the writer considers it better not to minimize costs and to err on the
high side, if at all.
The royalty is fixed on the capacity of the plant used
and in the case of an oil plant installed to treat the
tailings of a concentrating mill of a capacity of 100 tons
per day it might be that the method of concentration
consisted of sizing and jigging and that the final tailings were only one-quarter the amount of the original
ore milled. In this case a 25 ton per day oil plant
would be installed and the royalty charged on that
tonnage.
In order to form an idea as to what grade ore may
be treated successfully by the process, below is given
expenses, but the cost of mining is not included as it
is impossible to give a fixed figure when it is so variable, according to each district, the nature of the mine,
the width of the lode and many other conditions.
But it may be safely said that concentration will invariably tend to reduce mining expenses, as the ore
will then be mined as it comes, therefore at a cheaper
rate, while in the case of direct smelting the poorer ore
either remains in the mine or is dumped on a heap and
left to its fate :
Per Ton of Ore
Treated.
Concentrating by oil     $    76
Milling .-  90
Cost per ton of ore, of producing concentrates      $1  66
To this would have to be added freight of concen-
centrates to smelter, which is, in Rossland, about 75c.
per ton; also smelting and realization charges, which
can be taken at $6 per ton.
Now if we take a case of a concentration of 10 to 1
the charges on these two items would be 1-10 of the
above figures when working out the costs on the ton
of ore treated, viz.:
Freight to smelter per ton of ore treated $    75
Smelting and realization charges, etc., per ton of
ore   6 00
$6 75
Adding this to the cost of producing concentrates we
get the total expenses, mining excluded, (on the assumption of the 10 to 1 concentration) to be $2,335
per ton of ore treated, so when treating a dump heap
and taking a case of 85 per cent, recovery of contents
by process any ore over $2.75 can be treated at a profit.
In taking the smelting and realization charges together it must be remembered that the smelting charge
is based on the amount of concentrates to be smelted
while there are some of the items in the realization
charge, such as interest on mining and concentration,
freight on matte to refinery, and one or two other
small items which will be-just as much when concentrating as when smelting direct, but these will not cut
much figure and can be overlooked.
It will be readily seen that the larger the ratio of
concentration the more favorable it is for the process,
not only on account of freight of concentrates but also
as regards the loss of oil, as the concentrates contain
in their final state a small percentage of oil.
The question of a mine concentrating a portion of
its output to mix with the rest in the crude state in
order to make a more nearly self-fluxing product is
worth noticing,1 and it may be quite likely that this
will be one of the many cases where the oil process
will come in, and in this case it is possible briquetting
would not be required. It seems a plausible idea to
dump all the ore as it is mined over a series of grizzlies, shipping the coarse to the smelter and treating
the fines by the oil process. In this way a preliminary crusher might not be required, the fines going
direct to the pulverizer which would be relieved to
some extent of its work.
In the case of ores that are not self-fluxing economic
concentration should be especially adaptable, as it is
only natural to expect that smelting a concentrate
would be a less lengthy process than smelting the
crude ore and in most cases the amounts of ingredients which have to be added to get a suitable flux will
be greatly reduced, hence the smelting charges should
be very much less. The loss of copper in the slag
should not show anything like so high a percentage
when dealing with a concentrated product as when
smelting the ore direct. .
In conclusion the writer intends that the figures
supplied are only meant to convey a good idea to thoseTHE MINING RECORD.
479
interested in and likely to patronize the process, and
in all cases they appear to be on the high side if anything, especially in the case of milling which under
good circumstances with water power available would
probably be as low as 6oc. to 70c. per ton. As is the
case with most estimates, they must not be taken as
exact, and any suggestions or criticism on this article
with a view of making things clearer in any way will
be appreciated.
MINING DEVELOPMENT IN
THE OKANAGAN DISTRICT.
(By A. A. Watson, B.Sc.)
IT is a well known adage that "a man cannot eat his
cake and have it too," and a survey of the mining
development in the Okanagan District of British
Columbia is a forcible reminder of the truth of this
saying. Its soil is so rich and its climate so mild and
favourable to the growth of all kinds of fruit that the
attention of men of means in the district is irresistibly
attracted to the possibilities of fortunes to be made
out of fruit-growing, with the result that while the
prospects for the successful mining of gold and copper are as good in the district as in any other district
of British Columbia no serious attempt at mining has
ever been attempted. This year, however, several
claims have changed hands and in one or two instances
energetic efforts at development have disclosed conditions justifying the expenditure of large sums of
money for further development.
The Okanagan District is bounded on the north
by Sicamous Lake, on the east and west by ranges
of mountains and extends south into United States
territory. Vernon, the chief town of the district, is
situated four miles north of Okanagan Landing on
Okanagan Arm. The whole valley north of Vernon
is adapted to the growth of nearly everything that
can be raised in a temperate climate, while at favourable spots on the lake small settlements are continually being made. At Kelowna the climate is so milA
that tobacco is successfully grown, while on the west
shore of the lake fruit ranches are being planted
wherever level land can be found.
Geologically the district in the lower valleys consists of clays and shales with exposures of porphyry
and granite, while the summits of the mountains for,
at any rate, sixty miles east of Vernon, reveal granite
H the prevailing country rock with numerous veins
of auartz, in some cases carrying gold. The summits
of the range west of Vernon show a little granite and
a great deal of porphyry with some diabase. The
ciuartz claims are located. I think, without exception,
in granite and porphyry formations, while the exposures of copper ore are found in diabase.
Takine Vernon as the centre and dealing with the
claims in the order of their proximity to the town, the
nearest locations are two claims located last October, called the Glenoro and the Tranmere, the locators
beinp- resoectivelv Messrs. Milligan and McPhail.
Thev are situated on the west shore of Long Lake
two and a half miles from Vernon. The ore is a very
fine lime conglomerate on the Glenoro and a fine
quartz conglomerate on the Tranmere. On the Glenoro the bed of ore is two hundred feet wide and is
exposed clear up from the lake shore to the top of the
hill. Following the ore up the hill to the top we find
it overlaid with clay shale and following the apparent
direction of the bed of ore we find ourselves on the
edge of an inaccessible cliff. Five hundred feet of the
cliff in width consists of quartz conglomerate from a
point a hundred feet from the summit of the hill to the
bottom of the cliff. The few samples that have as yet
been taken have run from. $1.80 to $2.20 per ton, while
a five-foot hole- on the lime conglomerate showed
quartz conglomerate underneath which assayed $3.20
a ton in gold. It appears that the bed of quartz conglomerate cuts through the hill from the cliff to the
lake and is overlaid with lime conglomerate on the
lake side of the hill. Work will be actively pursued
on both these claims next spring with the object of
seeing whether the values diminish or increase inside
the ore. The bed of ore is so situated that it could
be quarried. No shafts whatever would be required.
Two men are already at work on the Glenoro. The
next mineral field as regards distance from Vernon is
situated on the peninsula at the northern end of
Okanagan Lake four miles from Vernon and directly
opposite Okanagan Landing. The most important of
the claims is the British Empire owned by Messrs.
Highman, Miller and Muller. On this claim there
are altogether nine veins of free milling gold quartz
ranging in width from ten inches to two feet, in value
from $8 to $48 per ton and running about north and
south. Clay and shale cover the hill largely, but there
are numerous exposures of porphyry. On one vein
a shaft is now down 68 feet, in all the width of the vein
averaging two feet and its value $16 per ton in free
milling gold. At a depth of thirty feet a slight fault
was encountered and at a depth of sixty feet from
the surface a cross-cut was run due east which struck
the vein again five feet from the shaft. Eight feet
more sinking on the vein showed the richest quartz
vet encountered, a piece supposed to be about an aver-'
age assaying $168 per ton. The vein is a true fissure,
the walls consisting of porphyry, schist and talc and
assaying over $2 per ton. The Sarah claim north of
the British Empire claim shows the same vein as the
one on the British Empire on which the shaft has been
sunk and is owned by Messrs. Highman and Seydel.
The following extract from the report-of the Provincial Mineralogist for the year 1901 on the British
Empire claim is of interest:—
"There is here a quartz vein two feet wide having
a strike 45 degrees west cutting through schist and
slate and apparently associated with an igneous dyke.
The development consists of a shaft from 40 to 45
feet deep, from the bottom of which a drift has been
run some five feet. The shaft which at the time of
inspection was half full of water, was timbered and
encased in planks and provided with a good ladder,
etc., but it could not be closely examined. The quartz
was mineralized with iron sulphides carrying gold
values and a certain amount of free gold. While the
mineralization is sparse, such as there is must be quiterich, since an assay on a sample showing no visible
free gold and containing but a small percentage of
mineral in the quartz gave $44 in gold and an ounce
in silver per ton."
Since the Provincial Mineralogist visited the claim
the vein has improved in width and in Value and there
is no doubt that the British Empire claim has the
making of a first-class mine.
There are numerous other locations on the same hill
but work has been so unskilfully performed upon
them that nothing can be said as to their value. The
idea seemingly held by most of the holders is that a
vein should be absolutely perpendicular and consequently every shaft is found to have left the vein in the
first twenty feet or so and no cross-cuts have been
attempted.
At Siwash Creek on the west side of Okanagan
Lake, due west of Vernon, at an elevation of about
3,000 feet and a distance of four miles from the lake,
are some very promising copper prospects. The
writer.visited these claims this fall for the first time.
They were originally located about four years ago by
I Cameron, who held them until last summer, when
he abandoned them and went to Dawson. They were
re-located by J. Hamilton under the. names of the
Gail, the Dawson, the Bluebell and the Phoenix. The
writer visited the group with Mr. Hamilton last September and was able to obtain a very fair idea of the
prospects. They lie on top of a hill wooded to its
summit and covered over with drift but here and
there are outcroppings of oxide of iron carrying copper in diabase rocks. The only claim showing a ledge
then was the Dawson, and while the iron capping
assayed four per cent, in copper and $2 in gold, the
work had been done, however! in such a fashion as
to have proved nothing and sufficiently explained the
abandonment. The cross-cut had been run on the
edge of the caoping and parallel to the ledge instead
of across it. Since then two men have been employed
in cross-cutting- the same ledge about 300 feet east of
this hole j thev state that the cut is now twenty-five
feet long and is not yet across the ledge. A sample
brought as an average assaved 6.5 per cent, copper.
Tt is satisfactory that these claims are now in the
hands of men who will work in such a wav as to
definitely determine the value of the properties. Work
will be continued all winter. Conner properties are
held at White Man's Creek, about six miles south of
Siwash Creek, but here again the work has been so
unskilfullv oerformed as to show nothing, one way or
the other. Shafts sunk on little strinsrers and tunnels
through tbe countrv rock never completed aooear to
have been the usual mode nf procedure in developing
nrosoects in this oart of the country.
^out sixteen miles northwest of Arernon is the
Periich claim, held bv Messrs. Clark and MacMullen.
Tip's claim is alsn situated on the'summit of a mountain about ^.ooo feet above the sen and directlv above
thp Armstrong waf^on road. The work done consist1: of a. cross-cut on the 1ed<^e showing" its width to
be siv feet, three feet of which assaved $4 and three
feet assayed $19 in gold. The formation is diorite
interspersed with calcite and strongly mineralized
with sulphide of iron. At a point two hundred feet
below the ledge a tunnel has been driven to cross-cut
it. The tunnel is now in 220 feet. At a distance
of 100 feet from the mouth of the tunnel some iron
oxide about a foot wide was encountered which assayed an ounce to the ton and the last hundred feet
of the tunnel has been run along a narrow vein assaying $16 per ton in gold, which is at right angles to the
ledge and appears to be an offshoot from it. The
tunnel is expected to shortly strike the ledge. Work
will be continued on this claim all winter.
At Trout Creek on the west shore of Okanagan
Lake are some outcroppings of coal. As the writer
has not seen the properties he cannot do better than
quote from the report of Mr. W. - Blakemore, published by the Ashnola Company:—
"At a point where an outcrop of coal has been
located Trout Creek has cut its way through the tender rocks of this formation to a depth of about 150
feet below the level of the surrounding country. The
coal is visible on the west bank of the river at an elevation of nearly 100 feet and is easily, accessible along
the banks of the creek. The geological formation is
in the upper cretaceous series consisting of light
colored clay, sand stones, shales and rocks. This
formation is more or less continuous from Fairview
in the south to Kamloops in the north. At a point
100 feet above the level of the creek I found in the
bank a good exposure of a workable seam of coal
which I measured and judged to be at least four feet in
thickness. The coal is bright, strong and of uniform
qualitv, being free from interstratifi cations of any
kind. At the exposure a tunnel has been driven in a
distance of 20 feet, but owing to the disturbed character of the ground it is not of material assistance in
determining the position of the seam. I found indications of the seam continuing for at least half a mile
along the banks of the creek to the west, the main
strike of the coal bein north and south and the dip
westerlv. The elevation of the exposure is 600 feet
above the level of the lake."
So far the onlv productive camp in the Okanagan
District is Fairview, and this camp has been so often
described that a brief statement of the present prospects of tbe camo should be all that is necessarv. The
most prominent feature is the improvement in width
and value of the vein in the Stemwinder mine, which
nt the third level is now thirtv feet wide and of an
average value of $6.'?-? oer ton.' Near the surface the
width was ten feet with a value of $^.60 per ton. A
clean-UD vielded a gold bar worth $20,000. A force of
men averaging fortv in number has been emoloved at
the mine and a mill of &£> stamns has been in operation.
Large cvanide vats are to be erected in addition to
those alreadv in position.
The Dominion Mininc- Comoanv in the same camo
have done a great deal of work on their orooertv.
which is understood to have the same vein as the
Stemwinder with average values of about $0 per ton.THE MINING RECORD.
481
A TRIP  DOWN  QUESNEL  RIVER  ON  A
DREDGE.
(By Thos. Drummond, M. E.)
DURING the summer the writer took a small
dredge down the Quesnel River to make a
working test of gravels on dredging leases extending up stream on Quesnel River for a distance
of about ten miles from the mouth of the Beaver. It
was a novel trip, with'a considerable amount of excitement and some danger, and it may be of interest
to your readers.
The Quesnel River is one of the principal watercourses of the country; it has a well-defined vallev
a soft miocene clay rock which apparently came in as
a filling upon the top of the true slate bed-rock which
shows in many places along the bank. This soft bedrock is particularly suitable for dredging purposes
and there is a strong probability that rich tertiary
gravel underlies it.
The river has yielded a large amount of gold and
many well-known creeks, benches and bars were
were passed in going down, prominent among which
are Four-Mile, Nine-Mile, Twenty-Mile and China
Creeks, all of which have been worked continuously
for the last thirty years and are still yielding considerable quantities of gold.
In the straight stretches of river the banks as a
rule are steep, but at the bends low bars are formed
The Drummond Dredge on the Quesnell River.
one mile in width gradually dropping from the mountains on either side in benches and terraces to the
level of the river. It has two principal branches, the
north and south forks, both of which rise in large
lakes. They join at the town of Quesnel Forks and
then flow onward in one united stream for a distance
of about' seventy miles to the junction with the
Fraser River. The main river is from 400 to 600
feet in width. It is a turbulent stream full of strong
rapids and riffles, with awkward rocks, and several
sharp "Z" shaped bends. It has a swift current, and
in high water runs from 8 to 10 miles an hour, and it
is a dangerous river to navigate even with small boats.
The rise between low water and high water is from 7
to 8 feet. . The bed-rock is what the author takes to be
on the short side of curves, while the stream cuts
into the opposite banks. The river, therefore, consists of low benches alternating with cut banks and
higher benches. In the upper stretches the soft banks
contain a good deal of slum capped with gravel, but
below Twenty-Mile Creek the banks are wholly formed of gravel often from 200 to 600 feet in height.
These banks are constantly enriching the river and in
many places they have yielded a considerable amount
of gold as evidenced by the work which has been done
upon them.
As I have stated above, the river is a rough, turbulent, dangerous stream and it was with some considerable anxiety that I undertook to move the dredge
down stream, but under the careful and efficient sup-ervision f Wm. Reeves, of Vancouver, the work
was successfully accomplished. Every possible precaution was taken to avoid accidents.
The dredge is only a small prospecting dredge with
a dipper of one-third yard capacity and a digging
capacity of ioo yards per diem. The hull is 55 feet
long and 19 feet wide, and it draws about 30 inches of
water.
In going down rapid streams in a boat steering way
can only be obtained by going either considerably
faster or slower than the stream. The latter plan was
adopted as being safer, and a slow rate of speed was
maintained by means of a chain drag on the end of a
wire cable and this also acted as steering gear.
The arrangement was, as in sketch, the dipper going down stream first. The dipper was fitted with a
piece of 12-inch plank passing through it, which served as a rudder and by means of it a threatened obstruction, rocks, etc., could be avoided by swinging
the dredge quickly away from it. In the sketch, A,
B, C. D, represents the hull of the dredge, C D being
the down-stream end and G the dipper. E and F are
the working drums of the dredge. The main cable
passes from drum E through sheaves and pulleys at
the angles along the left-hand side of the dredge to
the stern and carries the chain, L, at the end. From
the drum, F, passes a shorter rope along the right-
hand side of dredge to main cable at stern where it
connects with a running pulleys. By manipulating
this latter rope the drag could be moved from corner
B to corner A and to all intermediate positions. When
leading from B the down-stream end of dredge
swings to the left and the current moves dredge
bodily across towards the right-hand bank; when in
the A position it works in the opposite direction to
the left-hand bank, and when in the centre the dredge
runs straight. The chain drag weighed about 1,700
pounds, and it could be wound up close to boat or
dragged from behind, and in this way the speed was
regulated. The drag maintained an average speed of
one and a half miles an hour, being faster on the rapids and slower on the quiet stretches. The arrangement worked like a charm and the dredge could be
steered like a small row boat and put any place in the
width of the river in a distance of 200 to 400 feet.
The only difficulty occurred in turning verv short
bends when the drag was far behind and in such cases
the chain sometimes dragged over the point and
forced the dredge into the same bank below.
It was quite a novel trip and one well worth taking,
but I would not care to repeat it with the responsibility of a dredge on my shoulders, for though all possible precautions were adopted there is alwavs danger
of possible accidents even under good management,
and certain chances have to be taken. It also had its
dangers, for in case of accident both dredge and crew
would have been lost. The arrangement, however,
worked beautifully; the boat moved slowlv over the
quiet streteches and danced merrily down the raoids,
avoiding the rocks in grand style, and our destination
was reached safely without accident. The whole distance travelled was about sixteen miles, and many
rapids and bad places were passed. The dredge has
been at work for about two months with satisfactory
results.
THE GOAT RIVER MINING DIVISION.
(By W. P. Sloan.)
IF the hematite iron ore at Kitchener holds out the
future of the Goat River Mining Division is assured. Dating back to the time of discovery and
partial exploitation of these great deposits the district has taken on a more hopeful air and further discoveries north and south on the same lead tend to
"stiffen" the existent good feeling.
On the north of the C. P. R. company's property
a vein with from eight to twenty-one feet of solid
hematite iron ore is said to have been discovered by
R. Laib and partners, and on which a group of claims
were located. The claims lying south of Goat River
which were found last fall are looking very well.
Except for assessment work the Kitchener mines
have been idle for the past year. Mr. C. P. Hill states
that until the company can secure suitable coal lands
on the Crow's Nest line no extensive development
Typical Prospector's Camp, Goat Mountain.
work would be undertaken at Kitchener.
The latest iron finds were made quite recently on
Gray Creek, a tributary of Crawford Bay. Some
people believe it to be a continuation of the Kitchener
deposits, which, if true, is marvellous, the distance
between points being thirty miles at least. Be that
as it may, many of the best known mining men of
Nelson have taken a hand at putting up stakes—Bruce
White among the number, which is evidence that
something is "in sight." Development is being carried on as far as possible till the snow gets too deep
for surface stripping. The Crawford Bay ore goes,
I hear, as high as 66 per cent metallic iron. The low
price of lead and the other common metals has had a
deadening effect on development generally except in
cases where gold values only were looked, for.
In the immediate vicinity of Creston there is the
Alice mine with an excellent showing and a large
quantity of ore on the dumps.   The workings aggre-THE MINING RECORD.
483
gate 1,500 feet, three-quarters of which was dead
work. A waggon road was built by the Government
a distance of three miles from the C. P. R. depot at
Creston to the mine, over which some ore was hauled
and the returns satisfactory, but almost simultane-
'K
Hightown Bluff and Slide, Goat Mountain.
ously with the completion of the road and making
connections with the vein in the lower tunnel came
the slump in lead and the mine was shut down. It
is a low-grade galena proposition, but with a little better price for lead it could be operated at a profit. It
is owned by an English concern—the York and Lancaster Syndicate, of Manchester.
On Goat Mountain there is a promising group of
claims owned by Creston parties. Ore from the Ibis
is galena of good grade carrying up to 168 ounces
silver and 80 per cent, lead besides $6 or $7 in gold per
ton. The development was going on in the lower
tunnel at the time of my visit, and the owners expect
to strike an ore body almost any day. The work
done on this claim consists of two tunnels, one a
hundred feet long when I saw it, another thirty feet
long and a number of shafts from ten to forty feet
deep all showing ore. The waggon road to this claim
has been put in, partly at government expense. In
this group two of the claims, the Hightown and Edith,
show copper in fair quantities.
A peculiarity in the occurrence of ore on this
mountain is that the lower down the mountain the
higher the gold and the lower silver values become.
As an instance of this I might mention the Blenheim
group owned by George Alexander, of Kaslo.   The
ore from the shaft on this claim has
from $100 to $180 in gold besides a f;
frequently given
air amount in
copper, while the silver values per ton were small.
These assays were from hand samples. Development
has been limited here and it is doubtful whether the
owner has so far determined what class of ore carries
those high values,—but if rumour can be trusted Mr.
Alexander intends shortly to go in for extensive exploitation, not only on this property, but also on the
Show Down group, where there is a good showing
of cobalt bloom or erythrite. The main filling of this
vein is a copper sulphide of exceptional density. The
erythrite appears to be more or less segregated from
the other vein contents, which probably is accounted
for by a re-opening of the fissure and further depos-
tion of mineral.
On a small shaft within 100 feet of the Canadian
Pacific Railway there is about one and a half feet of
ore, from which I obtained samples and had assays of.
10 and 12 per cent, of cobalt. The copper ore from
two open cuts on this claim goes almost uniformly
25 per cent, copper per ton. That from the shaft is
not so high grade. Mr. McEvoy, late of the Geological Survey of Canada, sent a sample of erythrite
ipmi&fiBf 1*
Halcyon Clean-Cut Ledge of Copper Ore, Goat Mountain.
from this claim to the museum at Ottawa, mention of
which is made in the Geological Survey Report for
1901. Samples from this claim were among those on
exhibition at Paris, Glasgow and other Old Country
places, and met with much attention and many enquiries from cobalt refiners.
Apparently large  quantities  of it are procurable484
THE MINING RECORD.
from this source, and in the future we may have cobalt added to our resources—likewise nickel. This is
a class of ore not usually looked for, yet it exists in
the low foot-hills of Goat Mountain, though whether
in paying quantities remains to be seen. So little has
been done in the way of opening up deposits of almost
every class of mineral on this hill that no reliable idea
as to its future can yet be arrived at.
There are some good showings on the K. V., and
Hecla south of the Blenheim, which may really be
called the same ore area, while on the Nil Desperan-
dum, Stemwinder, Last Hope, and Last Chance the
veins appear to be much larger than farther north.
The last time I visited this property I measured the
by water. Steamboat communication on Kootenay
Lake is had all the year round, on Kootenay River
for nine months in the year, and is available for the
greater part of that time right up to the foot-hills.
There are a sufficient number of local smelters for
present needs. There is some talk of Pilot Bay
smelter being converted into a zinc plant. The inauguration of oil concentrating plants will have the
effect of making available deposits of ore never before
dreamt of.
We have the White Grouse country in this division
—virgin soil and a vast extent of rich country. In
some instances the ore is high-grade. Copper sulphide, bornite and copper glance form a large. pro-
Goat River Valley, Looking Towards Kitchener.
lead and it taped 22 ft. wide and no wall in sight. What
is true of the other properties is also true of this.
Without digging nothing can be ascertained definitely. It is unfortunate for the country that the
owners of this group do not go ahead with development, as their showings are exceptionally good and
the prospects for this turning out a mine are bright.
I am told by one of the owners who is quite reliable
that assays of 27 per cent, copper have been obtained
and the gold values from $12 to $37.50 per ton—in
one instance the returns from test gave $117 in gold
per ton.
One of the chief features of these low-lying claims
is their close proximity to transportation. The C. P.
R. and Nelson & Bedlington R. R. traverse the majority of them.   There is the alternative of carriage
portion. Galena is also met with. Roads have been
built by the Government by way of Kitchener via
Goat River, a distance of thirty miles, and from
Sanca near the head of Kootenay Lake. Large veins
seem to be the rule in this camp and were railroad
communication once established many prospects
could ship ore which, under present conditions, cannot be done profitably.
There is a choice of routes for a railroad, any of
which could be utilized at comparatively small cost
for this class of work. Indeed, it would be no great
surprise to see construction of a railroad commenced
at an early date to tap this rich, region. Duck Creek,
Arrow Creek, Goat Creek and numerous others have"
their quota of claims—promising, many of them,
which need only capital and development.THE MINING RECORD.
485
On Crawford Creek the Silver Hill is looking well
and shipping ore steadily at this writing. It is being
worked on the lease system by Italian labour, which
arrangement appears to be satisfactory alike to lessee
and owners. On other properties work is being systematically carried on, and it is safe to say that Crawford Creek will be quite a factor in mineral production in the course of a year or two.
On Summit Creek, which ilows into Kootenav
River near the head of Kootenay Lake, the gold excitement held all summer and many new discoveries
are recorded. During the last winter and away into
the summer Finch and Campbell had a force of men
at work on the Bayonne (the banner mine) and drove
a long tunnel besides cross-cuts a 40-foot winze, 50-
foot upraise and other work, but they failed to take
up the property, and it is now shut down. A large
dump of free-milling ore is ready to be treated, the
estimate being that there is upwards of $50,000 net
worth of ore on the dump and "in sight." I visited
this property in the latter part of August and it
looked well. The only thing in connection with the
work that struck me forcibly was that those operating the property might just as well have run their
tunnel in on a level 100 to 200 feet deeper. • The cost
would not have been greatly in excess of that already
contracted.
New locations have not much work done on them,
•the most promising that I encountered being the
Black Watch, Granite, Lone Star and Red Horse.
They easily take the first place so far as surface appearances go. I am informed that the owners had
assays of the ore of from $28 to $80 per ton in gold.
Joe Campbell, of Erie, is one of the lucky owners in
this group.
v Taken as a whole, the Summit Creek camp has
aome excellent ground and there is a vast area as yet
unexplored.   Time and money usually work wonders..
The "strike" of the season was undoubtedly made
on Shaw Creek this year. The property was first discovered in 1897 under romantic circumstances. The
original locators did a considerable amount of work
for two years and then left for the Yukon, where they
evidently perished, as they have dropped completely.
out of sight. The claims did not lapse until the sum-"
mer of 1901, when numerous parties of prospectors
at once began to search for the lost claims, which
were reputed to have the best showing in the district.
The search was again taken up with enthusiasm by
many parties this season and finally the old workings
were discovered and the ground re-located yi July.
It is evident that the original owners intended to
return and prosecute the development, as their whole
outfit of tools, cooking utensils, etc., were left on the
ground boarded up in the tunnel nearest water.
The country rock is gray granitoid rock traversed
by large dyke's of lime and quartzite. The ore occurs
in a mineralized zone which can be traced oyer the
whole length of the claims. The ledge matter presents two main characteristics, the hanging wall sida
being composed mainly of a silicious schist strongly
impregnated with iron, and the foot-wall of calcite,
the whole ledge carrying, gold values. This peculiarity would appear to indicate two different origins to
the mineralization occurring at different times, a view
sustained by the two-fold character of the ore bodies
themselves. The ore consists of pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite on tlie one hand and gold-bearing quartz on
the other, and there is also a series of mineral deposits
which apparently connect these two main classes.
• The origin of the mineralization has not yet been-,
clearly worked out, but it would appear to be due to
deposition from solutions contained in thermal waters arising from great depths along the lines of fracturing and Assuring in the mineralized zone. The
width of the lead at different surface exposures varies
from 100 to 300 feet. Parallel to this lead on the'
same ground is a second ledge which averages 150
feet in. width on the surface and which shows similar
characteristics. I understand that negotiations are
under way for the sale of this property to American
capitalists. For the good of the district it is to be
hoped that the claims fall into the hands of a strong
company, as from surface indications one is warranted in believing that we have here a rival to the great
Boundary mines.
To sum up, it is quite evident from the above that
there are many promising properties in the Goat
River Mining Division. Others could be mentioned.
as well, but I have only referred to such claims as are*
most in evidence at present or to those representative
of whole groups. The crying need of the division is
for capital, which alone can make possible the neces-
sarv development work—and to obtain the money a
- spirit of live and let live is absolutely indispensable.
The "knocker" flourishes . here exceedingly and -
through-his baneful influence many a promising prospect is lying idle. But to the strong Qf heart the
country offers many inducements. Blest with an ideal
climate the day is not far distant when a comprehensive scheme of irrigation (as of dyking now under
way) will be carried out and the river valleys will "be
standing so thick with corn that they shall laugh and
sing."
Many a mountain has-yet to be trodden by the prospector. For my. own part I feel. confident that another decade will work a marvellous- transformation,
when the valleys will be full of prosperous farmers,
when steel plants will be in full operation at Kitchener or on Lake Kootenay, and when numerous
■mountains which now re-echo but the mournful howl
of the co'vote shall be scenes of bustling activity.
THE HISTORY AND   PROGRESS  OF MINING
IN THE BOUNDARY  DISTRICT.
By. E. Jacobs.
(Continued from last month.)
THE mines mentioned last month, together   with
a great many mineral claims up©n which but
little development work has been done,   are
situate in one or other of the two raining divisions
of the district.    The Kettle River Mining Division is
the older and larger of the two; the other, the Grand486
THE MINING RECORD.
Forks Mining Division, being but the eastern portion
of what formerly was but one large division. The
office of the Gold Commissioner and Mining Recorder
for the former division is at Greenwood, with sub-
recording offices at Beaverdell, Camp McKinney and
Vernon. The office of the official holding similar
appointments for the Grand Forks division is at Grand
Forks. These divisions have within their limits subdivisions known as "camps," but since the dividing
line between the divisions is the summit of the mountain range, so that each division takes in all the
mineral claims on the watersheds of the several
streams flowing through it, it happens that in two
or three instances part of a " camp '' is in one division and the remainder in the other. It may be mentioned, by the way, that the location of Greenwood
IN KETTLE RIVER MINING DIVISION.
Old Ironsides and Knob Hill group (Granby Mines),
Greenwood Camp.
Brooklyn and Stemwinder group, Greenwood
Camp.
Mother Lode mine, Deadwood Camp.
Sunset and Crown Silver group, Deadwood Camp.
Morrison mine, Deadwood Camp.
King Solomon mine, Copper Camp.
Big Copper mine, Copper Camp.
Jewel mine, Long Lake Camp.
No. 7 mine, Central Camp.
Providence mine, Providence Camp.
Sally mine, West Fork of Kettle River.
Car mi mine, West Fork of Kettle River.
Rambler mine, West Fork of Kettle River.
B. C. Copper Co's Smelter, Greenwood, with Mother Lode and Sunset Mines on hills in background.
is not, as would naturally be expected, in the vicinity
of the town of Greenwood, but has the the more
recently established town of Phoenix as its centre.
Locally the camp has come to be called Phoenix
Camp, but officially it is still Greenwood Camp, which
latter was its official name before either town was in
existence. Greenwood town was named after the
camp and about three years later, following the opening up of neighbouring mines, Phoenix commenced to
develop from a little camp of prospectors into a mining town. These matters are mentioned for the reason that reference to Greenwood Camp might otherwise convey a misleading idea as to the exact locality
of certain mines.
The more important mines of the respective mining
divisions are as under:--
Cariboo mine, Camp McKinney.
Waterloo mine, Camp McKinney.
IN GRAND PORKS   MINING DIVISION.
Snowshoe mine, Greenwood Camp.
Gold Drop mine, Greenwood Camp.
Golden Crown mine, Wellington Camp.
Winnipeg mine, Wellington Camp.
Athelstan mine, Wellington Camp.
B. C. mine, Summit Camp.
R. Bell mine, Summit Camp.
Oro Denoro mine, Summit Camp.
Emma mine, Summit Camp.
City of Paris and Majestic group, Central Camp.
Pathfinder mine, Brown's Camp.
Golden Eagle mine, Brown's Camp.
Humming Bird mine, Brown's Camp.THE MINING RECORD.
487
As indicating the extent of territory covered by the
Kettle River Mining Division it may be mentioned
that the Cariboo mine, in the south-western part of
the division, is distant by waggon road 48 miles from
the Jewel, in the north-eastern part of the division.
Turning now to the development and equipment of
some of the larger mines, the following summary will
in a measure indicate their relative importance.
GRANBY COMPANY'S'MINES.
As having, so far as yet known, the largest ore
bodies, truly described as enormous, and as having
done more development work and shipped more ore
than any other mine or group of mines in the district,
the Granby Company's mines come first. The group
consists of the Old Ironsides, Knob Hill, Victoria,
Fourth of July, Phoenix, .-Etna, Grey Eagle, Banner,
Tip Top and Triangle fraction, all adjoining claims in
or adjacent to the town of Phoenix.    These claims
Ironsides and Victoria, as the writer can testify from
personal.observation, having, when underground in
these mines in 1900, walked around three blocks of
ore each not less than an acre in area. Nothing short
of seeing for themselves suffices to overcome the incredulity of most people as to the immense proportions of the ore bodies occurring here, and exposed
both in the underground workings and in the big
open quarries. So large are these that no difficulty
is experienced in maintaining a minimum daily output
of 1,500 tons of ore for treatment at the company's
smelter, whilst additions to plant and equipment are
being made to provide for an output up to 5,000 tons
per diem whenever the available treatment capacity
shall have reached that tonnage.
The aggregate footage of development work done
on the Granby mines to the end of 1902 was 16,359
lineal  feet—more than three  miles—of which 3,013
s    "       '
"Sfes-fcBOTasj!
3^B*^-
*^'-^-ws£--<saM"»w«,*sss;S5fc3
General View of the Snowshow Mine, Boundary District.
Co.
and
Old
were acquired from the four companies which were
consolidated into the present Granby Consolidated
Mining, Smelting & Power Company, Ltd., viz., the
Old Ironsides Mining Co., Knob Hill Gold Mining
Granby Consolidated Mining & Smelting L-o.
the Grey Eagle Mining Company. The
Ironsides and Knob Hill claims were both
located on July 25th, 1891, and they are the oldest
mineral locations in Greenwood Camp. But little
underground work was done on the Old Ironsides
prior to 1897, but in that year development was actively entered upon, and a steam hoisting engine,
which much facilitated mining operations, was installed. From that time on the opening up of the
enormous ore bodies occurring on this group 01
claims has steadily proceeded until to-day the showing of ore exposed in the extensive workings ot these
mines is simply marvellous. It is a literal fact that
"acres of ore"haye been blocked out in the Old
feet was in sinking and raising and 13,346 feet in
cross-cutting and drifting. These figures show the
number of feet done in underground development
work proper, but leave entirely out of account the
numerous large drifts and raises in the huge ore
bodies preparatory to opening out the big stopes characteristic of these mines, which are being worked
down to the 300-foot level. One shaft on the property is 400 feet in depth, but no levels have yet been
run below 300 feet depth. Rising ground on the
Knob Hill makes the 300-foot level of the Old Ironsides about 550 feet, vertical depth, below the apex or
outcrop of ore on the Knob Hill, with the ore body
proved to be continuous from the summit of the
mountain on the Knob Hill through the Old Ironsides
to other claims beyond, also owned by the Granby
Company. The use of the diamond drill has shown
that the ore continues down to a depth of at least 1,000
feet.488
THE MINING RECORD.
The system of ore quarrying followed here constitutes one of the most remarkable features of mining
seen in the district. On the north side of the hill ou
which the mines are situate workings have been opened at half a dozen points along a distance of about
1,000 feet in a body of ore known to have a length of
fully 3,000 feet on the company's ground. The removal of the surface debris has exposed ore for a width
of about 400 feet. Three big open quarries are being
worked at different levels. The top one was the first
opened and its output of ore consequently has been by
far the largest. It has an ore face about 80 feet high,
and large raises from the Knob Hill main tunnel below serve as chutes down which the ore is thrown to
be trammed thence to ore bins above the main shipping track of this mine. The middle quarry is on the
same level as the main tunnel, 84 feet vertical depth
below the floor of the top one. The lowest quarry is
about 50 feet lower down still, so that when it shall
have been carried back far enough to be immediately
under the apex of the ore body it will have an ore
breast, as proved by tunnel and raise, of more than 200
Hauling Ore at the Mother Lode Mine.
feet vertical depth. Railway tracks run into the two
lower quarries, so that the ore broken down in them
can be loaded direct on to the railway cars and thus
obviate further handling until it reaches the smelter.
No. 2 tunnel connects with the 100-ft. level—that is
100 feet below the main tunnel—of the Knob Hill,
and this provides another outlet for ore from the lowest quarry by means of chutes, whence it is trammed
to ore bins placed above the main shipping tracks of
the Old Ironsides. A third tunnel, started still lower down the hillside, will eventually be extended to
connect with the 100-ft. level of the Old Ironsides and
the 200-ft. level of the Knob Hill.
The machinery and plant installed at these mines
some time ago includes 2 80 h.p. steam boilers, io-drill
duplex Rand air compressor, air receivers, etc., on the
Knob Hill, and a similar plant on the Old Ironsides.
Each of three shafts on the Old Ironsides and Victoria
is provided with a steam hoisting engine. A timber-
framing machine driven by a 45 h.p. steam engine, an
electric light engine and dynamo, steam pumps and
much other plant and machinery are also included in
the power equipment of these mines. An ore-crusher
with jaws opening 42 in. by 32 in. to crush rock to
not larger than 7 in. or 8 in. at a rate of 150 tons per
hour, and a 100 h.p. electric induction motor to drive
same, also a 2,000 ft. gravity tramway from the top
quarry to crusher, with 3-wheel brake system head-
works, were recently put in and are now in operation.
Two tandem compound Rand air compressors, together rated at 60 3% in. machine drills, and two 700h.p.
electric induction motors for motive power, are being
installed. '1 he equipment of the machine shop on the
mines is also being largely added to, so as to provide
it with modern improved appliances.
Prominent among the mine buildings are large bunk
and boarding houses for the accommodation of employes, with a number of comfortable cottages for men
having their families with them. The several buildings for housing plant and machinery are roomy and
substantially built. Ore bins give storage capacity for
a large quantity of ore, and railway trackage about
the mines is comparatively extensive. From the time
ore shipping was commenced in July, 1900, to the close
of 1902, the output of ore aggregated 606,151 tons, of
which about 310,000 tons were produced in 1902. All
this ore was treated at the company's smelter at Grand
Forks. When shipping 1,500 tons a day these mines
employ about 425 men. The Mine Superintendent,
Mr. Wm. Yolen Williams, has been in charge for nearly six years, during which period he has developed
the property from mere prospects "into the most important and productive group of mines in the Boundary District and one of the largest copper-producers in
Canada.
- THE  MOTHER   LODE.
The Mother Lode, situate in Deadwood camp, about
three miles west of the town of Greenwood, was located on May 28, 1891. In 1896 it was bonded by Col.
John Weir for himself and several other New York
mining men, who in that year formed the Boundary
Mines Company to develop the claim. About March
of 189S the British Columbia Copper Co., Limited, was
organized in New York, to acquire and work the
Mother Lode and several adjoining claims. The
group now owned by the Company consists of the
Mother Lode, Offspring, Primrose, Ten Broeck and
Don Julio and Sunflower mineral claims.
When Mr. Frederic Keffer, M.E , took charge of the
Mother Lode in 1896 there was not a  prospect shaft
or a tunnel 25 feet in depth or length on  the claim.
To-day the development work  totals between 7,000
and 8,000 lineal feet, besides which big stopes underground and  quarries at the surface represent much
productive work.    The lode  occurring here is large,
its surface width varying from 80 to 160 feet.    It has
been cut in trenches along a distance of about   1,100
feet north from the main shaft to where it  disappears
under heavy drift, while a big surface  exposure, on
the Primrose, about 700 feet in an opposite  direction,
indicates its continuity south as well.    The main shaft
is down 325 feet,   and long .levels have been run at
both 200 and 300 ft. depth.    The ore body as opened
at the 200 ft. level has a width varying from 80 to 100
feet, and cross-cuts show  it  to  be continuous at this
level  for at least  350  feet.    At the 300 ft- level the
workings are not yet so large, but as far as they have
gone they have proved the ore body  to  maintain  its
large proportions.    A second shoot of ore, i8|to 20 ft.
in width, was met with at the 300 ft. level and followed for 200 ft. without its dipping out of the level.   TheTHE MINING RECORD.
489
"pillar and stope" system of mining the Ore underground, as here adopted in 1901, was fully described
and illustrated in the April, 1902, issue of the Mining
Record. Most of the exploratory work done underground has been done north of the main shaft, which
is situate about the centre of the claim, so that little is
known of the-conditions as regards the occurrence of
ore south of the shaft. Underground work was suspended last spring, the opening up of big surface
quarries in ore having made it practicle to maintain a
sufficiently large production to supply the company's
smelter at Greenwood with plenty of ore to keep its
two furnaces running continuously.
The main quarry is well up the side of the Mother
Lode hill. Two other openings were made at lower
levels, big tunnels having been driven under No. 1
quarry and connections made by means of wide raises;
these serving as chutes down which the ore is thrown
to No. 3, from which a double-track tramway, with
three-ton ore cars drawn by mules, conveys the ore to
a Farrel rock crusher. During recent months two
quarries were opened higher up the hill in ore containing more sulphur, and the ore from these is either shot
down more than 200 feet to the mule tunnel or run
down a gravity tramway to another crusher above a
diffierent set of ore bins. All the ore is crushed at
the mine before being shipped to the smelter, a saving
being^ thereby effected, the ore going direct into the
smelter mixture bins instead of having to be first
passed through the smelter sample mill crusher with
the attendant expense of this further handling. The
mine shipped 5,564 tons of ore in the latter part of
1900; 99,548 tons in 1901, and 136,657 tons in 1902,
making an aggregate of 241,769 tons. When there
is no shortage of coke or other difficulty in the way
of both furnaces being kept in blast at the smelter,
the daily output of the mine is about 800 tons. The
Mother Lode was the first mine in the district to have
a power plant equal to doing much underground work.
In 1898 a ten-drill straight line air compressor, two
60-h.p. boilers, hoisting engines, etc., and electric
light plant, were hauled in from Marcus, then the
nearest railway point, at a cost for hauling alone of
about $3,000. In 1901 a 40-drill cross-compound
condensing Ingersoll-Sergeant air compressor, with
two 100-h.p. boilers; a big double cylinder, first-motion Jenckes hoisting engine, with two 80-h.p. boilers;
a Robins ore-sorting and conveying plant; a No. 5
Gates rock crusher, with a 70-h.p. steam engine to
run it; a full equipment of tools for a machine shop,
and other plant were added. Last year a 24x36 inch
Farrel improved crusher, to crush 65 to 80 tons of rock
per hour to a size not exceeding five inches; a Jeffrey
elevating machine with a chain of 20 inch by 9 inch
by 12 inch buckets, to lift the crushed ore to ore bins
over the railway track; a plain slide-valve engine, to
run crusher and elevator; a 250-light Westitighouse
dynamo, with 25-h.p. engine, and other machinery,
to bring mine equipment up to the requirements of an
increased ore output, were installed. The mine buildings are commodious and those for the accommodation
of the men are comfortable. The ore bins have a total
holding capacity of about 3,000 tons, and the railway
facilities are sufficient for handling much larger quantities of ore than are at present produced. During
construction work periods and when underground
mining was in progress up to 150 men were on the
payroll, but not more than half that number are now
regularly employed in getting out ore and incidental
work.    Mr. Keffer is still in charge of the mine, he
being the company's general manager.
THE SNOWSHOE.
The Snowshoe group, owned by the Snowshoe Gold
& Copper Mines, Ltd., of London, England, and
situate in Greenwood Camp, comprises the SnOwshoe
mine and the Pheasant, Alma Fraction and Fairplay
Fraction mineral claims. The Snowshoe was purchased by the British Columbia (Rossland & Slocan)
Syndicate, Ltd., in 1899, and after that company had
spent about $130,000 in development work and in
machinery, plant and buildings, the Snowshoe Company was organized in London in June of 1901 to
acquire and operate the group. Development work
done to the end of 1902 totals 6,440 lineal feet, nearly
2,000 being sinking and raising and the remainder
cross-cutting and drifting. The earlier work was
done in the eastern part of the Snowshoe. It consisted of an incline shaft, sunk 200 feet, with levels at
100 and 200 feet depth, respectively. On the former
level some 520 feet and on the latter about 740 feet of
cross-cutting and drifting were done, and two raises
were made from the 100-foot level to the surface.
Much of this work was in ore, which dips easterly
into the other claims owned by the company.
Later workings, in the western part of the claim,
have opened up a big body of ore, which is now being
mined by quarrying as at the mines above described.
The Phoenix branch of the C. P. R. company's Columbia & Western Railway crosses the Snowshoe.
Below the railway, in the southern part of the claim,
a tunnel, known as No. 1 level, has been run westward 677 feet into the hill, which rises rapidly to the
western boundary of the property. For about 300
feet, excepting where a 25-foot dyke of waste crossed
it; the tunnel was continuously in ore, apparently a
parallel body to that in which the old shaft was sunk.
Beyond this the tunnel was run about 477 feet, exploring for other ore bodies. Some 730 feet of crosscuts and drifts, mostly in ore, were run on this level.
A raise 150 feet to the surface was also in ore most of
the way, and a winze, sunk 100 feet was in ore for 40
feet, and the ore shoot was again encountered in a
250-foot cross-cut from the bottom of the winze, which
was in ore for 170 feet before the wall was met with.
Altogether 660 feet of cross-cutting and drifting have
been done on this No. 2 level, and a raise in ore 140
feet on the incline makes a second connection with
No. 1. level. The ground has been explored below
No. 2' level with a diamond drill, with fatisfactory
results. During 1902 a large main working shaft was
sunk 300 feet, connecting with levels Nos. 1 and 2.
After removal of the surface debris from a comparatively large area of ground above No. 1 level, quarries
were opened and drifts were run under them. Chutes
were made at convenient intervals, and through these
the ore is drawn and trammed direct to ore bins above
the railway. It is calculated that these big open cuts
will go back about 120 feet before reaching the western limit of the ore, and that a maximum face of
about 60 feet in depth to floor of quarries will be obtained. A railway spur lately put in below the
mouth of tunnel on No. 1 level gives shipping facilities that will admit of a much deeper face of ore being
cut when quarrying operations shall have been carried
down to'that depth. Prior to 1902 only 2,028 tons of
ore were shipped, but towards the close of that year
the output was materially increased, so that the total490
THE MINING RECORD.
tonnage for the year was 20,800 tons, making the aggregate 22,828 tons.
The power plant installed at the mine in 1900-1 included two steam boilers, two air compressors together
rated at about twelve drills, machine drills, hoisting
engine at the shaft and an auxiliary engine in No. 1
tunnel, steam pumps, etc. Last year the high pressure half of a 30-drill Rand-Corliss air compressor, two
80-h.p. high pressure boilers and an electric lighting
plant were added, and a 150-h.p. electric hoist was
ordered. This hoist will shortly be in operation.
Meanwhile headworks over the main shaft are in course
of construction. The mine buildings include bunk
and boarding houses, offices, residences for superintendent and foreman, new compressor and boiler
buildings, hoist house, etc., and ore bins with a holding capacity of 2,500 tons are about completed.
Some 2,000 feet of railway tracks afford accommodation for shipping. The transmission lines of the Cascade Power Company cross the property, so that
when electric power for operating the air compressor
hoist shall be required it will be right at hand. The
average number of men employed is 44, but at times
nearly double this number have been on the payrolL
Mr. J. W. Astley, C.E., is the company's superintendent, resident on the mine. The Snowshoe has been
brought to its present stage of development under his
direction. Mr. Anthony J. McMillan is managing
director, and Mr. Geo. S. Waterlow, another director,
is one of the best friends the district has in England,
since he loses no opportunity to express his confidence
in the eventual profitableness of legitimate mining in
the Boundary.
MINING IN THE COWICHAN DISTRICT.
D
(From our own  Correspondent.)
EVELOPMENTS in the Mount Sicker last year
were of a very extensive character.
TYEE MINE.
The main shaft is now down to the 4oo-ft- level and
crosscutting has been started, to intersect the lode.
The main ore body has been opened up along a length
of 800 feet, all in ore and is now in fine shape for
winning 150 tons of ore per day.
The stopes range in width from 15 feet to 40 feet of
solid ore and the further the various levels are driven
into the mountain, the richer the ore becomes.
The following machinery is installed at the mine:—
Four boilers, viz.—1 of 60 h.p., 2 each of 50 h.p., 1 of
20 h p. A double drum hoist by Joshua Hendy, of
San Francisco, capable of hoisting from a depth of 800
feet, and one smaller hoist by the same firm. Two
compressors by the Ingersoll-Sergeant Co., viz.—1 of
5 drills and 1 of 3 drills. A Gates crusher, engine and
belt conveyor, for crushing and sorting the ore preparatory to shipping to the smelter. Also a well equipped
saw mill.
The Ribbet tram, which conveys the ore to the E.'
6 N. Railway at Stratford's Crossing is running very
well indeed and has now taken down over 8,000 tons
of ore to the Tyee Company's Smelter  at Ladysmith.
The Tyee Company's Smelter at Ladysmith, which
was blown in on the 16th December, is running continuously and smelting at the rate of 4,500 tons of ore
per month. Mr. Kiddie, the smelter, manager, has
managed  every  detail   with   a   view  to   the   most
economic handling of the product of the mine, and
from the time the ore leaves the mine until the matte
comes from the furnace, it is only handled twice by
hand. The work that the Tyee Company commenced
nearly four years ago has thus been brought to a most
successful conclusion.
With ore reserves to the present developments at
the mine sufficient to keep the smelter running continuously for the next three years and with every
facility for marketing the product of this ore to the
best advantage, this company has the highest prospects before it, of giving the shareholders large returns
for the labour and money expended, j which latter
amounts to over $400,000 in hard cash.
RICHARD   III.
A two compartment shaft is being sunk on the footwall of the lode. This shaft is now down 150 feet and
is following a heavy gouge matter, full of bright yellow
ore.
This is the typical ore of the Tyee and Lenora mines
and proves beyond a doubt that the ore bearing zone
is continuous to the " Richard III." and that a solid
ore body is within easy reach. This not only points
to the possibility of the '' Richard III," making a good
mine, but doubles the values of the ore reserves in
the "Tyee."
KEY  CITY.
The shaft is down 300 feet and crosscutting at that
level will soon commence.
COPPER  CANYON
A compressor, boiler and hoist have been taken on
to the ground and I believe will be put in operation
early in the year.
The other work done on a large number of claims
scattered over Mount Sicker and Monnt Brenton
amounts to very little, being just sufficient assessment
work to hold the claims. Various reports of strikes
etc., have been made from time to time, but the work
done has not been of such a character as to prove continuity and values, and the owners of these claims are
evidently waiting for "something to turn up," in increased values for properties, resulting from the
successful working" of the very few mines really
operating on a large scale.
At Cowichan Lake and the upper waters of the
Chemainus River fairly heavy development work has
been done, but in neither case has the presence of ore
bodies of commercial value been proved to exist.
On Molohat Mountain, near Shawnigan Lake, the
usual development work has been done on some twenty
claims. The surface ore showings on this Mountain
consist of pyrohtite and magnetite and are very large.
They occur in a lime contact and carrying as they do
some values in copper and occasionally very good gold,
they are well worthy of exploitation on a large scale.
The work up to the present time is scattered all over
the mountain side, which is a pity, as if concentrated
it might possibly have opened up a really good mining
camp, as the whole country along the line of contact
contains large out-crops of ore.
Some good samples of iron ore, also quartz and copper pyrites, have been brought in by prospectors from
the new trail at Ladysmith. No work however, has
as yet been done on these claims.
A development company has recently been formed
in London, England, for the purpose of opening up
mineral claims on this Island and the adjacent coast.THE MINING RECORD.
491
It is called the "Vancouver Island Minin°- and Development Co., Limited, with a capital of ^50,000 in
50,000 shares of one pound each. The registered
offices are at Duncans, Vancouver Island, B. C. and
Clermont Livingston is the general manager and local
director.
COMPARISON OF COSTS OF COMPRESSING
AIR WITH STEAM AND ELECTRICITY
AT ROSSLAND, B.C.*
(By William Thompson, Rossland, B. C.)
COMPRESSED air has become so generally used
in connection with mining operations, and so
well recognized as the most useful and economic power, with its unlimited range of uses, and .
special adaptability to underground work, that an
introductory to this paper on the subject would be
superfluous to mining engineers.
The comparative economy of prime movers for air
compressing engines is, however, of great interest to
all, and a subject on which any engineer can read with
interest. This is particularly the case with engineers
practising in British Columbia, where a large number
of the mining problems include the extraction and
reduction of large bodies of low-grade ores and the
consequent necessity for a thorough study of economical methods for mechanical handling.
The general mobility of compressed air as a power
allows a wide range of generators, or prime movers,,
but we can, in nearly all cases rely upon having to
adopt primarily, one of two sources of power, viz.,
water or heat.
Water, the first of these can, as we know, be used
in many ways, each terminating finally at the mine,
as compressed air ready for service. The initial water
power may come from one or more sources situate
either at the mines or many miles distant, and can
be used either as a directly 'connected unit of power
for the compression of air, or as a prime mover for
some intermediary power.
British Columbia has been fortunately blessed with
magnificent water power, more particularly in the
Kootenays. In many cases these water powers are
situated close to the mines; in others, as at Rossland, they are several miles away.
Distances over which power can be economically
transmitted by electricity are yearly becoming
greater, until it seems that distance is no longer an
obstacle, and it has become simply a question of
capital investment to successfully transmit the power
generated by water almost any distance.
Heat, the second great source of power for the
generation of compressed air, has been successfully
used as steam for many years, even in places which
seemed to be uterly inaccessible either for the erection of the necessary machinery, or the securing ot
fuel after the machinery had been installed and made
ready for operation. So accustomed have we become,
to surmounting difficulties of this kind, that we are
apt to look with suspicion upon any suggestion to
utilize distant water powers, preferring to resort to
steam as being the power we best understand, and
one which has been successfully installed and econ
omically operated under very adverse circumstances.
British Columbia has been abundantly provided
with fuel, in fact, we can say the supply of coal is
practically unlimited. Enterprising capitalists, year
after year, extend railways between the coal fields
and the consumers, so that no producing or promis
ing mimng district has long- t
nig 10 wait for an unlimited
managers would otherwise be
*From a paper re
ad before the Canadian Mining Institute, Nelson meeting.
supply of this fuel. The mines at Rossland are exceptionally favoured in this respect, all the leading
mines having access to two lines of railways, and
through them, the coal fields of both British Columbia and the State of Washington.
Rossland is also favoured by having the immense
water power at Bonnington. Falls, less than 40 miles
distant, immediately available. The enterprise of Sir
Charles Ross and associates in the West Kootenay
Power and Light Co. have rendered this available for
any service at each mine, as a competitor of the steam
power, which mine
compelled to adopt.
The question of the selection of power supply to be made by mine managers at Rossland is almost entirely removed from chance,
and may be based on ascertained facts. Railways ■
being at hand for the transportation of any kind of
machinery, reasonably cheap fuel in quanities required is assured, and electric power for any size machinery or service is available. Therefore the problem
simply resolves itself into "Which of these powers
will give the best service in operating the machinery
used in connection with mining operations?"
The same privilege applies to nearly every other
mining district in Southern British Columbia; therefore, the writer feels that the results obtained in the
air compressing plants at Rossland will be of special
interest to the members of the British Columbia section of the Canadian Mining Institute, and mining
engineers.
The steam and electric plants described below were
modelled on the design and erected under the personal supervision of Mr. Bernard Macdonald, then
general manager of the Le Roi and Nickel Plate
mines, assisted by the writer. The steam plant was
erected for. the Le Roi Mining Company, Limited,
and consists of the following, viz.:
Boiler Plants.—Two 250 horse-power Heine safety water tube boilers, arranged to burn coal as fuel.
These were intended to generate steam to run the air
compressors, and were set so as to work, if desirable,
in connection with the nine 125 horse-power steel
shell return tubular boilers, designed to operate the
haisting and surface plants. These boilers are
arranged to be interchangeable to either service. A
general description of this plant will be found in volume V, page 309, of the Journal of the Canadian
Mining Institute.
During the test, the water-tube boilers were used
at a gauge pressure of 150 pounds per square inch,
using Crow's Nest coal as fuel, which cost, laid down
in frOnt of the boilers, $5.50 per ton of 200 pounds.
Air Compressing Plant.—The steam driven plant
consisted of two compound condensing Corliss valve
engines, direct connected to two stage air cylinders,
equipped with intermediate cooling devices, each
machine having a rated capacity of 4,000 cubic feet
of free air per minute, or a combined capacity of 8,000
cubic feet of free air per minute at sea level.492
THE MINING RECORD.
No. i
No. |
Engine.
Engine
inches.
Inches.
22
22
36
36
22
22
36
38
48
48
A more detailed description of these engines would
be as follows:
Diameter, high pressure steam cylinder.
Diameter, low pressure steam cylinder .
Diameter, high pressure air cylinder ...
Diameter, low pressure air cylinder ...
Length of stroke  	
The Electrically Driven Air Compressing Plant.—
This plant was erected by the Rossland Great Western Mines, Limited, and was originaly intended to be
operated in connection with the steam plant previously described, the intention being to supply power
from a central station to four mines, owned by different companies. The arrangement would have given
each mine power at the lowest possible cost, and have
ensured continuous operations by reason of the compressing plant being arranged in separate units.
Each company would pay its share of operation,
maintenance, of plant, pro rata to its consumption
of air.
When it was found necessary to erect the third
unit to the compressing plant, unforeseen difficulties
presented themselves in the shape of shortage of
water for condensing and cooling purposes. On
examination it was found that a satisfactory supply
could not be secured without heavy capital expenditures for erection of flumes, etc., to convey the water
to where it was required for use.
It was, however, found that a supply of water,
barely sufficient for the intercoolers and waterjackets,
was available about three-fourths of a mile distant
from the steam plant. This supply was so located,
located at this distance away from the main steam
plant. By conserving this water supply, cooling and
re-using, it was decided a sufficient supply of water
for the air cylinder jackets and intercoolers could be
secured.
The results obtained from the steam plant had
proven so satisfactory, that it was considered questionable if any electric plant could be installed that
could successfully compete with steam, even when
running non-condensing, unless very favourable
rates for power could be secured. After negotiations
with the Power Company, it was decided to erect an
electrically driven plant, a short description of -which
is as follows:
Electrical Equipment.—Three phase, S.K.C., synchronous motor, designed for 2,200 volts, with
rated capacity of 660 kilo watts, equivalent' to about
825 horse-power. The motor is provided with a separate starting motor, mounted on the main frame,
exciter and Italian marble switch-board, on which
all operating switches and instruments are mounted.
There is a 50-inch Frisbee clutch set intermediate
between the driving pulley and the motor. The
motor is of a four bearing type, fitted with self-aligning" and self-oiling sleeves. The entire machine is
mounted upon a solid cast iron base set upon massive
concrete foundations. The driving pulley is 60 inches
in diameter, grooved for 22 1/2 in. ropes, and runs at
270 revolutions per minute.
The three compressors were built by the Canadian
Rand Drill Company, of Sherbrooke, Quebec, and
are especially designed for constant service.
The electrical equipment is also entirely of Canadian manufacture, the entire apparatus being manu
factured by the Royal Electric Company, of Montreal, who are the Canadian manufacturers of the
S.K.C. apparatus.
All tests were conducted under the personal supervision of the writer, and extreme care was taken
to arrive at actual facts. Indicator diagrams were
taken off both the steam and air cylinders every half-
hour, and the results tabulated. Coal consumed was
weighed, and all other supplies, such as waste, oil,
etc., charged as used.
Readings were also taken and recorded by means
of a delicately adjusted kilo watt metre, connected to
the primary mains, of the amount of electric power
used. The test extended over a period of thirty days,,
without interruption, both plants being run undGS*1-
exactly similar conditions as to.air pressure.
Each of the plants tested being modern and representative of their respective types, gave an opportunity for a comparative test that rarely falls to the
lot of an individual engineer under such favourable
conditions, as to work being performed, and for this
reason is the more valuable as data for basing calculations as to problems of power.
The average results of the thirty days' test is rerecorded in Tables I, II, III, IV, and V following:—
TABLE I.
Work Performed by Steam Plant.
Average indicated horse power at steam cylinders of
the combined machines   (h- p.) 730
Free air compressed per minute from atmospheric
pressure to 95 ft>s. per square inch (cubic ft)      5,432
Free air compressed per hour  325,920
Average horse-power required at steam cylinders to
compress 100 cubic feet of air per minute, to gauge
pressure    (h.p.) 13.4
Pounds of coal consumed during test   (fbs.) 1,038,000
Pounds of coal consumed per dav of 24 hours 36,400
Average pounds of coal consumed per horse-power
per hour during test  (lbs.) 1.9
TABLE II.
Work Performed by Electric Plant.
Average horsepower registered at switchboard (h.p.) 540'
Free air compressed pec, minute from atmospheric
pressure to 95 pounds gauge pressure. . (cubic ft.)       3*319
Free air compressed- per hour  199 140
Average horsepower required at motor to compress
100 cubic feet of free air per minute to 95 tbs. gauge
pressure        (h.p.) 16.3
TABLE III.
Cost of Operating Steam Plant.
Total cost of fuel consumed during test . .$2,880 45
wages  for  employees         710 00
oils, waste, etc      14730
for 30 days, exclusive of
maintenance and depreciation     $3-737 75
Cost per horse-power per month for fuel..       3 96
oil,  etc.       o 20
wages..       o 97
r    , u   $5 15
Cost per horse-power per annum         $61 56
Cost for each 100,000 cu. ft. of free air compressed t 56
Cost per drill shift  t 2c
Note—80,000 cubic feet taken as the average consumption
per shift of one 354 inch drill.THE MINING RECORD.
493
TABLE IV.
Cost of Operating Electric Plant.
Cost of current for thirty days    $1744 26.
employees' wages        270 00
g'    oils, waste, etc         73 00
Total cost for 30 days, exclusive of maintenance
and depreciation  $2,087 86
Average cost per horse-power per month  3 87
Average cost per horse-power per annum  46 44
Cost for each 100,000 cubic feet of air compressed 1 46
Cost per drill shift   1 17
Note—80,000 cubic feet taken as the average consumption
per shift of one zYa inch drill..
TABLE V.
Showing  Comparative  Results between the Two Types of
Compressors, based on each 100,000 • cubic feet of air
compressed from Atmospheric Pressure to 95
pounds Receiver Pressure.
Cost for each 100,000 cubic ft. of free air compressed
by steam plant (see Table III)       $1 56
Cost for each 100,000 cubic ft. erf free air compressed
by electric plant (see Table IV) :         1 46
Result, saving by electricity over steam 6-4 per cent.
The saving shown in Table V would be
affected adversely if the electric plant was
operated singly and the entire air compressed was
not used. For the reason that- electrically driven
compressors must be operated at constant speed, and
loss of air at safety valve would be considerably increased over the same loss at steam plant, which
could be run at the speed required to compress the
amount of air actually required. This loss would,
however, be slightly offset by the increased cost per
horsepower by working the steam compressors on
underload.
I wish to draw special attention to the noteworthy
results obtained from the system of intercooling used
on the compressors tested.
In Table I, it is shown that the steam plant required
13.4 horse-power to compress 100 cubic feet of air
to 85 pounds gauge pressure per minute. The best
power factor recorded that has come under the
writer's notice, for doing the same amount of work
by a two-stage compressor, is 14.5 horse-power,
which shows a .saving of 8 per cent, resulting from
the use of specially designated intercoolers, for which
the manufacturers are entitled to receive the credit.
How this result is obtained can be best understood
by reproducing the average of a number of tests
made on the efficiency of the intercooler during the
progress of the power test. The results of the tests
are shown in Table VI.
TABLE VI.
Temperature of cooling water at inlet of intercooler.. 42°F.
Temperature of cooling water at outlet of intercooler 50 e.
Rise in temperature of cooling water while passing
through intercooler   •• • ■ • •     "    •
Temperature of air at outlet of low pressure cylinder
and before passing through intercooler   .'",'■'  I9
Temperature of air at inlet of high pressure cylinder
after passing through intercooler • • •    54 »'■
Reduction in temperature of air after passing through
intercooler    1^2
In conclusion, permit me to state that this paper
has not been prepared with the idea of recording the
performance of these two plants, except, .in so far as
comparisons can be drawn between the relative efficiency of the two systems, so that engineers, knowing
local conditions, can have some record of actual performance before them,
PATENT OFFICE REPORT,
WE are indebted to Mr. Rowland Brittain, of Vancouver, for the following list of patents issued
to British Columbia inventors during the past
month ;—
E. A. Marshall, Vancouver, a United States patent
on his improved jar seal, which has now received a
lengthy trial of shipment to the Eastern States, Great
Britain and Australia, and in every case his specialty
of potted fish and meats has been reported on as having been received and kept in good condition. A
Canadian patent has just been issued to G. A. Roedde,
the well-known bookbinder of Vancouver, on an improved loose leaf binder, which is designed to be
applicable to books of special form or size. Heretofore such have had to be specially made at the factory
when required, while Mr. Roedde's securing clasp can
be applied by any practical bookbinder. George
Cassady, Vancouver, a Canadian patent on a sash lifter
designed to overcome the difficulty commonly experienced in opening and closing the top sash of an ordinary window. The device, which is entirely supplementary to the ordinary sash weights, consists of a
small reel secured to the centre of the sash frame and
having wound on it a cord, the off end of which is
secured to the top rail of the upper sash and continued down to afford a means for pulling the upper
sash open. The reel is provided with a spring, the
tendency of which is to pull the sash shut, and is controlled by a gravity pawl of that class that will only
fall into engagement while the reel is at rest or rotating slowly, and will fall out of engagement when the
sash is pulled down. H. Condren, Vancouver, a Canadian patent on a body indicating buoy. This consists of an inflated chamber forming part of an ordinary hat or cap, and connected by a light line to the
person of the wearer, the line being coiled within the
cap. It is intended to be worn by anyone exposed to
the risk of drowning, while either boating, bathing or
skating and on the person being submerged the cap
will float and the line being attached to the body, will
afford a ready means of rescue. If help should not be
forthcoming and the wearer drowns, the cap indicates
the locality of the body and enables it to be quickly
recovered.
MINING. PATENTS.
A Canadian patent on a method of desulphurising
coal, granted to Oscar Daube, of New York. Patent
No. 78,080. Claim : The method of carbonizing
organic material or material of organic origin, which
consists in subjecting the material to be carbonized to
a preliminary fusing blast, and then to a carbonizing
blast as described and for the purpose set forth. This
patent is covered by nine claims, which can be obtained by application to the Patent Office.
To John Morrisett, Vancouver, on an ingenious
improvement on a steam engine piston, whereby the
weight of a heavy piston is centrally sustained in the494
THE MINING RECORD.
bore of the cylinder, and undue wear of piston and
glands thereby avoided.
Apparatus for separating mercury from amalgam,
granted to T. H. Hicks, of Fort Wayne, Ind. Claim:
In a rotable vessel, a cylindrical chamber and an annular chamber, each adapted to contain mercury and
both arranged concentrically to the axis of said vessel 's revolution and connected only by one or more
joints so closely fitted as to prevent the passage of
mercury therethrough, except under pressure.
iS^aBS^^^^^W
warn
KJ
Gold recovering process.—T. H. Hicks, Fort
Wayne. Claim : The process of recovering gold as
amalgam from pulverized sulphides (commonly called
concentrates) which consists in subjecting such sulphides when dry to the action of heat and of hot
mercury vapour as shown in the specification, and
then collecting the freed gold whether in particles of
amalgam or not by any effective liquid mercury
amalgamating or mercury massing apparatus.
MINING PROGRESS AT ROSSLAND.
(From our own Correepondent.)
THE situation in Rossland remains unchanged
from last month. The LeRoi is still shipping
the usual quantity of ore, but arrangements are
being made to bring up the output of 18,000 to 20,000
tons monthly, the increase being rendered possible by
the larger amount of coke said to be available at the
Northport smelter. The more furnaces that are running the cheaper the ore can be treated and, indeed,
the manager, Mr. Mackenzie, is responsible for the
statement that with all six furnaces going in the
spring, upon the completion of the coke ovens at Morrissey, smelting can be accomplished at $3 per ton,
rendering $8 ore profitable. This will mean a large
augmentation of output. Mr. Mackenzie is leaving
the mine at the end of the current month, and it will
in future have no general manager, but one of the
directors, Mr. Anthony J. McMillan, who is appointed
managing director, will reside here and will conduct
the affairs of the mine with a superintendent here and
another at Northport. How this experiment will work
yet remains to be seen. The present Superintendent,
Mr. Roscoe R. Leslie, is said to be a capable mining
man though young in years and necessarily so in experience. With smelting as cheap as is anticipated it
is unlikely that the mine will immediately go in for
concentration until the perfection of the experiments
now being carried on in Rossland shows that not too
large a percentage of the values is lost in the process.
It is also likely that if concentration is carried out
later on that the mill will be erected outside of Rossland if proper arrangements can be made with the rail
ways. The most likely site to be selected is on Sheep
Creek, over the boundary line, on the way to North-
port, where below the falls there are some ideal sites
where operations can be carried on by gravity. The
question of concentration in Rossland itself is rendered
difficult by the apparent lack of water, which, by the
way, is more apparent than real if the city could be
persuaded to undertake the bringing of it in on a large
scale.
The War Eagle and Centre Star are shipping as
usual and as yet no move has been made with regard
to the erection of the concentrator. The experiments
are perfected and the erection of a plant will - probably
come with the settlement of the water suits which are
now pending at the Coast before the Supreme Court
between the city and these mines. The disposition of
the tailings is also another matter which needs some
arrangement with the city if the mill be built close at
hand.
In this connection it may be stated that the Elmore
Process Company, which has been conducting a series
of experiments on what is practically a laboratory
basis, have made up their minds to erect a custom
plant in the camp and treat ores given to them on a
commercial scale. Most of the big mines on the hill
have had samples of their ore treated locally by these
people. The mill of the Centre Star and War Eagle
is understood to be the usual water concentration type
ending up with cyanidization. It is not improbable,
however, that the tailings will be treated by the Elmore process.
The LeRoi No. 2 is now again on the shipping list
after a close down which lasted for over a couple of
months. The mine is reported to. be in good shape.
It is not likely, however, that the present manage^
ment is anything else but temporary.
The Kootenay has commenced shipping in small
quantities to Trail, which is inaugurating a series of
experiments in treating this heavy iron ore on a py-
ritic basis and it is likely that the reduction works will
be able to take some 300 tons daily and treat the same
at about $2.50 per ton, direct charges. If the indirect
charges do not amount to much it is probable that the
management will not proceed to erect a pyritic smelter of their own, at all events for the immediate present. The general manager of the mine is at present
in London conferring with the shareholders as to the
best method of putting the property on the active
shipping list. He is expected back towards the end
of February and it is more than probable that he will
start shipping on a much larger scale on his return.
The mine is being actively set in order in the preparation of stopes, etc., with a view to this policy.
Nothing much is being done upon the Giant. Events
are waiting upon the action taken in London by the
shareholders, which, if favourable to the further development of this promising property will probably
result m the compressor of the California, an adjacent
mine now lying idle, being utilized for more expeditious and economical work than is at present possible
with the inadequate machinery at command.
The Homestake is working along well and some
shipments of ore have been made to the Trail smelter
which are reputed to have given favourable results
The management is particularly reticent in the dissemination of any information at the present stage of
the mine's exploitation.THE MINING RECORD
495
The Velvet is looking in excellent shape and is shipping first-class ore to the Northport works. Mr.
Gray, the manager, is jubilant over the result* obtained and is confident of ultimate success, and is entirely
warranted by the development work which has been
done, especially in the upper levels, where some bodies
of high grade ore, previously unsuspected, have been
located and shipped at a good profit. Samples running well over $30 in gold and as high as seven per
cent, in copper have been obtained. These bodies are
not large in extent but there are several within a few
feet of each other so they are easily worked. Prospecting done in levels immediately above and below
have demonstrated their continuity. There is a concentrator partly finished upon this property, but no
work will be done through it for some, little time to
ccme, until a welcome capital account is placed to the
credit of the mine through its profits. The management is now contemplating the opening up of the
Portland, a contiguous property, also belonging to the
Velvet and situated within 300 feet of the present
workings at the main shaft.
PROPOSED   AMENDMENTS TO THE PLACER
MINING ACT.
TO THE EDITOR: A meeting was held on the
ioth of January, 1903, by the miners of Black
Bear and Spanish Creeks at the Moore Company's cabin on Spanish Creek, to consider the proposed suggested amendments to the Placer Mining
Act, suggested by the Placer Mining Committee appointed at the ledger office in Vancouver on December 18, of which James Reid was chairman, to draft
proposed amendments to Part VII of the Placer
Mining Act.
The meeting was unanimous in indorsing Crown
Grants for deep placer mines, and suggest the following amendments:
Amend Section 2, Chapter 136, Placer Mining Act
of 1899, to read as follows:
I Placer mines shall be divided into two classes, as
follows:
'' Shallow placers and deep placers.
"Shallow placer mines shall include all claims located on creek diggings, bar diggings, bench diggings, dry, diggings and hill diggings in newly discovered shallow placer mining districts.
" Deep placer mines shall include all claims located
on deep alluvial or other deposits of earth, gravel and
gravel conglomerate, containing gold, platinum, os-
mirridium, or other valuable metals or precious stones
that shall be worked by the hydraulic, hydraulic
elevator, or milling piocess."
Part VII of the Placer Mining Act, so far as it
refers to leases, shall be repealed and amended to read
as follows:
"Sec. 1. That practically no changes be made in
the present Act from Sec. 1 to Sec. 89, inclusive, except in so far as is necessary to prevent conflict with
the changes to be made in Part VII.''
This will protect the individual miner.
1 Sec 2. Every free miner will be entitled to locate
and apply for a Crown Mineral Grant for a deep
placer mining claim P» any creek, bar, hill, bench, or
plateau on any unoccupied and unreserved Crown
land, but no more than two claims in the same locality, one of which shall be a creek claim, lie shall be
allowed any number of placer mineral claims by purchase, and every free miner may sell, mortgage, or
dispose of his claim or part thereof, but in no case
shall any free miner be permitted to locate and record
a deep placer mining claim in a newly discovered
shallow placer mining district without first obtaining
the consent of the Gold Commissioner, with the sanction of the Lieutenant-Governor in Council.
"Sec. 3. The dimensions of the deep placer mining claim shall be as follows: In creek diggings, one-
half mile in length.
" Sec. 4.    In other deep placer mining ground, 80
acres; but in  no case shall any deep placer mining
. claim extend along any creek or river more than 500
yards, creek diggings excepted.
" Sec. 5. Every deep placer mining claim shall be
as nearly as possible rectangular in form and marked
by four legal posts at the corners thereof, firmly
fixed in the ground. One of such posts shall be
marked as the initial post, and on that post shall be
placed a legible notice in writing, stating the name of
the claim, its length and breadth in feet, and a general
description of its boundaries, commencing at the
the initial post marked No. 1, stating distance and
general direction and a line blazed therefrom to each
of the other coruer posts, which shall be marked No.
2, 3 and 4.
" Sec. 6. Any lawful holder of a deep placer claim
shall be entitled to a Crown Mineral Grant, for the
exclusive right to mine and extract the precious metals and minerals from said mining claim until the
same shall have been worked out or abandoned on
payment to the Government of British Columbia the
sum of one dollar per acre of land conveyed by grant,
in lieu of the two per cent, tax on the gross output
of placer mines. The intending purchaser of said
right to mine shall comply with all the provisions of
Sec. 36 of the Mineral Act, and the amendments concerning the application- for Crown Grants, so far as
they may be applicable to deep placer mines.
"Sec. 7. The holder of a Mineral Grant for a deep
placer mining claim, or a consolidation of deep placer
mining claims, shall expend annually on each claim
or mine containing 80 acres or less at least $200 for
exploratory work. Such work shall consist of manual labour, permanent improvements made on the
mine, in building roads, shafts, tunnels, machinery,
dams, canals, ditches, flumes, pipe line or any mining
work necessary for equipment or operation of mine.
"Sec. 8. The holder of a Crown Mineral Grant
for a deep placer mining claim, or placer mine, or a
consolidation of deep placer mining claims or placer
mines, shall pay annually the deep placer mining tax
of $1 for each and every acre of mining claim or mine
so held.
"Sec. 9. The failure of the holder or holders of
Crown Mineral Grants for deep placer claims or mines
. to comply with the provisions of Sections 6, 7, and 8
of this Act, shall be deemed an abandonment, and
such mine shall be declared open for re-location by
the Gold Commissioner or Mining Recorder in such
district, who shall post notices to that effect on the
bulletin board of his office.
"Sec. 10. It shall be lawful for the Gold Commissioner, with the sanction of the Lieutenant-Governor496
THE MINING RECORD.
in Council, to grant the right to lawful holders of
leases of placer mining ground for hydraulic or deep
placer mining -purposes to avail themselves of the provisions of this Act without in any way prejudicing the
rights or privileges appurtenant thereto. The lawful
holder of a lease for placer mining ground and water
rights appurtenant thereto shall be entitled to a record
for the same dating back to the date of original lease
and water grant, so held as appurtenant thereto, but
in no case shall the holder of a lease be entitled to
such record until he shall have fully paid up all leasehold rents due on said leases."
James Moore,
Secretary of Meeting.
AN ELECTRIC DRILL.
AS electric drills have recently been installed in one or
two mines in British Columbia, a brief description
of the Durkee Lightning Drill, manufactured by the
Mine and Smelter Supply Co. of Denver, Colorado, may
prove of interest. This drill follows along the lines shown,
by experience with the air drill to be most satisfactory. No
departure has been made from standard air drill practice
except where necessitated by the difference in the power.
The standard form of air drill column, arm, clamp, guide
shell, feeding devices and chuck for holding the steel are
retained. The column rifle .bar, rifle nut, ratchet and pawls
are also used, although the arrangement of the parts are
changed to meet the requirements of the machine.
i«*?iP«?>
Hlv.
The Durkee Lightning Drill is driven by a small electric
motor, provided with speed controlling devices, through
■which the speed of the drill is controlled as readily as by
the throttle valve of the air drill. The power of the motor
is conveyed to the drill through a short, flexible shaft, which
allows the motor to be placed in any convenient position
close to the drill. The piston of the drill, through a simple
mechanical device, is given a rapid forward stroke and a
much slower return. This rapid forward stroke concentrates the power upon the rock, while the comparatively
slow return stroke gives a powerful pull to release a drill
from a fissured hole. In- regular minting work in bad ground
it is found that the Durkee drill runs steadily, while an air
drill will make but a few strokes without sticking in the
hole. To prevent shocks on the mechanism of the drill,
buffer springs are used, through which the power is transmitted to the pdston. An incidental result of .the use of the
buffer springs is that as the springs are compressed by the
inertia of the piston on the back stroke, and by their expansion add to the work delivered through the piston, the
drill is run at such speed as to take full advantage of this
action.
Comparing the power plant of the electric drill with that
of the air drill, it will be noted that the electric drill plant is
very small and compact and needs no expensive foundations.
The power transmission line of the electric is also lighter
and cheaper to put in place and can be removed to other,
working places without damage to the wires and with a
minimum of labour. With electric power it is also a very
simple matter to place a light where required and also to put
a small motor-driven fan where it will do the most good
with the minimum of power.
The electric distribution o,f power is steadily increasing
throughout the world. On account of its economy it is used
to drive all classes of machinery. In modern machine shops
electricity is especially useful because of the ease with which
small units of power can be installed where required. In
mining, where large amounts of power are used and where,
underground, a large number of small units of power are
required, it is being slowly but surely adopted. Electric coal
miining machines have been in use for some years, but only
during the last year has a successful electrically driven
machine been built for drilling hard rock. The Durkee drill
is the most satisfactory rock drill in the market on account
of its economical electric drive and because of its adherence
to the principles developed by alir drills.
COMPANY NOTES.
RAMBLER-CARIBOO  (MCGUIGAN.)
THE annual report of the Rambler-Cariboo just issued
states that the mine has about 75,000 tons of ore available on the dump and in the present workings, 25 per
cent of which is mined and ready to hoist. Since the financial
statement issued in June, $20,000 has been expended in new
machinery, which, it is estimated, will increase the profits by
$20,000 per month. The present work includes sinking a shaft
from No. 8 to No. 9 tunnel, and it is expected to open level
No. 9 by March ist.
Reco (Sandon) : The balance sheet for the year 1902 values •
the assets at $^003,933.74, made up as follows: Mines,,etc.,
$958,200, treasury stock $41,800, cash in bank $3,933.74; and
the liabilities : Capital stock, paid up, $1,000,000, accounts
payable, $2,293.48, profit and loss $1,640,26. The net proceeds
from ore sales, 536 tons were'$6i,077.75.
Payne (Sandon) : Two Wilfley tables for the purpose of saving the zinc contents of the ore are being installed. The Payne
is exporting a considerable tonnage of ore carrying zinc. Values
to Iola, Kansas, and the zinc concentrates will be added to
these shipments in future.
Fisher Maiden (Silverton)—The superintendent reports
that sufficient ore has been blocked out, averaging 150 oz. of
silver to the ton, to keep the present mine-force engaged for a
year. Seven carloads of ore have recently been shipped to the
Trail smelter, and production is being maintained at the rate
of a carload every four days.
Arlington (Slocan)—An experimental plant for treating
the lower grade products of the mine is being setup in Spokane. The principle of the system is the making of slimes by
sending finely crushed ores over the Wilfley tables or Frue
yanners, and subsequent electrical treatment.
Enterprise (Slocan)—At the general meeting held in London last month, the chairman reported that last year's operations resulted in a loss of $2,585. New machinery has been installed with a view to economizing costs, but the directors
contemplate a temporary suspension of operations until metal
market prices and conditions generally improve.
Eva (Fish Creek)—A ten stamp mill is to be installed immediately on this property, while a mill of like capacity is being set up on the Oyster-Criterion group at Camborne.
LE Roi (Rossland)—At a meeting of the company held in
London on January 17th, the announcement was made that
the profits of the last eight months amounted to $578,000. Sir
Henry Tyler was re-elected chairman, and Mr. Antony J. McMillan was appointed managing director of the company. The
statement of shipments and profits for the period is given as
follows :THE MINING RECORD.
497
Months" Tons. Profits.
Erie' I3>°47. $66,93253
{£?.?• •" T1'475 72,640 24
JAu>st x4-492 92,898 42
e S  .' ^.oog 71,270 53
"ctob" 15,204 84,232 49
November                            T- -,<: „2 .«„ 2,
t->         i_       ;    /•      .   -,; I5,57° 76,4°2 63
December   (estimated) I3>500 .    45)0oo 00
'       Total  $57^,548~33
- Velvet (Rossland)—Two baby Rand drills have recently
been added to the equiment of this mine. The manager is
reported to have stated that he can secure better results with,
these onerman machines than with the larger drills. The
Velvet now has ten of these machines in use.
Josie (Rossland)—It is reported that very satisfactory discoveries of rich ore bodies have been recently made in the
lower levels, and it is said that in the present lower workings
of the Josie, where work has been under way for some weeks,
the face is eleven feet in width and the ore assays in the
. neighborhood of $100 per ton.
Granby Consolidated (Boundary)—A meeting of the
shareholders of the Granby Consolidated Mining Company
was held on January 15th. The president, Mr. Miner, announced that by the sale of 125,000 shares of Treasury stock at
$4 per share, the Company had been practically freed from
debt, and unless something out of the ordinary occurs a dividend will be paid during the present year. He furthermore
stated that two new furnaces would be established by August,
and full equipment by March or April following. The week
before last the four furnaces had treated 10,115 tons of ore at a
cost, including freight and commission, of $2 65, a figure
which he believed in the near future would be reduced to
$2.50.
The new directors are : Messrs. John Stanton, Copper Statistician; William H. Nicholls, President of the Nicholls Chemical Company; Jacob Lans-eloth, President of the American
Metal Company, of New York, and Clement S. Houghton,
financial agent, of Boston.
YMIR.
The Secretary of the Company's Board in London, recently
sent the following advice to the Press : " The upraise from "he
1,000-foot level has now been connected with the bottom of
the shaft. The completion of this important work enables the
development of the lower levels to be more vigorously and
economically carried on, and also facilitates the driving of No.
10 level eastwards so strongly recommended by Mr. Hooper
and Mr. Fowler. It is gratifying to learn by the latest reports
"from the mine that developments at No. 5 level in an easterly
direction are described by the Mine Superintendent as follows :
" The prospects in this direction are certainly very favorable
and highly encouraging.' The significance of this cannot fail
to be appreciated when it is explained that this development
occurs in entirely new ground—considerably further east than
any point at which values have been found in the upper workings. The re-construction scheme has been successfully carried
through, and the whole of the new capital taken up."
The last returns from the Ymir mine indicate a profit for
December of $10,000, which is the highest since last May.
The London price of the shares has advanced within the last
two months, and lately stood about $3.00.
union jack (ymir.)
The Manager of the Union Jack Mine, Ymir, states that a
good payshoot of galena has been met, 165 feet in on the lower
tunnel. He adds that this averages $42 a ton. However,
previously to this strike the' vein faulted considerably and
■more remains to be done to prove the permanence and continuity of the deposit.
wilcox (ymir.)
The first gold brick from the Wilcox mill at Ymir, has been
taken to Nelson by John F. Burne, the Secretary of the Broken
Hill Cfempany. This brick, which weighed seven pounds, is,
however, only the product of a partial clean-up, after a run of
16 days'. The gold is found to be much freer than was estimated, necessitating a few slight alterations in the plates.
Most of the gold is being retained in mortars, from which no
clean-up has bfeeh made yet.
SULLIVAN (E.   KOOTENAY.)
It is said that arrangements have been made to provide the
'necessary capital to complete the  building of  the Sullivan
smelter at Marysville. It was first estimated that about $50,-
000 should be raised, of which $40,000 would need be spent in
construction. It is now planned to raise $100,000 and give a
working capital of $60,000. The money will probably be
raised on the security of mortgage bonds issued by the company. The plant has a nominal capacity of 100 tons, but its
actual capacity is expected to be nearer 150 tons a day.
FAIRVIEW CORPORATION (FAIRVIEW.)
The Manager writes, January 21st: We now have half of the
vats up and are getting into shape to erect the others immediately. During the past month we have been sinking on the
vein to the 400 foot level and are now down 80 feet below the
3rd level.
We are also breaking down the ore from the other levels in
order to have a large quantity stored by the time we get started.
The ore is a good average in quality and the quantity is very
great so there is no doubt of the future.
VAN   ANDA.
The English Syndicate, the past year operating this property,
have, it is reported, decided finally to consummate a purchase.
MINING RETURNS AND STATISTICS
ROSSLAND.
SHIPMENTS from the Rossland camp for the three weeks
ending January 34th were as follows:—
Tons.
Le Roi ;.  11,861
Centre Star ! 5.720
War Eagle  3,425
Giant  170
Velvet  390
Kootenay  225
LeKoiNo. 2  400
Homestake   ;-  60
Total    21,741
SLOCAN.
From January 1st to January 17th, exports from the Slocan
were:—
Tons
American Boy  123
Antoine -.  16
Arlington  40
Blaok Prince  18
Bondholder  1
Enterprise  95
Fisher Maiden  60
Ivanhoe ... .• '  90
Ottawa  20
Payne  246
Rambler  60
Reco ".  20
Slocan Star  21
859
The following table shows the Slocan ore shipments for the
year 1902 with average value per ton :
Payne Mine, 1,976 tons, average value $100; Ivanhoe, 637
tons, $75; Sunset, 827 tons, $125 ; Reco, 490 tons, $250; American Boy, 1,134 tons, |50 ; Arlington, 3,560 tons, $150; Hewett,
805 tons, $40; Bosun, 2,040 tons, $65 ; Last Chance, 168 tons,
$75; Wonderful, 181 tons, $90; Enterprise, 2,220 tons, $50; La-
vina., 85 tons, $55 ; Bismark, 62 tons, $40 ; Queen Bess, 180
tons, $75; Silver Glance, 257 tons, $250; Whitewater, 2,962
tons, $40; Ottawa, 48 tons, $150; Capella, 60 tons, $50; Florence
1 ton, $55 ; Trade Dollar, 20 tons, $125; SlocanJBoy, 158 tons,
$80 ; Neepawa, 123 tons, $40; Hartney, 25 tons, $50; Marion,
80 tons, $50; May, 5 tons, $55; Paystreak, 7 tons, $55; Surprise, 22 tons, $55; Monitor, 1,306 tons, $80.; Slocan Star, 714
tons, $90; Duplex, 7 tons. $55: Emily Edith, 20 tons, $55;
Wakefield, 220 tons, $50 ; Prescott, 4 tons, $55 ; Rambler, 4,187
tons, $75; Molly Gibson, 2,100 tons, $60; Washington, 187
tons, $80; Folliot, 2 tons, $55; C.O.D , 2 tons, $55; London
Hill, 115 tops, $100; Ruth, 846 tons, $100; Antoine, 207 tons,
$100: R.E. Lee, 144 tons, $80; Spectator, 4 tons, $55; Red Fox,498
THE MINING RECORD.
63 tons, $50; Hampton, 13 tons, $250; Mercury, 21 tons, $200;
Dardanelles, 21 tons, $50; Porcupine, 2 tons, $50; Charleston,
11 tons, $250; Pinto, 15 tons, $85; Noble Five, 21 tons, $65;
Soho, 64 tons, $55 ; Or in round numbers 28,000 tons.
Shipments from the Slocan City Division aggregate 6,529
tons from fourteen mines.
BOUNDARY   DISTRICT.
The Phoenix pioneer publishes the following table of 1902
shipments:—■
Tons.
Granby Mines, Phoenix  309,858
Snowshoe,              "         20,800
Mother Lode, Deadwood -.  141,326
Sunset                     "          7,455
B. C. Mine, Summit  15,024
Emma,              "          8,^30
Winnipeg, Wellington  785
Golden Crown,     "       625
Jewel, Long Lake  2,175
Providence, Providence  172
Miscellaneous '.  325
- Total, tons   507,758
Granby Smelter treatment, tons 312,340
LARDEAU.
The Nettie L shipped 400 tons of ore in December valued
about $40,000 and the Silver Cup shipped 205 tons valued at
$25",625. The total shipments for the year 1902 for these two
principal mines of the Lardeau is valued at $217,000.
The shipments from other properties including the Guinea
Gold, Triune and Ethel are expected to increase the value of
the district's output for the year, to a quarter of a million
dollars.
VANCOUVER ISLAND.
Last year the Yreka mines at Quatsino, on the west coast,
shisped 190 tons of ore. From Alberni canal were sent 400
tons. The Marble Bay mines, Texada, shipped 9,000. From
Mount Sicker the Lenora- shipped 3,000 tons to the Crofton
and Tacoma smelters, and the Tyee about 3,000 tons. From
Princess Island and other places on the coast about 300 tons
additional were shipped to the smelters, while about 1,000 tons
of iron were sent from Texada Island to the Irondale emelter.
COAL EXPORTATIONS AND TRADE.
THE output of the Crow's Nest Pass Coal' Company's col-
leries for the month of December shows a marked increase over any month since last spring.    The following
are the figures for the past three months,  for the three col-
leries :
October   42,577 tons
November   34,410 tons
December ".  43,631 tons
November output was curtailed by the Michel strike.
The following shows the amount contributed by each camp
for the month of December :
Coal Creek   19,336 tons
Michel   13,927 tons
Morrissey    10,369 tons
It is expected that the output for 1903 will reach the grand
total of 1,000,000 tons
Production from the Vancouver Island colleries last year was
divided as follows :—New Vancouver Coal Company, Nanaimo, 490,000 tons coal ; Wellington Colliery Company, 800,000
tons of coal and 15,800 tons coke.
The mines in the Crow's Nest produced during the year
441,000 tons of coal and 112,000 tons of coke.
In these amounts the coke production in each case is included in the coal mined. While therefore 1,731,000 tons of
coal were mined in the Province during the year, there was,
roughly estimated, about 200,000 tons, making 127,800 tons of
this latter product.
Last year's total production was 1,703,827 tons coal and 127,-
533 tons coke.
TRADE NOTES, CIRCULARS AND CATALOGUES.
CRUSHING BOLLS.
THE Allis-Chalmers Company send us a copy of a new
edition (the seventh) of Catalogue No. 8, which is "devoted exclusively to the description of crushing roUs.
The company's standard make of crushing rolls consists of
three styles, the Style A, formerly known as the Gtates High
Grade RoU, Style B, formerly known as the Fraser &Chalm-
ers Standard Roll, and Style O, formerly known as Fraser &
Chalmers' Old Style Belt Roll. In this catalogue these rolls
are fully described and illustrated. Tables of the standard
and special sizes are also given. It addition the company
manufacture an auxiliary line of crushing rolls.
Wire rope tramways.
The Trenton Iron Company's new book on Wire Rope
Tramways, directs special attention to the merits of the
Patent Locked-Coil Track Cable and Webber Patent Compression Grip, with Patent Automatic Attacher, (used only on
Bleichert tramways). The little volume contains a vast deal
of useful information and contains numerous illustrations of
an interesting order. A diagram showing the details of the
Bleichert system of wire rope tramways is also included.
a Chicago School of assaying.
From the pi ospectus of the Chicago School of Assaying
we gather that ten different courses of instruction are here
given. These include a prospector's course; a short course in
fire assaying, advanced courses in assaying, and course in
geology, practical and theoretical chemistry, quantative analysis and sanitary and domestic chemistry ,
THE LESCHEN  WIRE ROPE  SYSTEM.
The A. Leschen & Sons Rope Co. issue a new catalogue,
plentifully illustrated and well printed,  descriptive of the
Leschen automatic system of  aerial wire rope tramways as
"well as of the Leschen friction grip system, single line tramways, two-bucket tramways, etc,
ALLIS-CHALMEKS QUARTERLY DIVIDEND.
At meeting of Board of Directors of the Allis-Chalmers
Company, held January 15th, 1903, regular quarterly dividend
on preferred stock was declared.
THE  CANTON STEEL COMPANY'S NEW OFFK ES.
The Canton Steel Company have opened new offices at 1621
to 1639 Seventeenth Street, Denver, Colorado.
YUKON OFFICIAL RETURNS.
A STATEMENT of the output of gold by the Klondike
has been compiled by the Department of the Interior.
The figures were obtained from Government records
from 1897 to the 1st of January, 1903 ; from statements furnished by the Northwest Mounted Police for 1896, and from
trading companies from 1885 to 1895, inclusive. Ihe output
year by year was as follows:
1885 $        50,000
1886      50,000
1887     " 70,000
1888      40,000
1889      175,000
1890      175,000
1891      40,000
1892      87,000
1893  176,000
1894 ....::  125,000
1895      250,000
1896      300,000
1897            2,500,000
1898   10,000,000
1899   16,000,000
1900  22,275,000
1901   16,304,682
1902  11,930,264
Total.
rSO.930,956
RECENT PUBLICATIONS.
THE Songs of an English Esau, (Printer, Elder & Co.,
London,) collection of Mr.' Phillips-Wolley's poems including The Kootenay Prospector, The Sea Queen Wakes,
The Strathcona Cavaliers, &c. is now on sale. Orders received at the Mining Record Office. Attention is called to
the reviews of this work in such papers as The London limes,
Scotsman, &c.THE MINING RECORD.
499
COAL EXPORTATIONS.
EXPORTATIONS from Vancouver Island collieries during
the month of January were as follows :
Tons
Western Fuel Co., Nanaimo 21 582
Wellington Coal Company       _ 25 390
Total. 46,972
The condition of the San Francisco coal market is showing
improvement.
The,placing of all foreign coals on the free list should induce
further shipments of colonial, as the reduced cost to consumers should increase sales. This concession has been granted
nominally since January 15 for one year, but the writer believes that coal will never again be on the dutiable list.
A further advantage in favour of increased sales of coal, is
a marked improvement in the price of oil, with an assurance
of its being marked up still higher; hence the values of coal
and oil as economic fuels are approximating very closely.
The amount of coal from the Crow's Nest Pass fields arriving in the United States through the port of Gateway, over
the Great Northern's branch from Jennings, is 300 cars, of 20
tons each, a day, an increase of 50 cars since the repeal of the
duty on foreign coals by Congress two weeks ago, says the
Seattle Post-Intelligencer. All this fuel is for use along the
line of the G.N.R. and it is expected, within a short time the
imports of this coal will be at least 500 cars per day, or 10,000
tons. At the time the duty was taken off coal, the G, N.
was paying a duty of 67 cents a ton. On the amount of coal
imported at the present time a saving of $4,020 a day is made,
and with the imports increased to 500 cars a day, the saving
in duty to the road, by the Act of Congress, will be $6,700 a
day.
PERSONAL.
It is reported that Mr. S. F.'Parrish, of the B.C. mineEholt
has been selected to succeed Mr. John H. MacKenzie as general manager of LeRoi mine and of the Northport smelter.
Mr. Parrish is widely known throughout the Western mining
States, and in the Kootenays, where he has resided for the
past three or four years. The appointment, if made, would
be an exceedingly popular one.
The Western Fuel Co. have appointed Mr. Thomas Russell
to the position of superintendent, vacated after twenty years
by Mr. Samuel M. Robins.
COMPANY MEETINGS AND REPORTS.
CARIBOO    CONSOLIDATED.
AT the Annual General Meeting the chairman gave the
following brief account of the undertaking: The company was brought out in 1899 to work nineteen mining
properties in the Cariboo district of British Columbia. These
properties were of three descriptions, hydraulic, drifting, and
dredging, distributed over a considerable area, several of them
difficult to get at for want of roads, and to some not even a
trail through the forest had been cut. We took iu hand and
developed three hydraulic properties near Barkerville, viz.,
Lowhee, San Juan, and Ah Quay on Lightning Creek. The
result of working these has not so far been satisfactory. A
large amount of development work has been done, but it was
found difficult to obtain a sufficient supply of water. One of
these properties, the Lowhee is known to be rich, and it has
considerable possibilities, and as a larger supply of water will
be obtainable next season through an additional ditch which
has lately been completed, the board anticipates that next
season's working will give much more satisfactory results.
It, however, soon became apparent to the board that small
hydraulic properties, which can only be worked for a few
months in the summer, would not give results sufficient to
ensure the success of a company with a considerable capital.
There were three other properties near Barkerville—Eureka
Gulch, French Creek, and Cariboo Creek—which we did not
feel justified in incurring the cost of developing immediately.
Eureka Gulch is an hydraulic proposition; has little or no
water. French Creek, a drifting claim, would require a large
expenditure in boring to locate the old tunnel, and may be left
until we have our own boring plant. Cariboo Creek-was
prospected by Mr. Thompson with unsatisfactory results.
The other properties of the company are the leases on Cunningham Creek, Cariboo Lake, Cayeuse Creek, Fraser River,
and Lightning Creek. The claims on Cunningham Creek are
considered to have great possibilities as drifting and hydraulic
propositions, but as they are 20 miles from Barkerville, and at
present difficult to get at, we would not undertake their development until the roads are completed. At present we
could not get machinery there. The different leases about
Cariboo Lake are very extensive dredging leases, but here
again we did not feel justified in going to the great expense
of placing dredges on Cariboo Lake until the country was
further opened up. The same may be said of the leases in
Cayeuse Creek and Fraser River, which are also dredging
leases. Lightning Creek, as many of you doubtless know, is
one of the most famous of the Cariboo creeks. It produced
in its early history over £2,000,000 of gold from two miles of
its channel, a short distance above the Eleven of England
claims. In other words, the channel produced gold at the
average rate of £200 for each foot in length. This was in the
early seventies, but even this year gold is being recovered in
large quantities in these old claims, and as recently as last
month 56)^ ozs. of gold were taken from a single pan. In
1900 Mr. Thompson put before the board a scheme for working these claims, but as it necessitated the construction of a
drainage tunnel, to drain the bottom of the channel—which
would have been over three miles in- length, and was then
estimated by Mr. Thompson to cost £30,000, and take three or
four years to construct—the Board did not see its way to embark on such an undertaking. The tunnel, however, would
not only have drained our claims but all those in the creek
above, which would then have become of considerable value,
as they could have been easily and inexpensively worked by
their owners ; and if we wished to acquire any of these leases
we should have had to pay a large price for them. It was
quite clear that less than % of a mile of Lightning Creek
would not justify any large expenditure for its development,
and that the only course left to the board was to acquire the
adjacent claims on Lightning Creek to the Eleven of England
so as to enlarge our property to an extent which would not
only justify the cost of its development, but give us satisfactory returns for our outlay.
Such a property we have now obtained by the acquisition of
eight leases below our present claims, and also several additional leases above them, so that we now own nearly the
whole of Lightning Creek from Beaver Creek to the Van
Winkle mine, a distance of seven miles. We have decided to
abandon the scheme for a tunnel as beyond our resources, to
say nothing of the time it would take to carry out, and to
proceed with the development of these leases by means of
bed-rock shafts and tunnels under the old channel, handling
the water by means of adequate pumps. The estimated cost
for the first of these is £16,000, and if it should be found necessary to largely increase our pumping power—which, however, is not anticipated by our local manager—the additional
Cost will be as nothing compared with the cost of a drainage500
THE MINING RECORD.
tunnel. When the first shaft and tunnel reaches the bottom
of the channel, then it is proposed to immediately sink a second shaft.
Mr. Bailey's estimate of the time required to sink this shaft
and drive the tunnel is as follows :—Under ordinary conditions he says you should be able to commence making these
borings (to locate the best position for the shaft) about the 1st
April, 1903, and they should be completed about the 1st July.
He estimates it will take three months to construct the shaft-
house and. instal the machinery, i.e., to the 1st October. Estimating the depth of the shaft at 200 feet it will take till the
15th January, 1904, to complete and drive the tunnel, which
he estimates will be 600 feet long—four months—so that by
the 15th May, 1904, we should be into the channel. These are
our local engineer's estimates, and we believe he will be able
to carry it out.
NEW VANCOUVER COAL CO.
At a meeting held in London at the end of last month the
following resolutions were carried: "That the provisional
agreement dated December 15, 1902, made between the New
Vancouver Coal Mining and Land Company (Limited) of the
one part, and the Western Fuel Company of the other part,
which agreement is, or short particulars thereof are, now
produced to this meeting, being an agreement for the sale of
all the real, and personal property in British Columbia of
this company excepting coal stored, balance of purchase
money for property heretofore sold, cash on hand and in
bank, securities, correspondence, books of record
and account, be and it is hereby adopted and confirmed, and
that the directors be and they are hereby authorized to carry
the said agreement into effect with modifications, if any, as
the directors may in their discretion think necessary."
"That the director3 be and they are hereby authorized to pay
to Samuel Matthew Robins, as soon as the property comprised
in the agreement of December 15, 1902, adopted by this meeting, shall have been conveyed and transferred according
to that agreement, the sum of £10,000 sterling agreed compensation and satisfaction of his claim for, and in respect of,
his uncompleted contract as superintendent of this company.
"That the .directors be and they are hereby authorized to .
enter into an agreement on behalf of the company with
Messrs. John Rosenfeld's Sons, of San Francisco, under
which this company (a) shall pay .the said Messrs. John Ros-
enfeld's Sons the sum of $10,000 (United States currency) in
consideration of their subscribing the full $50,000 in the purchasing company in relief of the obligation imposed by that
company; (b) shall pay to the said Messrs. John Rosenfeld's
Sons a further remuneration in consideration of their guaranteeing the due payment of the promissory notes referred
to in Section 2 of the agreement of December 15,1902, adopted by this meeting." The chairman explained that one of
the conditions made by the representatives of the purchasing
company was that the Vancouver Company should take
$50,000 in the new company The directors, however, preferred another course, so Messrs. Rosenfeld undertook
to put their own money in to that amount, if the company
would pay them $10,000 in consideration of their doing this,
and |that was acceded to by the directors. With regard to
Section B of the resolution, the extra remuneration would be
8 per cent, on the £30,000 that ran for one year, and 10 per
cent, on the £20,000 that ran for two years. This was not 10
per cent, per annum, but was for the whole period.
'' That so soon as the property comprised in the agreement
of December 15,1902, adopted by this meeting shall have been
conveyed and transferred under that agreement the sum of
£5000 be paid out of the funds of the company to the directors
as compensation for loss of office, and that likewise the sum
of £3000 be paid to Joseph Ramsden, secretary of the company, and £1000 to Arthur Billett Mayes, an employee of the
company, and that the directors be, and they are hereby authorised to make any such further payments as they may think
fib by way of bonus or compensation to other officers or employees of the company."
THE SNOWSHOE   MINES.
The second ordinary general meeting of the Snowshoe
Gold and Copper Mines, Limited, was held on December 31
in   London,  the   Earl of Chesterfield, chairman,  presiding.
The Chairman, in moving the adoption of the report and accounts, said that development work had been vigorously prosecuted since the formation of the company in June of last
year, and large bodies ot' ore had been opened up during development.    At the present time the mine was shipping from
200 to 250 tons of ore per day, and when certain equipment, in
hand, was completed, it would be able to ship from 500 to 700
ton of ore per day. This ore was being mined very cheaply,
a great deal of it being quarried by blasting oil and near thg;
surface. At present the ore was being sent to customs smelters in the neighborhood, where it was treated at a comparatively low rate. The Canadian Pacific Railway had put in
additional side tracks for the accommodation of the company,
and arrangements had been made with an electric company to
furnish power and light, The directors had Under consideration the question of erecting their own smelter, as by doing
this it would be possible to treat ore at a considerably larger
profit. With reference to the two per cent, tax levied on the
gross output of the mines, after deducting freight and treat:
ment rates, he urged strongly that the British Columbia Government should abolish this tax as it was undoubtedly retarding the investment of capital and the progress of mining. Up
to the present the work at the mine had been mainly in connection with development. The Snowshoe was one of the
largest mines in British Columbia, and it took long to open up
and develop such big properties as this. The fact that they
were now shipping between 200 and 250 tons of ore per day
showed that they had done remarkably well. They were commencing to put money back into the mine from the proceeds
of ore shipments, and the receipts from this source would be
considerably increased before long, so much so that-he hoped
the time was not far distant when the shareholders would receive a return.
The accounts were set out-so clearly .as to require little explanation. Whilst the directors might have claimed to capitalize the whole of the first year's expenditure, they thought it
better to start with a profit and loss account, so that the shareholders would be better able to follow from the commencement the working expenses of the mine. The following cable
had'been received that day from Mr. J. W. Astley, the resident
superintendent of the mine :
" Shipments this year to date 20,000 tons; electric hoist arrived; ore bins nearing completion; contract with Cascade
Power Company signed; smelter expected to be ready not later
than ist February for increased tonnage."'
During last autumn three directors had visited the property
and come back well pleased. In conclusion, His Lordship
said : " I am perfectly well aware thatowing to circumstances
which have occurred within the last year or two in connection
with certain mines in that country, the confidence of the British mining investor in British Columbia mines has to a great
measure been shaken, and I am not surprised. To restore that
confidence will be the aim .of your Board. Before long we will-
be able to prove to the investing public of this country that by
honest, judicious and sound management there are mining enterprises in British Columbia well worthy the attention of the
investor, and that there are in that country capabilities hitherto little realised, which must in time on their merits force
themselves on the notice of the English capitalist."
A LARGE AMOUNT   OF ORE IN  SIGHT.
Mr. George S. Waterlow, in seconding the adoption of the
report and accounts, said that having spent some time last
autumn at the Snowshoe mine, he believed that the methods
of mining there and at the adjoining properties were the most
economical possible, and possibly the cheapest mining, as well
as the cheapest smelting, in the world was at the present time
being carried on in that district. He had visited the Snow-
shoe mine in 1900, when it was comparatively undeveloped
and he could not but notice vast changes since his former visit.
The ore was being extracted by blasting in open quarries.
Owing to the conservative manner in which the affairs of the
Company were managed matters had generally turned out better than anticipated, and the large amount of ore in sight was
gratifying. They were shipping 1,200 to 1,500 ton? per week,
and it would soon be possible to double or treble that quantity.
The ore, of which about 100,000 tons was in sight, contained
considerable bodies of gold and copper, the gold values predominating, and in addition there was also a small amount of
silver. The next mine to the Snowshoe, which had been in
course of development much longer than this Company's property, was shipping 1,500 tons of ore to the smelter, and had
erected its own smelting works capable of dealing with this
output, to which it was proposed to make early additions.
The railway communication afforded by the Canadian Pacific
Railway, which crossed the Snowshoe mine, was very good,
and on account of the great developmenUn mining it was proposed by other companies to build railways into that part of
the country at an early date. With reference to freight rates
on ore to the smelters, which had already been considerably
reduced, he had received a telegram from Sir Thomas Shaugh-THE MINING RECORD.
499
nessy, President of the Canadian Pacific Railway stating; tha
when the ore output was increased further reductions might
be expected. He urged the desirability of the Provincial Government paying more attention to the mining industry and
would also suggest that the Dominion Government could help
matters by reducing or abolishing the duty on mining machinery and explosives. In the Boundary District in the centre of which the Snowshoe mine is situated—mining only commenced on a commercial scale in the year 1900, and during
that year less than 100,000 tons were sent to the smelters
This year the output was about 500,000 tons, and up to date
nearly 1,000,000 tons of ore had been treated, and there was
every reason to believe that 1903 would witness a much greater
output. The Snowshoe had already sent to the smelters about
20,000 tons of ore, much of which had been in the nature of
experimental shipments to test values, and its output in the
near future would be much greater.
SEVERAL OFFERS  RECEIVED FOR THE MINE.
As a very large shareholder he was quite satisfied with the
position, as stated in the cable he sent from the mine in September. An offer had just been received from certain well
known mining men in America, who wished to purchase the
Snowshoe mine, and several offers had been received within
the last few months. It had'been the practice in connection
with this Company for one or more of the directors to visit the
property every year, and under present conditions of honest
and economical management, the mine, which was a very good
one, would undoubtedly last for years and turn out a sound and
profitable undertaking.
Dr. H. Lewis Jones, one of the directors, in supporting the
motion, said he spent some weeks in British Columbia during
last autumn and lost no opportunity of satisfying himself as to
the position of the mine. They had abundance of ore which
had been developed in a very economical manner. The great
question for them to consider was the best and cheapest means
of smelting or otherwise dealing with this ore. In the neighborhood of the Snowshoe the cheapest mining and smelting in
the world was being done. While there he had looked carefully into the whole question and was satisfied that the Company could make a considerable addition to their profits by
owning their own smelter. Owing to the self-fluxing nature
of the Snowshoe ore it could be smelted cheaply, and in all
probability if they owned their own reduction works they could
make an additional profit of 75c. or $i-aton on their output.
It was desirable that any large mine, such as the Snowshoe,
should own or control its own smelting works, thus operating
the mines and the smelter as a whole, and secure all the profits
there were in handling these enormous bodies of ore.
The resolution for the adoption of the report and accounts
Jjras unanimously carried.
Mr. Philip Waterlow moved and Colonel Satterthwaite seconded the re-appointment of the retiring director, the Earl of
Chesterfield.
The retiring auditor, Mr. John Cooper, was re-appointed, on
motion of General Berkeley, seconded by Mr. Lefroy.
Mr. C. Guy Pym, M.P., moved a vote of thanks to the chairman. This was seconded by Mr. A. J. McMillan, managing
director, who stated that just before he left British Columbia,
in November, the Dominion Government had removed the
obstacles in the way of the Great Northern Railway building
through Southern British Columbia, and officials of that company had assured him of their intention to build to the Snow-
shoe mine at an early date.
The resolution was carried and the proceedings closed.
SUPERINTENDENT'S REPORT.
Mr. J. W. Astley, Superintendent of the mine, reported as
follows:—
Phoenix, B.C., Nov. io, 1902. •
Gentlemen:—
I herewith beg to submit my report of operations on the
Snowsnoe mine from June 30th, 1901, to September 30th, 1902.
The number of lineal feet of underground development,
composed of drifts, crosscuts, raises and winzes, to the 30th of
September, was 5,766 feet, and including the three compartment shaft, 296 feet, brings the total to 6,062 feet. Of this
amount 1737 feet have been driven in the fifteen months under
consideration. This does not include any of the surface cuts,
etc., which extend over a large area.
Nine thousand and sixty-six (9,066) tons of ore have been
shipped to the smelters, and of this amount 3,237 tons were
shipped in September. In September, 1901, a large area of
ground was stripped, leaving the ore exposed and ready for
extraction.    It is from this part that most of the ore has been
shipped and is being quarried at the present time.
In addition to the old buildings, the following have been
erected and put into use. Bunkhouse, a two story frame building, well ventilated and fitted with wash and bath tubs; boarding house, with spacious dining room and mess room for staff;
superintendent's house, foreman's house, office building, compressor house, boiler house, ore bin. The timber has been
ordered for the following. Ore bins on new railway spur, with
capacity for 2,500 tons; headworks over new shaft, and hoist
building.
In December last the order was given for the new compressor,
but it was not delivered till June, and was installed and put
into use on August nth. It is the high pressure half of a Rand
Corliss Cross compound, condensing steam and compound air
compressor, and is so constructed that it can be operated by
either steam or electricity. The half at present in use is driven
by steam, and is guaranteed to supply power for ten 3% inch
drills at an altitude of 5,000 feet above sea level. A five inch
air main was put down from the compressor to a second air
receiver, situated at a central point, and from there the air is
conveyed through smaller pipes to the different workings.
Two 80 h.p. boilers, of the return type, set in brick, were installed with the compressor. These boilers are built of steel
plate, having a tensile strength of 60,000 pounds per square
inch, and are designed to carry a working pressure of 150
.pounds per square inch.
The new shaft is a three compartment shaft, each compartment being 4^ feet by 5 feet in the clear of timbers. Two
compartments will be used for hoisting purposes, and the third
for air and water pipe lines, manway, etc. The location of the -
shaft was finally determined upon as being the best position
for handling the ore bodies, at present developed, and for exploring below the present workings. The shaft is down 296
feet, and as soon as the necessary pocket arrangements are
made for loading the skips, prospecting the ore body below
No. 2 level will be resumed.
Three sidetracks have been graded and rails laid on the
property. The first ore put in was to the present ore bin, and
will accomodate eight ore dump cars, and is also used for unloading supplies, such as timbers, machinery, etc. The second
is a short siding to the compressor for the delivery of fuel. The
third is a spur from the main line to the site of the new ore
bin; it is graded, and rails laid most of the distance ; it is 1,800
feet long.
The small electric light plant, rated at 80 16 c.p. lamps, was
at first rented, it being understood that the Cascade Power Co.
would furnish us with light. However, the completion of
their plant w-s postponed from time to time, and it became
necessarv to purchase a small plant sufficient for present re
quiremeuts.
During the directors' visit here it was decided to operate the
hoist for the shaft by electric power, to be supplied by the
Cascade Power Co. A 150 h.p. double conical drum electric
hoist has been seemed, and will be ready to place in position
as soon as the building is sufficiently completed to house it.
The concrete foundation is now completed.
Skips of two ton capacity each will be used in the shaft and
operate in balance. A head frame has been designed for the
automatic dumping of these skips, and will be constructed with
head room sufficient for a rock crusher if found necessary at
any time.
The new ore bins and railway spur to them will be situated
at a point 52 feet lower in elevation than the present tunnel,
(known as the railway tunnel.) If found necessary, a rock
crusher can be installed, and all rock crushed before delivery
to the ore bins.
The low price of copper, together with the closing down of
the smelters during part of the summer, on account of the
Fernie coal strike, had a very depressing effect on the Boundary district. However, the coke difficulty has been settled.
The smelters have all resumed operations and are making
active preparations for increasing their output. Freight charges on ore have been reduced, with the probability of a still
further reduction when the Great Northern railway system is
built into Phoenix.
The price of copper has undoubtedly reached the lowest
point, and is recovering. In short, everything points to the
successful operation of "these large ore deposits of the Boundary-
district.
In conclusion I wish to express my appreciation of the
willing assistance I have received from Mr. Trevorrow, Mr.
Tomlinson and Mr. Bannantyne.
Yours faithfully,
J. W   A.STLEY, Supt.mk
500
THE MINING RECORD.
LOCAL STOCK MARKET FOR THE MONTH OF JANUARY,  1903.
Prepared by the Stuart Robertson Co.,. Ltd., Stock Brokers, Victoria, B.C.
Companies.
Week Ending Saturday,
ioth January.
Highest.
Cariboo McKin'y,
Cariboo  Hydra'lic
Centre'Star	
Crow's Nest P. C.
Dardanelles	
Fairview Corp'n.
Iron Mask	
North Star	
Payne	
Rambler	
Slocan Star ;
Sullivan	
War Eagle	
Waterloo	
Winnipeg	
St. Eugene	
Granby	
Lowest.
Week Ending Saturday,
17th January.
75 00
35
3 25
Highest.
Lowest
$     18
100 00
3^
i<%!
3 50
3 20
Week Ending Saturday
24th January.
Highest
Lowest-.
$     t6%
5%
M
30
3 20
•3 25
32 m
3 70
Part Week   Ending
31st January.
Highest.
31
35
Lowest.
17
mm
75 00
THE LOCAL MINING STOCK MARKET.
The market this month has been quiet, although in several
cases prices have advanced. Thus Granby is now quoted at
4.50 asked, 3.80 bid, as against 3.75, 3.25, and St. Eugene has
advanced from 22 to 40. Both North Star and Payne are firmer
at higher prices. Centre Star remains stationary at 35 to 36;
Cariboo-McKinney at 18 to 18^, and Waterloo 5% to 6. Fair-
view is nominally quoted at 5, but few shares are. obtainable
at this figure. On the whole the outlook is decidedly brighter
and an improvement all round may be looked for this year.
Tr£r5m
Sffi
COAL MINES REGULATION ACT.
Board of Examiners.
NOTICE is hereby given that the following constitute the
Board of Examiners for the Nanaimo Mine during the
year 1903:
Appointed by the Owners—(I) Thomas Budge; (2) John
Newton.
Alternates—(1) James Malpas; (2) James Dudley.
Appointed by the Lieut.-Governor in Council—J. P. Planta.
Elected by the Miners—(1) George Johnson: (2) William
Neave.
Alternates—(1) James Frame; (2) Arthur Spencer.
Note—Alternates act as Members of the Board in the absence of those regularly appointed or elected to act thereon.
All persons interested may obtain full information by applying to the Secretary to the Board, Mr. J. P. Planta, of Na
naimo, B. C.
Dated this 14th day of January, 1903.
R. F. TOLMIE,
Deputy Minister of Mines.
New Catalogue
ELEVATING-CONVEYING
MACHINERY
Now Ready,        Send for Copy
The JEFFREY MFG. CO., COLUMBUS, C, U.S.A.
iWlil
bsm
~sm
COAL MINES REGULATION ACT.
N
Board of Examiners.
OTICE is hereby given that the following constitute the
Board of Examiners for the Wellington (Extension)
Mine during the year 1903 :—
Appointed by the Owners—(1) James Sharp; (2) Alex. Bry-
den.
Alternates—(1) Alex. Shaw; (2) John John.
Appointed by the Lieut.-Governor in Council—William G.
Simpson.
Elected by the Miners—(1) Benjamin Berto; (2) Samuel K
Mottishaw.
Alternates—(1) Wm. Anderson; (2) Martin Dunsmuir.
Note—Alternates act as Members of the Board in the absence of those regularly appointed or elected to act thereon.
All persons interested may obtain full information by applying to the Secretary to the Board, Mr. Wm. G. Simpson, of
Ladysmith, B.C.
Dated this 14th day of January, 1903.
R. F. TOLMIE,
Deputy Minister of Mines.
Wire Rope Bargain
27,400 feet best patent improved crucible steel wire
rope, 1 in. diameter, 6 strand, 16 wire, manilla core,
Lang lay, on four reels, for sale in any lengths desired.    For terms apply to
HALL MINING & SMELTING CO., Ltd.,
Nelson, B. C.THE MINING RECORD.
XT.
I The Cherry Creek
Copper King Mines, Ltd.
N©N=PERSON»L  MOBILITY.
Head Office, Kamloops, B. e.
Capital,   =   =    =    $500,000
In 5oo,ooo Shares of $i Each.
DIRECTORATE:
President—W. J. Roper, Esq., Cherry Creek, B.C.
Vice-President—J. R. Hull, Esq., Kamloops, B.C.
DIRECTORS:
J. A. Mara, Esq., Victoria, B.C.
Freeman Harding, Esq., Kamloops, B.C.
N. J. Hopkins, Esq., Kamloops, B.C.
W. H. Ford, Esq., Kamloops, B.C.
F. E. Young, Esq., Kamloops,-B.C.
SECRETARY:
Frederick E. Young, Esq., Kamloops, B.C.
This Company owns and is operating six claims in
the Kamloops Copper-Gold Belt which promise exceedingly favourable results. Of the capital there
remains in the treasury 225,000 shares, and there is
absolutely no promoters' stock. The property is
FULLY PAID FOR AND UNENCUMBERED,
and every dollar realized from the issue of Treasury
Stock will be put into development.
An issue of 50,000 shares, with interest at TEN
PER CENT, per annum GUARANTEED by the
BRITISH COLUMBIA TRUST COMPANY,
LIMITED, for a period of six years, is offered for
public subscription at par. Six years will give ample
time to put the property on a paying basis and your
money brings annual returns.
NO WAITING FOR DIVIDENDS.
For Prospectus and forms of application write—
THE SECRETARY,
Cherry Creek Copper King Mines, Ltd.
Non-personal Liability.
Kamloops, B.C.
CITY OF
VICTORIA.
The Metropolis of Western Canada. The terminus of the
Vancouver Island railways, and, under agreement, the British
Columbia terminus of the Great Northern Railway of the
United States, and of the Canadian Northern. The Can-
dian gateway to the Orient and the South Pacific Islands.
The starting point of steamship lines to the Yukon and Cassiar gold fields, and their chief source of mercantile supply.
The principal Canadian port of call for tourists on the line
between San Francisco and Alaska. Only a few hours' sail
from Seattle, Tacoma and other Sound cities.
CLIMATE—Unexcelled for health and comfort, temperate and bland. Cool in summer and mild in winter.
Flowers the year round.
SCENERY—World-renowned. Unparalleled marine
views. Ideal landscapes. Charming vistas. Splendid public edifices, churches and schools. The magnificent Parliament Buildings, architecturally perfect. Superb private
residences and grounds. Paved streets and sidewalks. Electric railways and all appurtenances of the most modern city.
Drives that excite the admiration of everyone. Incomparable public parks.
ENVIRONS—Never-to-be-forgotten scenes of picturesque beauty. See Esquimalt suberb, with its dockyard and
ships of war, accessible to visitors; Cordova, Cadboro, Fowl
and Oak Bays, Saanich, Goldsteam and Sooke—far-famed
retreats.
SPORTS AND GAMES of all kinds. Driving Parks,
Agricultural Grounds, Golf Links. Victoria Arm, five miles
long, the most perfect pleasure waterway on the Pacific Coast,
always placid and delightful. First-class Hotels and Lodging Houses; livery turnouts at reasonable rates. THE
MOST DELIGHTFUL PLACE OF RESIDENCE IN
CANADA. Surrounding districts the sportsman's paradise—
trout, salmon, duck, grouse, deer, bear, moose and elk.
The leading centre of the MINING INDUSTRY on the
Coast, and of the wonderful iron, copper and gold mines and
mining properties on Vancouver Island. Three smelters in
course of erection within a radius of 100 miles from the city.
Great lumber entrepot. Sealing fleet headquarters. Centre
of iron and other manufactures—some of national reputation.
All Enquiries Addressed to the Clerk of the Municipal Council, Victoria, B. C. will receive
Prompt AttentionStrongest, Cheapset,
IN   THE   MARK
THE B. C. ANCHOR FENCE CO., Limited, 743  Pender St., VANCOUVER, B. C.
^^^fiJ^^^k^mM.^. liPi^JiiSf.
For continuous service and efficiency this wheel has
been the standard for over fifteen years.
Send for interesting catalogue giving valuable information about water power.
PELTON   WATER  WHEEL CO.,
135 Main St., San Francisco-        156 Liberty St.. New York.
Lobnitz' Gold Dredgers are at work in British North and
South America, Africa, Asia, &c.
LOBNlTZ&CO.,L'TD.
Gold Dredgers
\JU I**      m „BUvery of sta^rt S«es.
auick Delivery
IIP****1*        LETTERs
ADDRESS
LOBNITZ & CO., "do
REHF*E*. SCOTIA
Telegraphic Address: "Lobnitz, Renfrew."   Al Code used.THE MINING RECORD.
XIII.
Hi
$Je   \&i3ikk^\
Fire Boss  Becomes  Mine Foreman
| Through the I.  C.  S.   ||       If
The information gained from my Metal Mining Course has been of great practical benefit
to me in my position. The instruction papers are so well chosen, and so easy to understand,
that any man can complete a Course with a little study and make it a means of future success.
The Reference Library which is furnished free, is worth more than the price of the Course.
As a result of the knowledge gained through your Schools, I have advanced from fire boss to
assistant foreman, and then to mine foreman, with proportionate increases in salary.
Henry  Parmley, Scofield,. Utah.
This is but one of many hundred indorsements
proving that our students succeed. Our new
free booklet, " 1001 Stories of Success," gives
the names, addresses, and progress of over a
thousand other students, whom we have placed
on the road to progress and prosperity. Every
student of the I. C. S. is entitled to the assistance of the Students' Aid Department in secur=
ing advancement or a new position. Start
TODAY to rise!
Fill in and Mail the Coupon NOW!
International   Correspondence  Schools,     «
►                                           Box 82<3, Scranton, Pa.                                           *
Please explain how I can qualify for the position marked X below.
■
Metal-Mine Supt.
Metal-Mine Foreman
Metallurgist
Milling Engineer
Fire Boss
Civil Engineer
Surveyor
Coal-Mine Foreman
Mine Surveyor
■ Mechanical Engineer
Machine Designer
Mechanical Draftsman
Foreman Machinist
Foreman Toolmaker
Foreman Patternmaker
Foreman Blacksmith
Foreman Molder
Refrigeration Engineer
Traction Engineer
Electrical Engineer
Elec. Machine Designer
Electrician
Flectric-Lighting Supt.
E ectric-Railway Supt.
Telephone Engineer
Wirem&n
Dynamo Tender
Motorman
Steam Engineer
Engine Runner
Marine Engineer             ,
	
Hydraulic Engineer          ,
Municipal Engineer         ,
►	
	
	
Bridge Engineer 4
Railroad Engineer            .
	
Cotton-Mill Supt.
	
Woolen-Mill Supt.          ,
Chemist                           ^
	
Sheet-Metal Draftsman- ^
Bookkeeper
Stenographer
Teacher
To Speak French
To Speak German
>
To Speak Spanish           .
: n,
,m(.                                                                             Cirv                    ...                               *
I*   St. and No.
_Srare_THE MINING RECORD
ALUS CHALMERSH
  SUCCESSOR     TO
THE   fidllRb   RALLISIfO.FRASER  & CHALMERS.     GATES   IRON    WORKS,       DICKSON   MFO.   CO.
MUwaukee.Wis. J|S Chicago.   III. Chicago, 111. Scranton.Pa.
MANUFACTURERS   OF
MINING   MACHINERY
GATE.S' TUBE  MILL
This cut illustrates the highest type of all modern fine pulverizers, namely, the Gates Tube Mill. As a tube
mill it is essentially a fine pulverizer and when used as such is effective and economical, giving large capacity at a
very low cost for repairs. The Tube Mill consists of a plate steel shell, made to revolve by means of heavy gearing
at about 25 revolutions per minute. The shell is about half filled with hard flint pebbles and material to be pulverized, and the constant rotation and waye-like tumbling action of j the pebbles produces an enormous and flexible
grinding surface. It is continuous in its operation, being equipped with the Gates Patent Automatic Adjustable
Feeder and most approved form of dustless discharge. As the fineness of the discharged product depends upon
the quantity of material fed, we have taken special pains to produce an automatic feeder, driven from the mill itself,
capable of being adjusted to a nicety, which is not found in any other tube mill. In a modified form this same type of
mill can be used for wet pulverizing, and we have furnished a number of the smaller sizes for regrinding jig tailings.
We have patterns for and are prepared to manufacture mills o($ 43 54 and 60 inches in diameter, and of any
practicable length for the respective diameters.
BRANCH OFFICES:
NEW YORK. BroadExchangeBldg.
^^BURO, 1212 flick Bldg.
MINNEAPOLIS. 416 (brnExclunpeBldg.
DENVER.   l649TromonlSl.
GENERAL
OFFICE :
CHICAGO^^«|,U.SJl
HOME   INSURANCE BUILDING.'
BRANCH OFFICES:
SALTlAKECnr. Dooly Bj^g
SPOKANE^ 512 FirslAvftJy
SAN FRANCISCO. 623Haywmll%
LONDON. ENG.   l60DaslmofldltouseTHE-MINING RECORD
XV.
ALUS CHALMERSlCa
SUCCESSOR     TO _...
™E   ^I^eR^LUS    C°-     FRASE^aC"^LMERsl GATES   IRON    ^M^^^KI
Milwaukee, Wis. Chicago     III /-•.■     ..      ... i'rtSsJ-'-'sSSS
^nicago,    m. 1MS|       Chicago, 111. Scranton.Pa.    ?KS&
MANUFACTURERS  OF
MINING   MACHINERY
BRADLEY
IMPROVED
CHILIAN
MILL * <*■
6«Foot Bradley Improved
=== Chilian	
Grinding  Mill
This mill is driven from underneath to avoid oil from the
driving gears dropphig into the
grinding pan. The three solid
rollers, each weighing 6,400 lbs.,
are so rigged to the vertically
adjustable driving spider that the
centrifugal force of the rollers
augments their efficiency for
crushing and grinding.
.The roller shaft journals are
hinged in the spider so as to permit each roller to independently
adjust itself to the amount of
material on the ring die. A step
box fitted with steel wearing
rings not only supports the
spindle's weight, but also prevents its being lifted by the
centrifugal force of the rollers.
All bearings are made extra
large and adjustable, and special
care has been taken to overcome
end thrust. The ore and water
are fed to the annular launder,
placed directly on top of the
driving head, and are from it
spouted right in" front of each
roller. Back of each roller is a
scraper to agitate the ore bed and
to assist in washing pulp against
the screens. The screening surface is extra large, and the ring
die and roller tires are made of
extra hard and tough rolled steel.
Sole "Builders of
Reynolds Corliss Engines for all
Power Purposes
Riedler Pumps and Air Compressors
BRANCH OFFICES:
NEW YORK. Broad ExchangeBldg.
PITTSBURG, 1212 nick Bldg.
MINNEAPOLIS. 416 (nrnExchangrBldg.
DENVER,   l649TromonlSi.
GENERAL
OFFICE :
CHICAfiO^ILL,U.S.A.
HOME   INSURANCE BUILDING.
BRANCH OFFICES H
§|j§jtAttE Clipooly Block| i
SPOKANE,     512 Fol||
SAN FRANCISCO, 623HaywitlBld<j.
LONDON. ENG.   160 DashwoodltouseXVI.
THE MINING RECORD.
BRITISH COLUMBIA
THE MINERRL PROVINCE OF eftNHDH.
Gold, Silver, Lead, Copper, Cool, Coke, Oil Iron, Mercury, Platinum, etc.
The Mines of British Columbia have produced over
If       $180,000,000. '   i
Amount and Vai,ue of Mineral Products for 1899, 1900 and 1901.
Gold, placer
Gold, lode	
Silver	
Copper	
Lead	
Coal	
Coke 	
Other materials.
Customary
Measure
Ounces    	
Pounds    	
Tons, 2,240 lbs.
1899.
Quantity. Value.        Quantity
67,245
138,315
2,936,413
7.722.591
21,862,436
1,306,324
34,251
Si,344,9°o
2,857,573
1,663,708
i,35i,453
878,870
3,918,962
171,255
206,400
1900.
$12,393,121
63,936
167,153
' 3,958,175
9,997,080
63,358,621
1,439,595
85,149
Value.
$1,278,724
3,453,38i
2,309,200
1,615,289
2,661,887
4,318,785
425,745
251,740
$16,344,751
1901.
(Estimated).
Quantity.
43,204
227,696
4,685,718
30,736,798
50,529,260
1,529,210
i34,76o
Value.
$      892,500
2,704,200
. 2,614,002
4,951,698
1,970,641
4,587,630
673,800
309,030
$ 20,713,501
Production for 1890, $2,608,608 ; for 1899, $i2,393,131; for 1900 $16,344,751; for 1901, $20,713,201.
GOLD.—Placer gold mining, which in early days formed the
chief mineral industry of the province, and made it famous all
the world over, still continues to be important, while improved
methods of working the gravel deposits, together with cheaper
transportation and cost of mining, have venlered the working
of large deposits, long known to exist, mow profitable where
previously impossible.
The area of country known to contain placer gold is enormous, and has only been touched, leaving still virgin ground
well worth the prospecting for this, the only class of " poor
man's  mine."
Recent discoveries of new placer fields iln the Atlin district,
the Cassiar district, and the Cariboo district near the Horsefly.
river, are proof that the field is not yet exhausted, and promise
a revival of this important industry.
HYDRAULIC MINING plants costing large amounts of
money are being installed in Atlin, Cassiar, Omineca and Cariboo, at points widely separated, indicating the extent of the
gold deposits. One company recovered $350,000 in srold during 1900.
DREDGING FOR GOLD is receiving deserved attention,
and dredges are at work on the Fraser, Thompson, Quesnel
and other rivers, on all of which streams good ground may yet
be obtained.
LODE GOLD MINING is now being prospected in various
parts of the provinoe, and in certain instances very successful,
notably at Ymir,  Cariboo-McKinniey and elsewhere.
GOLD-COPPER ORES are being extensively worked at
Rossland by the Le Roi, War Eagle find associated companies,
while other mfines in the camp are rapidly becoming important
producers.
The tannage of this camp alone in 1900 was 217,676 tons, and
there ^nl! be an increase this year.
SILVER-LEAD.—The silver production of the prov'nce
in 1900 showed an increase over 1899 of 39 per cent, while the
lead production increased 206 per cesfc, largely derived from
properties in East Kootenay, rendered available by railroad
construction.
This year the increase will not be as great, but the industry
is expected to hold its own.
COPPER.—Copper is being produced to a limited extent
at Rossland, where the chief value of the ore i-s in gold, but the
feature of thfe branch of the industry is the development and
mining of a large tonnage of low-grade copper ores" in the
Boundary district, of which there seems to be an almost un-
mited amount. The output of ore from this district alone will
amount to from 1,20a to 1,500 tons of ore per diem,
The Coast district will this year show a very considerable
copper production, from the Vancouver Island and Texada
Island mines.
Prospecting for copper is receiving great attention, and the
discoveries made on the Coast, in the Similkameen valley, etc.,
give great promise.
IRON.—With the great probability of an iron-smelting plant
on the Northern Pacific Coast in the near future, what promise
to be extensive, bodies of magnetite iron ore have been developed on the Coast, while other deposits of iron ore are now under
development in the Goat River and Fort Steele mining divis-
ions, and still other bodies occur near Kamloops.
COAL AND COKE.—In 1900 the Vancouver Island collieries made a net output of 1,336,023 tons of coal and 19,234 tons
of coke, and in 1901 even this output promises to be exceeded.
In 1900 the Crow's Nest collieries made a net output of
!03,572 tons of coal, and 69.915 tons of coke. In 1901 this output
will be doubled at the least. These mimes alone are putting- out
from 1.500 to 2,000 tons of coal per diem.
Of this output in 1900, 914,183 tons off coal and 51 757 tons of
coke were exported, chiefly to the United States. The remainder was consumed in local smelters and other industries.
SMELTERS.—In the province there are smelters in active
operation at Trail, Nelson, Grand Forks, Greenwood and Van
Anda ; while this coming year will probably see one erected in
East Kottenay and two others on the coast.
Refineries are yet lacking, but the building of at least one
is pretty well assured.
CAPITAL.—Capital can now find here many excellent opportunities for investment, as the values placed on mines and undeveloped properties has reached a reasonable basEs. If proper
business care is used, and the experience of competent men
£&ffized, these investments should be safe as well as profitable.
MINERAL LANDS.—Mineral lands are open to location
to any person over 18 years of age, who has obtained a free
miner's certificate, and perfect title to lode claims can be
easily secured after $500 worth of work has been done per claim.
A great extent of territory has yet to be prospected.
For information,, reports, bulletins, etc., address
w.
The Hon. the Minister of Mines,
VICTORIA, B.C.
F   Robertson,
Provincial Mineralogist,
VICTORIA, B.  C.THE MINING RECORD.
XVII
BENNETT'S  FUSE
CROWN
BRAND
THE   KING   OF   FUSES
The WHITE COUNTERED GUTTA PERCHA FUSE is the POPULAR FAVORITE in the
mines of British Columbia, Australia, the Transvaal, and the World over.      Beware of Spurious
Imitations Made to Catch the Unwary.
HOLMAN BROS.
CAMBORNE,^ ||2 CORNWALL
Manufacturers of
Boilers, Air Compressors, Mining Machinery
The Holman
Patent Roek Drill
Specially Adapted to B. C: Mining.
Awarded Gold Medal Greater Britain Exhibition
Awarded Gold Medal
CHARLES CAMMELL & CO. Ld.
| SHEFFIELD,   ENGLAND,
Manufacturers of Drill Steels, Best Refined Cast Steel Files, and Rasps,  Steel Axles, Wheels
and Cranks.    Rails and Fish Plates.made to any specification.
Steel Plates, etc.    Stamp Mill Dies and Shoes.
ROWLAND MACHIN,
5 Yates St.,   VICTORIA,   B. C.
General Agent for Canada.■■»
XVIII
THE  MINING RECORD.
PROFESSIONAL AND BROKERS.
J. C. GWILLIM, B, Sc.
Mining Engineer.
Late of Geological Survey of Canada, (Atlin District), six years' experience in
B. C. mining districts.
BAKER STREET,
NELSON, B.C.
JAMES BRADY,
Dominion and Provincial Land Surveyor,
Mining Engineer.
Properties surveyed, examined and reported on.   Agent for procuring
Crown grants.
GOLDEN, B. C.
CHAS. E. OLIVER, M. E.
. HEDLEYr    B. C.
Properties in the Similkameen carefully sampled and reported on.
I have the handling of three of the standard properties of
Camp Hedley and solicit correspondence from any first-class mining man or corporation regarding same.
s. m. McGregor, b.a. Sc.
w. d. McGregor, m e.
McGregor & co.,
MINING and CIVIL ENGINEERS        -,. ,    ^. --* A ».     D   /^
and LAND SURVEYORS. OLUOAIMj   D . \s
Reports on Mines and Prospects.
Act as agents in doing assessment work, applying for Crown grants and in
taking general charge of preliminary development work.
P. 0. Box 453.
Telephone 895
A. R. BARROW, a.m.i.c.e.
Mine Surveyor
Mine Surveys instituted and plans brought up to date at regular
intervals.    Steam Engines and Air Compressors
Indicated and valves Set.
PROVINCIAL   LAND   SURVEYOR.
4 View Street, Victoria, B.C.
^^ IY/1 i   i!Z)    is one of the most promising gold camps in
}\   | w| ;   ^l    British Columbia arid now offers many capital opportunities for profitable investment.
For further particulars write
PERCY J. GLEAZER,
MINING BROKER AND AGENT, YMIR, B. C.
Code—Moreing & Neal's.
E. W. WIDDOWSON,
PROVINCIAL ASSAYER.      -      -     -      YMIR, B.C.
Late Assayer to: The Hall Mines Smelter, Nelson, B. C.
The Winnipeg Mining and Smelting Company.
I.ate Chemist to: The Hollow ay Chemical Works, London, N. Etc.
Mineral Analysis and Working Tests a Specialty. All samples received by
mail or express receive prompt attention.   Reliable reports on
Mining Properties in this District.
P. O. Box 11.        YMIR, B.C.        G. N. Express Company.
GEO. A. WALKEM, B. Sc.
(McQili).
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL
Consulting Engineer
Reports made.
Plans and Estimates made.
Expert evidence given.
Inst, of Mech. Bng. of England. , ,
Amer. Inst. ofBlec. Bng. Vancouver, B.C.
Manager Vancouver Engineering Works, I^td.
... . j R. GIFFORD,
Consu ting Mining Engineer, M.C, M.L
Late Manager The Hall Mining and
Smelting Co.,  Ltd.,  Nelson,  B. C.
Room 20, Flood Building.     San Francisco, CaL
J. McLELLAN,
Associate Royal School of Mines, London.
Mining Engineer and Assayer,
TROUT LAKE CITY, B. G
reliable: assays
Gold     $ .75 I Gold and Silver.  $i.oo
Lead 75 | Gold, Silver, Copper   1.50
SArtPLES BY MAIL RECEIVE PROflPT ATTENTION.
Gold and Silver refined and bought
OGDEN ASSAY CO. "25 ArapaDhe°„evfr:eceto,orado.
THE STUART ROBERTSON CO., Ltd.,
Successors to A. W. MORE & CO.
MINING AND STOCK BROKERS
Codes used: Bedford-McNeil's, Moreing & Neals,
Clough's, and A.B.C., Fourth Edition.
23 BROAD STREET,
VICTORIA, B. C.
<XK>0O<>O0<>O<X><>0<X><XXK><X><>O<>0O<>OOO<><XX>OO<K>OOO
SMELTER AND MILL
DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION  AND   DETAILS.
Geo. Williams, M. E.
P.O. Box 341, LADYSMITH.
Converters,   Reverberatories,  Concentrators.
OOO<KX>O0O00OO00OO<>0^>0O<>0<>O0<>0<><>0<>O0<>0O<>00Oi
THOS. DRUMMOND, M.E. and C.E..
B. A. Sc. McGill University, Montreal,
Member Canadian Society of Civil Engineers.
Mining Properties reported upon.    Information furnished.    General Engineering work promptly performed.   References furnished.
QUESNELLE FORKS, CARIBOO, B. C.
JOHN B. HOBSON,
Manager Con. Cariboo Hyd.
Mining Co., Ltd.
Consulting Mining Engineer,
BULLION, BRITISH COLUMBIA.
28 years' experience in the equipment and operation of targe hydraulic,   Deep Gravel,  cDrift and Gold Quartz Mines, in
California and British Columbia.
Telegraphic and Cable Address "HOBSON" Ashcroft B. CTHE MINING RECORD.
XIX
PROFESSIONAL ADVERTISEMENTS.
H. E. T. HAULTAIN, C. E.
CONSULTING
MINING ENGINEER,
office: jkflg'eU,  Nelson, B.C.
J.B.TYRRELL,   §
M. Inst. M. M., M.N. Eng. Inst. M. M. E., F. G. S.,
Mining Engineer,
DAWSON, YUKON, CANADA.
Cable Adcress:   " TYRRELL," Dawson.      Code: Bedford McNeil's
T. H.GORE.
J. H. McGregor.
I   Gore & McGregor,
Provincial and Dominion Land Surveyors
AND   CIVIL   ENGINEERS,
Five Sisters' Block. VICTORIA and NELSON.
WALTER E. SEGSWORTH
Licensed Provincial Assayer
Control Assays and Supervision of Ore Shipments a Specialty.
GREENWOOD, B. C.
WILLIAM A. BAUER,
Dominion & Provincial Land Surveyor
Surveys of Mines, Mineral Claims and Crown Lands.
■ Crown Grants obtained and Assessments managed for absentees.
Offiees-FERGUSON and VANCOUVER, B.C.
M. I. M. M., M. I. M. E.,
M. Can. I.M.
Cable Address : Phloxes, Nelson
A. B. C. Code.
R. C. Campbell=Johnston
Mining Engineer and Metallurgist.
Nelson, B. C.
A. A. HOLDICH
Analytical Chemist and Metallurgist
Royal School of Mines, London.
Seven years at Morfa Works, Swansea.
Seventeen years chief chemist to Wigan Coal andiron Co.
Late chemist Hall Mines Co., Ltd.
Assays and Analyses made on all varieties of mineral and many organic
substances.
Special experience in Smelting—both Swansea and American process.
FERGUSON, B. C.
RELIABLE ASSAYS
Gold  $.50      Gold andSilver $1.00
I,ea<i .'.'..'.'.'.' 50      Gold, Silver and Copper  1.50
Samples by mail receive prompt attention.
Gold and Silver refined and bought.
OGDEN ASSAY CO.,   1725 Arapahoe St., DENVER, Colo.
POHLE &, PARMELEE
ASSAYERS and CHEMISTS,
Special Attention to Control and Umpire Work.
Ores tested to determine the best method of treatment.    Experimental work on chemical processes or patents.    General
Commercial analysis.     Thirty years experience.
Prices and sample sacks free on application.
 1627 CHAMPA ST., DENVER, Colo.
CHRIS.  OUTHETT,
Associate of Royal College of Science, London, England.
Inland Assay Office,        KAMLOOPS, B.C.
Provincial Assayer.
Mineral and Coal Analysis a specialty.      Reports made on Mining Properties
Mail samples receive prompt attention.
Richard H. Parkinson
Provincial Land Surveyor,
Hydraulic Engineer.
FAIRVIEW, B. C.
Associate Member o£ the Canadian Society of Civil Engineers.
Water Works, Water-power Plants, Irrigation Projects, Bridges, Roads,
Tramways, Estimates of Construction, Surveys.
CecilM. Bryant, A.R.S M., A.I.M.M.       E. Philip Gilman, A.R.S.M., F.G.S.
Pel lew-Harvey, Bryant & Gilman
PROVINCIAL ASSAYERS.
The Vancouver Assay Office and Ore Testing Works.
Established  1890.
•   MILL, SMELTER, CONCENTRATION AND CYANIDE TESTS.
Reliable reports on mining properties. Complete analyses of Ores and Coal
Victoria Office : 4 View Street (Opposite Driard Hotel.)
Wil. M. BREWER, niNING ENGINEER,
MEM. N. of ENG. INST. MINING & MECH. ENG.
and AM. INST., M. E.
Molsons Bank Building,
VANCOUVER, B.C.
TEL. 846.
P. O. BOX 43
T. J. SMITH,
MINING  BROKER.
Syndicates and Companies formed to develop mining claims
Secretary Vancouver Mining Stock Exchange.
611 Hastings Street West, VANCOUVER, B. C
A. A. WATSON, B. 5c.
PROVINCIAL ASSAYER,      VERNON, B. C.
Analyst and Mineralogist
Honours Graduate in Chemistry, Victoria University, England.
Reports made on Mining Properties.
Seven years experience in Australia. South America. England and B. C.
Assay Charges—Gold, $i; Silver. $i; Copper, $2; Lead, $1 ;  Gold and Silver, $1.50 ; Gold and Copper, $2.50; Gold, Silver and Copper, $3 ; Gold, Silver,
Copper and Lead, $3 50 ; Complete analysis of any ore, $10.
•SPECIAL ATTENTION TO SAMPLES BY MAIL""**
Assay Office and Chemical Laboratory,
28 BROAD ST., VICTORIA, B. C.
(Opp.  Driard Hotel.)
WILLIAM F. BEST, F.C.S.
ANALYTICAL CHEMIST AND ASSAYER
(Heidelberg and Leipzig.)
Persona} attention given to all assaying and Chemical Anafe-sii
R-jroert evidence before the Courts.
IllXX
THE MTNING RECORD.
MINING PUBLICATIONS, EI"C.
RERCV  W.  CHARLESON
STOCK  AND   INVESTMENT  BROKER,
417 Hastings Street, Vancouver, B. Q.
B. C. 1TINES AND STOCKS A SPECIALTY.
Member Vancouver Stock Exchange.
Notary Public for British   Columbia.
CORRESPONDENCE INVITED. P. O. BOX 187. Cable Address—CHALCOUVER.
Codes used A. B. C. 4th Edition, Moering & Neal, Bedford McNeill, Cloughs.
NOW READY.
The MINERAL INDUSTRY
Its Statistics, Technology and Trade in the United States and other
countries, to the end of 1900.
Edited by Joseph Struthers, Ph. D.
Volume X.—Copiously illustrated, containing numerous diagrams and
working drawings.   Price ?5.00, post paid.
THE SCIENTIFIC PUBLISHING CO., 253 Broadway New York.
The  Mining  Manual for 1902.
Published May 12th, 1902. By Walter R. Skinner.
Sixteenth Year of Publication.. (Established in 1887.;
A record oi information concerning
MINING   COMPANIES
(Gold, Diamond. Silver, Copper, Tin, Iron, and other Mines, Collieries,
Land and Exploration Concerns, &c.)   Followed by lists of
MINING COMPANY   DIRECTORS AND SECRETARIES
and concluding with a DICTIONARY  OF  MINING TERMS.
Over 1700 Pages.
THE MINING MANUAL FOR 1902.
Over 1700 pages.      In demy 8vo, cloth.      Price 21 s., post free.
London: WALTER R. SKINNER, 11-12, Clements Lane, Lombard St., E. C.
w
*^B
dBN
rtf>
&*
m
m
My Price List for Fall and Spring
is the most complete yet issued, containing all the different varieties in
Fruit, Shade and Ornamental Trees,
Roses, etc., etc.
Send for a copy.
LARITZ NURSERY, CAREY R0AD,
Victoria, B.   C.
POGSON, PELOUBET &, CO.
Public Accountants
NEW YORK 20 BROAD STREET
CHICAGO MARQUETTE  BUILDING
ST. LOUIS-'  CHEMICAL BUILDING
BUTTE HENNESSY BUILDING
R. MAYNARD
-   Importer and dealer in all kinds oi
Photographic    Supplies
Also Amateur Outfits, Kodaks, Hawkeyes,
Premos, Pocos,etc,
' Agent for
Imperial, Cramer   and   Hammer
Plates, Aristo-Platino, Solio, Klo-
ro, Velox and Dekho Papers
41 PANDORA St.
Victoria, B. C.
THE NATIONAL BANKER, Chicago, Illinois.
Is recognized as the leadingfinancial journal of the United States. Ih addition
to its circulation among banks it reaches the leading business industries of the
country. It reaches more private invertors and capitalists than any publication
in the U.S, It goes to retired merchants, conservative investors and thousands
of people with money to invest. The best evidences of its worth as an advertising medium is the fact that its advertisers remain with it permanently year
after year. In banks and business houses it is used as a work of reference. If
you desire to reach the moneyed class of the country, large or small, you should
place an advertisement in the National Banker. Any legitimate enterprisee
can secure all the money desired by making an announcement in this publi
cation. It is quoted from and referred to more by the press of America than
any financial j ournal in the United States. Subscripiion price $i.oo per year.
Advertising rates on application. Sample copies sent free Address all
communications to The National Banker, 84 & 86 La Salle St., Chicago,111.
M. R. SMITH & COMPANY
LIMITED.
Established I858.
Manufacturers of
High Class Biscuits *nd Confectionery
Gold Medals awarded at Royal Agricultural Exhibition
'95- '96, '97, '98. Medal and Diploma awarded at Colonial
and Indian Exhibitions. Silver Medals at Provincial Exhibitions, 1886.
BRANCH- VICTORIA,   B.   C.
430 CORDOVA STREET, VANCOUVER.THE MINING RECORD.
XXI
BRITISH COLUMBIA WHOLESALE SUPPLY HOUSES, ETC
A New Customer
Becomes a regular customer when once
started buying of us—
WHY ?       I
We have the Best Goods and   Largest
Assortment in the West.
We Can Fill Orders Promptly From Our Immense Stock.
"We manufacture a large quantity of Furniture, and import direct in car lots from the best makers everywhere
EVERYTHING    TO   FURNISH   A   HOME.
Write for illustrated catalogue, free.
WEILER BROS., VICTORIA, B. C.
ESTABLISHED
1862.
Canadian   Pacific Navigation Company, Ltd.
Steamers leave Victoria and Vancouver as follows:
Victoria=Vancouver Route.
Xeave Victoria daily 1 a.m.    Leave Vancouver daily 1.15 p.m.
West Coast, Vancouver Island Route.
Xeave Victoria 11 p.m., ist,   ioth and 20th day of month.
Northern  British Columbia Coast Route.
Xeave Victoria 11 p.m., ist and 15th day of month. Leave Vancouver 2 p.m., 2nd and 16th day of month.
Alaska Route.
;Steamships leave Victoria ii p.m. ist and 15th day of month, leave Vancouver 8 p.m. 2nd  and 16th day of  month
for Ketchikan and Skagway connecting with the White Pass and Yukon Route for Atlin,
Dawson, and Yukon River Points.
J. W. TROUP, Manager.
Victoria.
E. J. COYLE, Asst. Gen. Pass. Agent,
Vancouver.
TURNER,  BEETON & CO'Y
Victoria, Vancouver, and Nelson, B. C.
and at H. C. Beeton & Co., 33 Finsbury Circus, London, England.
*a„Ufac.«rer8„f       wholesale Merchants.   ^X-XV.
Clothing, Etc., Etc.
Goods indented from all parts of the world
Telegraphic Addresses :
'TURNER." Victoria; " BEETON," London; " TURBEET," Vancouver and Nelson
R.  R.   RITHET  &  CO.
Wholesale Merchants, Shipping & Insurance Agents.
Proprietors of Victoria Wharf, Columbia Flouring Mill ; agents for Victoria Lumber and
Manufacturing Company, Cheminus, V.I.; Pacific Coast Steamship Co., San Francisco.
m^HARF STREET. VICTORIA, B. C
 1 i	XXII
THE MINING RECORD.
BANKING ESTABLISHMENTS, ETC.
established,8,7.  BANK OF MONTREAL.
INCORPORATED BY ACT
OF PARLIAMENT.
HEAD OFFICE:
MONTREAL.
CAPITAL all paid up, $12,000,000.00      RESERVE FUND, $7,000,000.00.    UNDIVIDED PROFIT, $427,180.80.
Board of Directors—Bt. Hon. Lord Strathcona and Mount Royal, G. C. M. G., President.   Hon. G. A. Drummond, Vice-President.
A. T. Paterson, Ksq.; Edward B. Greenshields, Esq.; Sir William C. Macdonald; R. B. Angus,Esq.;
A. F. Gault, Esq ; James Ross, Esq.; R. G. Reid, Esq.
( F. W- TAYLOR Assistant Inspector
JAMES  A1RD Secretary
I Montreal-H. V.MEREDITH Manager
IN
L S. CLOUSTON General Manager
A. MACNIDER Chief Inspector and Superintendent of Branches
#- S. CLOUSTON Inspector of Branch Returns
BRANCHES
Province of Ontabio—Almonte, Belleville, Brantford, Brockville, Chatham, Cornwall, Deseronto, Fort William, Goderich, Guelph. Hamilton, Kingston. Lindsay, London, Otrawa, Perth Pe'erboro, Picton, Scirnia, Stratford,
St. Mary's Toronto,Toronto Yonge St. Branch, Wallaceburg.
Province op Quebec—Montreal: West End Br., Seigneurs St. Br., Point
St. Charles; Quebec.
Lo-web Provinces—Chatham, N.B.; Frederickton, N.B.; Moncton, N.B.
St. John N.B.; Amherst, N.S.; Halifax, N.S.; Sydney, N.S.
Province of Manitoba and North-West Territories—Winnipeg, Man.;
Calgary, Alberta; Lethbridge, Alberta; Regina, Assiniboia.
Province of British Columbia—Greenwood, Nelson, New Denver, New
Westminster, Ro&sland, Vancouver, Vernon, Victoria.
In Newfoundland—St. John's, Nfld., Bank of Montreal.
CANADA:
In Great Britain—London, Bank of Montreal, 22 Abchurch Lane, E.C,
Alexander Lang, Manager.
In the United States New York—R. Y. Hebden and J. M. Greata,
Agents, 59 Wall Street; Chicago—Bank of Montreal.
Bankers in Great Britain-London—The Bank of England, the Union
Bank of London, the London & Westminster Rank the National Prov. Bank
of England. Liverpool—The Bank of Liverpool, Ltd. Scotland—Tha British
Linen Company Bank and Branches.
Bankers in the United States—New York—The National City Bank,
The Bank of New York, N.B.A. Bosten—The Merchants' National Bank, J.
B. Moors & Co. Buffalo—The Marine Bank, Buffalo. San Francisco—The
First National Bank, The Bank of British Columbia, The Anglo-Californian
Bank.   Portland, Oregon—The Bank of British Columbia.
The Canadian Bank of Commerce
With Which is Amalgamated
The Bank of   British Columbia.
HEAD OFFICE :     TORONTO.
Paid Up Capital $   8,000,000
Rest and Undivided Profits      2,652,ooo
Aggregate Resources Over       70,000,000
HON. GEO. A. OOX, President. R.. E. WALKER,  General Manager,
LONDON OFFICE:  60 LOMBARD ST., E. C.
The Bank has 80 branches well distributed throughout the Dominion
and elsewhere, including the following in British Columbia and the Yukon
District:
Atlin,
Greenwood,
Nelson,
Sandon,
Cranbrook,
Kamloops,
New Westminster,
Vancouver,
Dawson
Nanaimo,
Ladysmith
Victoria,
Fernie,
White Horse.
BRANCHES IN THE UNITED STATES.
New York, San Francisco, Seattle Portland, Skagway.
Every description of banking business transacted.   Letters of credit on:
all parts of the world.   Exceptional facilities for handling gold dust.
Savings Bank Department.—Deposits of $1.00 and upwards received and
interest paid at current rates.
GEO. GILLESPIE,
MANAGER VICTORIA BRANCH
BANK OF BRITISH NORTH AMERICA
ESTABLISHED 1836.    INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER 1840.
Paid Up Capital, £1,000,000 Sterling. Reserve Fund, $1,776,333
LONDON, ENG., OFFICES, 5 GRACECHURCH STREET, E. C.
BRANCHES IN BRITISH COLUMBIA :
Victoria,   Vancouver,   Rossland,   Kaslo,   Ashcroft, Greenwood*
Also at the Gold Fields—DAWSON CITY.
A Savings Bank Department Has Been Established   n Connection With the Victoria Branch.
Highest Price Paid for Gold Dust and Amalgam. W. T. OLIVER, Mgr., Victoria, B. C.
MICHIGAN COLLEGE OF MINES.
An Engineering School with unique location, giving it unusual facilities
New Mining Engineering and Hydraulic Building, also Chemical and Metal
lurgical Building ready for fall term, 1902. For catalogue giving list of graduates and their occupations, address F. W. McNaik, President, Houghton, Mich.
PATENTS,
Caveats, Designs, Copyrights and Trade Marks obtained in Canada and all
foreign countries.
ROWLAND BRITTAIN,
Registered Patent Attorney, Mechanical Engineer and Draughtsman.
Write for full information and references.    Satisfaction guaranteed.
Room 20
Bank of British N orth America
VANCOUVER .B. C.
The Hall Mining & Smelting Co., Ltd.
NELSON,
B. C.
SMELTING DEPARTMENT
■ Purchases
GORRER ORE,
LEAD  ORE,
DRY ORE.
WANTED
Position by Provincial Licensed  Assayer.    Several years
experience in B. C.   Apply "A" Box 246 Victoria, B OTHE MINING RECORD.
XXIII
VAN.COUV1R ISLAND COAL.
COAL!    COAL!
The New Vancouver Coal
Mining and Land Co,
(LIMITED.)
FORMERLY THE VANCOUVER COAL COMPANY;
Are the Largest Coal Producers on the Pacific Coast
Nanaimo Coal.
Used Principally for Gas and Domestic Purposes.
Southf ield Coal
Steam Fuel.
Protection Island Coal and New Wellington Coal.
(House and Steam Coal), are mined by this Company exclusively.
THE NANAIMO COAL gives a large percentage of gas, a high illuminating power, unequalled by
any other bituminous coal in the world, and a superior quality of coke.
THE  SOUTH FIELD  COAL is used by all leading steamship lines on the Pacific.
THE NEW WELLINGTON COAL which was introduced in 1890, has already become a favorite
fuel for domestic purposes. It is a clean, hard coal, makes a bright and cheerful fire, and its lasting qualities make it the most economical fuel in the market.
THE PROTECTION ISLAND COAL is similar to the New Wellington Coal. This coal is raised
from the sub-marine workings under the Gulf of Georgia and is shipped from wharves both at Protection Island and Nanaimo.
The several mines of the Company are connected with their wharves at Nanaimo, Departure Bay
and Protection Island, where ships of the largest tonnage are loaded at all stages of the tide. Speck
despatch given to mail and ocean steamers.
SAflUEL M.  ROBINS, Supt, Nanaimo, B. C.XXIV
THE MINING RECORD.
TRANSr-ORTATION   COMPANIES AND HOTELS.
CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY
SOO-PACIFIC LINE.
THROUGH   TRAINS
Atlantic to Pacific Without Change
LOWEST RATES, BEST EQUIPMENT.
TO ALL POINTS IN CANADA AND UNITED STATES.
For full'particulars as to rates, time, and copies of C. P. R.  publications,  apply to
H. H, ABBOTT,
Agent-,
VICTORIA, B. C.
Or to E. J. COYLE,
Ass't General Passenger Agent,
VANCOUVER, B. C.
Esquimau and Nanaimo Railway.
Northbound. Daily.
Leave. a.m.
Victoria  9 :oo .
Shawnigan Lake  10:20
Duncans   11 :co
P.M.
Nanaimo    12:4s
Ar. Wellington      1:00
TIME TABLE ISIO. 44.
Northbound.
Leave.
outhbound.
Arrive.
P.M.
12
:o6
10
•46
10
:02
8
:i5
Lv. 8
:oo
A.M.
Victoria  4125
Shawnigan Lake  5 142
Duncans   6:20
Nanaimo  8:02
Ar. Wellington   8:17
Sat., Sun.
and Wed.    Southbound.
Arrive.
P.M.
8:10
7:01
6:05
4:25
Lv. 4:10
»««- v. Tickets tn Grot'ton via Westholme,   Stage leaves Daily, connecting with North and Sonth bound trains,   Double stage service Saturdays,
Su5day*"2d Wed^s™ys"connecting with morning and afternoon trains.   Fare from Victoria, Single $2, Return $3.
t»i        ah   Tickets Victoria to alberni—Stage leaves Wellington Tuesdays and Fridays on arrival of train from Victoria.   Returning from Alberni
Mondfys and Thursdays.   Fare from Victoria, single, $5.20, return $8.65
.   Tickets Victoria to ©owichan Lake via Duncans—Stage leaves Duncans Mondays, Wednesday and Fridays.   Fare from Victoria $5.00
eturn.
Excursion rates in effect to all points good Saturday and Snnday.
GE©.   L.   e©URTNEY,   Traffic   Manager.theMhudsons bay coy
-HAVE-
GENERAL STORES
-AT-
Jaie de Peres
Battleford
Calgary
Chapleau
Dauphin
Deloraine
Edmonton
Fort William
Kamloops
Langley
Lethbridge
Quesnelle
Rat Portage
Riding Mountain
Shoal Lake
Sudbury
Touchwood Hills
Vancouver
Victoria
Vernon
Whitewood s5r|
Winnipeg
ind at other principal points in British Columbia, Manitoba and Northwest Territories.   Purchasers will find a
these stores the best goods at moderate prices, imported direct from all the principal markets of the world.
Lower Fort Garry
Macleod
Mattawa
^fvJMorden
Nelson
Pincher Creek
Portage la Prairie
Port Simpson
Prince Albert
Qu'Appelle
|h every belt
|BIguaranteed
genuine oak tanned
SleaIher belting!
For Exposed Situations Use
'Lancashire*    Hair   Belting.
CATALOGUES AND DISCOUNTS
ON APPLICATION.
fji McLAREN, Montreal, T^onto
FELTEN&GUILLEAUME.Carlswerk,
Actien Gesellschaft, Mulheim on Rhine
manufacturers;«|£*
ELECTRICAL LEADS AND CABLES
Electric Lighting Cables for Coal Pits with arrangement for
avoiding fife damp explosions in case of the cable breaking.
WIRE ROPES FOR MINING
Roun^rand Flat Wire Ropes, "Albert," or so-called "Lang's" Lay
Ropes, Patent Looked Coil Wire Ropes, Patented Flattened Strand
Wire Ropes.
IRON, STEEL, COPPER AND BRONZE WIRj|§'
Superior qualities.
SOLE AGENTS FOR  CANADA :
WATSON JACK & CO.,
7 ST. HELEN STREET
MONTREAL
STRAIGHT LINE, DUPLEX
SIMPLE or COM POUND.
Ajft COMPRESSORS.-
ROCK    DRILLS." STEAM .rAIR
R
A
||l THE CANADIAN RANDfORILL COMPANY
D
VANCOUVER, B. $.
ROSSLAND, B. 6.
GREENWOOD, B. 6.
-    —     '  " ^^-wood. v»LL»NeE & eo„
Hamilton.
Toronto Office,
Bay Street South.
GEO. d. w©©o & eo.,
Winnipeg.
Wfod, Vailai^S^ Leqqa||Limite|
:■ ' - wHOLEsaLif -HHROwaR^yaNeoiJYEi^^.e.
(Successors to Tbos. Dun & «o., Ltd.)
Bar iron! SteelMfa|te|©reiSack^
AND ALL MINING
e©RRE^PONDEN©E SOLICITED.
mksm™™
SMELTING WORKS
-AT-
LElWBMI*W
Pretaxed tpPurcha^Mft^ as From. August ||st* ^onvenieS
to E* & 'MKbr Seaffl
C^p/ION'fcVlMST^^^Kgei
L'iE<
iRTHWESTffll
SMELTI1NG AND REFlliNG&O.
Buyers of Gold, Silver and Copper Ores, Mattes,
Bullion, Furnace and Cyanide products.
LOCATION OF WORKS
Crofton, Vancouver Island,  B§ C§
Published by the B. C. Record, Ld.
Printed by T. R. Cusack, Victoria. Canada.
B^jijSI^i^elS&jiJls