CANADIAN NORTH-WEST
BRITISH COLUMBIA 
HIS EXCELLENCY THE MARQUIS OF LANSDOWNE. 
OTTAWA
 1886THE LIBRARY
THE UNIVERSITY OF
BRITISH COLUMBIATWO SPEECHES OF THE MARQUIS OF LANSDOWNE.
Three Governors-General of Canada, have successively made prolonged
journeys «to the North-West of Canada, crossing the continent to the
Pacific Ocean ; and each, in a speech in Winnipeg, has given the result
of his impressions. Lord Dufferin went in 1877, proceeding by
American Railways to the point of Fisher's Landing, in Minnesota;
thence by the tedious yet picturesque, and by no means uncomfortable
mode of conveyance afforded by a Red River steamer, down the Red
Lake River to Grand Forks; thence by the Red River proper to Winnipeg; and thenqe by means of the ordinary conveyances of the country,
with Métis for attendants, he made prolonged journeys on the plains.
In 1881, the Marquis of Lorxe made a similar journey, proceeding by
the lakes to Thunder Bay, and thence to Winnipeg by nine miles of
ordinary road, one hundred and sixty miles of water, and three hundred
and twenty-five by rail. He proceeded west from Winnipeg one hundred and fifteen miles by rail, and thence by waggon and horses, camping out on the prairies by night, he crossed the second and third steppes
and reached the base of the Rocky Mountains. The Marquis of
Lansdowne, in the summer of 1885, found the rail nearly continuous
across the Continent, the last spike being driven within a few weeks
after his return.
The speech made by each at Winnipeg, relating his impressions,
was remarkable.    Lord Dufferik was more than uuially eloquent,
and after describing the almost wonders of  travel   before  reaching.
Winnipeg, he said :—I
"From its geographical position, and its peculiar characteristics,
Manitoba may be regarded as -the keystone of that mighty arch of
sister Provinces which spans the continent from the Atlantic to the
Pacific. It was here that Canada, emerging from her woods and
forests, first gazed upon her rolling prairies and unexplored North-
West, and learnt as by an unexpected revelation that her historical
territories of the Canadas, her eastern seaboards of New& Brunswick,
Labrador, and Nova Scotia^ her Laurentian lakes and valleys, corn
lands and pastures, though themselves more extensive than half a dozen
European kingdoms, were but the vestibules and antechambers to that
till then undreamt of Dominion, whose illimitable dimensions alike
confound the arithmetic of the surveyors and the verification of. the explorer. It was hence that, counting her past achievements as but the
preface and prelude to her future exertions and expanding destinies,
she took a fresh departure, received the afflatus of a more imperial
inspiration, and felt herself no longer a mere settler along the banks of
a single river, but the owner of half a continent, and in the magnitude
of her possession, in the wealth of her resources, in the sinews of her
material right, the peer of any power on earth."
Marquis
OP
The  following  are  extracts  from the speech of the
Lorne, describing his impressions :—
" Beautiful as are the numberless lakes and illimitable forests of
j_eewatin—the land of the north wind to the east of you—yet it was
pleasant to ' get behind the north wind ' and to reach your open plains.
The contrast is great between the utterly silent and shadowy solitudes
of the pine and fir forests, and the sunlit and br.-.y ocean of meadow-
land, voiceful with the music of birds, which stretches onward from the
neighbourhood of your city. In Keewatiu, the lumber industry and
mining enterprise can alone be looked for, and here it is impossible to
imagine any kind of work which ishall not produce results equal to
those attained in any of the great cities in the world. Unknown a few
years ago, except for some deferences which had arisen amongst its
people, we see Winnipeg now with a population unanimously joining in
happy concord, and rapidly lifting it to the front rank amongst the
commercial centres of the Continent. We may look in vain elsewhere
for a situation so favourable and commanding, many as are the fair
regions of which we can boast.
"Nowhere can you find a situation whose natural advantages
promise so great a future as that which seems ensured to Manitoba and
to Winnipeg, the heart city of our Dominion. The measureless
meadows which commence here, stretch without interruption of their
good soil westward to your boundary. The Province is a green sea
over which the summer winds pass in waves of rich grasses and flowers,
and on this vast extent it is only as yet here and there that a yellow
patch shows some gigantic wheat field	" Like a great net cast over the whole are the bands and clumps of"
poplar wood which are everywhere to be met with, and which, no-
doubt, when the prairie fires are more carefully guarded against, will,
wherever they are wanted, still further adorn the landscape. The
meshes of this wood netting are never further than twenty or thirty
miles apart. Little hay swamps and sparkling lakelets teeming with
wild fowl are always close at hand, and if the surfaice water in some of
these has alkali, excellent, water can always be had in others by
■the simple process of digging for it a short distance beneath the sod
with a spade, the soil being so devoid of stones that it is not even
necessary to use a pick. No wonder that under these circumstances
we hear no croaking	
" There was not one person who had manfully faced the first difficulties—always far less than those to be encountered in the older
Provinces—but said that he was getting on well, and he was glad he
had come, and he generally added that he believed his bit of the country
must be the best, and that he only wished his friends could have the \
same good fortune, for his expectations were more than realized. It is-
well to remember that the men who will succeed here, as in every
young community, are usually the able-bodied.
" Favourable testimony as to the climate was everywhere given.
The heavy night dews throughout the North-West keep the country
green when everything is burned to the south, and the steady winter
cold, although it sounds formidable when registered by the thermometer,
is universally said to be far less trying than the cold to be encountered,
at the old English Puritan city of Boston, in Massachusetts. It is the
moisture in the atmosphere which makes cold tell, and the Englishmen
who, with the thermometer at zero, would in his moist atmosphere be
shivering, would here find one flannel shirt sufficient clothing while
working	
I With the fear of Ontario before my eyes, I would never venture to
compare a winter here to those of our greatest Province, but I am
bound to mention that when a friend of mine put the question to a
party of sixteen Ontario men who had settled in the western portion of
Manitoba as to the comparative merits of the cold season of the two
provinces, fourteen of them voted for the Manitoba climate, and only
two elderly men said that they preferred that of Toronto	
" You have a country whose value .it would be insanity to question,
and which, to judge from the emigration taking place from the older
provinces, will be indissolubly linked with them. Itrmust support a
vast population. If we may calculate from the progress we have
already made in comparison with our neighbours, we shall have no
reason to fear comparison with them on the new areas now open to us.
Exclusive of Newfoundland, we have now four million four hundred
thousand peop-_, and these, with the exception of the comparatively
small numbers as yet in this Province, are restricted to the old area.
Yet for the last ten years our increase has been over 18 per cent.,whereas during the same period all the New England States taken together have shown an increase only of 15 per cent. In the last thirty
years in Ohio, the increase has been 61 per cent.; Ontario has had
during that space of time 101 per cent, of increase ; while Quebec has
increased 52 per cent. Manitoba in ten years has increased 289 per
cent., a greater -rate than any hitherto obtained, and, to judge from
this year's experienqe, is likely to increase to an even more wonderful
degree during the following decade."
The two speeches delivered Jby His Excellency the present Governor
General, it is the main object of this pamphlet to reproduce, as containing the careful and guarded and responsible expressions of opinion
and observation of an imperial statesman of the acknowledged standing
of the Marquis of Lansdowne.
The length of the main trunk line of the Canadian' Pacific Railway
from Montreal, the head of Atlantic Ocean navigation, for steamships
between five and six thousand cons, to the navigable waters of the
Pacific, is as follows :
Statute
%f&k Miles.
Montreal to Callander        345
Callanoier to Port Arthur. .        657
Port Arthur to Red River, opposite Winnipeg ..       428
Red River to Savonas' Ferry     1,252
iSavonas' Ferry to Burrard Inlet        213
2,895.
It may be remarked that the Canadian Pacific Railway Company
have in addition six hundred and four miles of branch lines acquired
and built, making a total of three thousand four hundred and ninty-
nine miles of rail. The total cost of construction, of the Pacific Works
proper, was about a hundred and forty millions of dollars. The work
of building was unexampled in its rapidity, having in view the great
physical obstacles which had to be overcome. The contract with the
Company was made in 1880, and the last spike driven in the autumn
of 1885.
The following table of comparative distances is of general interest in
connection with the completion of the Canadian trans-continental
railway :
Statute
Miles.
Main Line—Montreal to Vancouver.     All rail
route      2,898
From New York to Vancouver, via Brockville
and Canadian Pacific Railway      3,158
From New York to San Francisco, via Central and
Union Pacific Railways,and shortest connect-ing lines through the United States   3,331
From Liverpool to Montreal '.    3,043
From Liverpool to New York    3,431
From Liverpool to Vancouver, via Montreal and
Canadian Pacific Railway 5,941
From   Liverpool  to  San Francisco, via  shortest
connecting lines in the United States    6,762
From Liverpool to Yokohama (Japan), via Montreal and Canadian Pacific Railway 10,977
From Liverpool to Yokohama (Japan), via New
York and San Francisco 11,990
It will, be seen from a comparison of the facts afforded by this table
that, by the construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway, even New
York, Boston, and Portland will be brought from twenty to one hundred
miles nearer the Pacific coast than they are at present by the Union
Pacific Railway ; and that, while the distance from San Francisco to
New York by the Union Pacific is 3,331 miles, the distance from
Montreal to the Pacific Ocean by the Canadian is 2,895 miles. Again,
compared with the Union Pacific, the Canadian line will shorten the
passage from Liverpool to China about a thousand miles. In addition
to greater shortness of distance, there are remarkable engineering advantages in favour of the Canadian line as compared with the lines,
from New York to San Francisco, traversing' the United States. And
it is evident from these facts that* the Canadian railway in entering
into competitior for the through traffic between the oceans, will possess,
in a very high degree, the essential elements of success.
The conditions thus established are of Imperial as well as of
Canadian interest. A new route is thus established between the
United Kingdom and the East, available for both military and commercial purposes, even if the Suez Canal was closed. This route is
wholly through British territory on the Continent of ^America, with
the open oceans at each of its termini,-with two of the best harbours
in the world ; and coal of superior quality and in great abundance on
both coasts; the coal of British Columbia having been demonstrated
by tests made by U. S. Naval officers to be by far the most valuable
of any found on the Pacific shores for steam making purposes. The
difference in economy in favour of the coal found in British Columbia
being that represented by the figures respectively of 1,800 and 2,400
pounds for producing a given quantity of steam.
This conjunction of great advantages of favourable grades and
curves and shortness of line, passing through a rich, well watered,
agricultural country, bountifully endowed with coal, and with favourable conditions as respects navigation on both sides of the Continent,
is already beginning to attract the attention which its importance
•demands, and leaves no room for reasonable doubt that it will in the
near future lead to great commercial development. It is, in fact, a
position  which is unique in the world,  and which   must exercise amarked influence on what has been hitherto called the " Trade of the
East," and also of that vast Pacific trade which has been depicted as
one of the events of the future, by the author of " Greater Britain."
A table is subjoined of the territorial area of the Provinces and
North-West Territory of Canada ; the figures of the four old Provinces
of Canada being taken from the Introduction to the Census of 1881 :
Sq. Miles.
Prince Edward Island  2,133
Nova Scotia        20,907
New Brunswick           27,174
Quebec       188,688
Ontario .-      181,800
Manitoba 5      123,200
British Columbia      341,305
The Territories 2,585,000
Total square miles    3,470,207
It is to be observed that the areas of the great waters, such as the
great lakes and rivers of the Upper Provinces and the St. Lawrence,
the bays and inlets of the Lower Provinces, are not included in the
above table of square miles, these being compiled from census districts
established with a view of apportioning population to specific areas of
land. The areas of these waters, as nearly as they can be estimated
from measurement on the maps, .would be about 140,000 square miles,
which, added to the areas taken from the census districts, would give a
total of over 3,610,000 square miles.
The area of the whole of the continent of Europe is 3,900,000 square
miles ; the area, of the United States, exclusive of Alaska, is 2,933,588
square miles—that of Alaska is 577,390 square miles—combined
making 3,510,978 miles. Thus the Dominion is nearly six hundred
thousand square miles larger than the United States without Alaska,
and nearly eighteen thousand square miles larger than both combined.
The total population of the Dominion by the census of 1881 was
4,324,810, against 3,687,024, as shown by the census of 1871. The
population, therefore, may be roughly estimated at a little over four
and three quarter millions, and approaching five millions in 1886. The
increase in the old Provinces during the decenniad is over 18 per cent.
The increase for the same Provinces in 1871 over 1861 was over 12
percent. The number of males in 1881 was 2,188,854; that of the
females 2,135,956 ; there being a preponderance of more than 50,000
males over the females in the Dominion. This has probably arisen
from the excess in immigration of males over females ; and it is very
desirable in the social and economical interests of the Dominion that
this difference should be redressed by an increased immigration of
.females.
-Of this population, 478,235 were born in the British Isles and Pos-sessions; 101,047 in Prince Edward Island; 420,088 in Nova Scotia;
288,265 in New Brunswick; 1,327,809 in Quebec; 1,467,988 in
Ontario; 19,590 in Manitoba ; 32,275 in British Columbia ; 58,430 in
the Canadian North West Territories ; 77,753 in the United States ;
and 53,330 in other countries.
Of the population of the Dominion 641,703 live in cities and towns
having,a population of over 5,000 inhabitants.
The trade of Canada has very greatly increased since Confederation.
At the end of 1868, the first fiscal year after the union, the total exports
were $57,567,888.00 ; in 1884-5, $89,238,361.00. In 1868 the total
imports were $73,459,644.00; in 1884-5, $108,941,486.00. The total
trade being in 1868, $131,027,532.00: and in 1884-5, $198,179,847.00:
and the amount of duties collected was $19,133,558.99.
Among the exports, the value of animals and their produce was
$26,593,994.00: agricultural products, $19,120,366.00 ; and products
of the forest, $22,873,305.00 ; of the mine, $3,836,470.00 ; and of
fisheries, $7,976,313,00.
.The total value of the Canadian fisheries in 1884 was $17,852,721.00
against $14,499,979.71 in 1880. The value of fish exported in 1885 was
$7,976,313.00. These figures show that by far the largest portion of
the product of the fisheries of the Dominion is consumed at home.
It will appear from the.comparatively small export of the products of
the mine that the vast mineral resources of Canada have scarcely begun '
to be developed.    There has been, however, a considerable consumption
of coals in the Dominion.
The total amount of receipts for the Dominion in 1884 was $95,898,-
591.42, and the receipts at the credit of the Consolidated Fund were
^31,861,961.73. The payments from the Consolidated Fuud were
$31,107,706.25. These two last payments represent the ordinary
revenue and expenditure. The total amount of the Funded and Unfunded Debt of Canada on first July 1884 was $242,482,416.00,
Against this amount the Assets held by the Dominion for Sinking Fund,
etc., amounted to $42,629,649.00, making a Net Debt of $199,852,767.
The amount of Net Debt per capita was 45.42.
The total interest on the public debt of Canada, chargeable against
the Consolidated Fund, for the same year was $7,700,180.00, or $1.75
per capita.
The total amount expended on Capital Account during the same year
amounted to $16,945,964.00
The Dominion has made great strides in its banking operations since
Confederation. The total paid-up Banking Capital, in 1868, the first
year after Confederation, was $28,529,048.00. In December, 1884, it
was $61,605,520.74. The total amount of Deposits in 1868 was $30r
168,556.00. In December, 1884, the total Deposits amounted to
$101,657,737.30.Lord Lansdowne in British
Columbia.      
CIVIC BANQUET IN VICTORIA, OCT. 10th.
HIS  EXCELLENCY'S   OPINION  OF  CANADA'S WESTERN
PROVINCE.
On the occasion of the yisit of His Excellency, the Governor-General
of the Dominion of Canada, to British Columbia, he was, on the 10th
of October, entertained at a Civic Banquet.
His Worship, R. P. Rithet, Esq., Mayor, occupied the chair. On
his right were His Excellency the Governor-General, Sir Culme Seymour, His Honor Mr. Justice Gray, Lord Melgund, E. Crowe Baker,
M. P., Hon. Wm. Sinithe, Premier of British Columbia, Hon.. J. W.
Trutch, C. M. G., R. Dunsmuir, Esq., M. P. P., W. C. Ward, Esq.,
Manager Bank of British Columbia, and others. His Worship was
supported on the left by His Honor Lieutenant-Governor Cornwall,
Sir Matthew B. Begbie, Chief Justice of the province; Hon. Mr.
Hope, N. Shakespeare, M. P., Attorney-General Davie, Capt. Rose,
Hon. S. Duck, Capt. Wolfenden, Lieut. Garforth, Capt. Tatlow, Hon.
A. N. Richards, Dr. Ash and others.
His Worship proposed the Queen; which was duly responded to, as
was also the toast of the Prince of Wales and the Royal Family, the
National Anthem and " God Bless the Prince of Wales " being played
for each by the band, which was in attendance in the adjoining room.
"His Excellency the Governor-General of Canada," was proposed
by IBs Worship the Mayor of Victoria, being received with great
enthusiasm, the band playing "Hail to the Chief" and "Rule Britannia."
In proposing this toast His Worship said that he had now the honor
and unfeigned pleasure of proposing the guest of the evening.    Ho■9
felt that it was hardly necessary to preface it with any lengthened remarks to ensure for it a proper reception at the hands of those present,
as he was sure that he -but expressed the sentiments of the people of
Victoria, when he said that they have experienced the greatest pleasure
in extending to His Excellency a hearty welcome on this his first visit
to this province. In availing himself of so early an opportunity of
visiting British Columbia and this city, by the Canadian Pacific Railway, His Excellency has shown an interest in this part of the
Dominion which is highly gratifying,- and he was convinced it was
greatly appreciated by the people generally. It was matter for regret,
that His Excellency's stay in the city had been a very short one, but
he ventured to hope that he may now have become sufficiently interested to create a desire on his -part to pay us another and longer visit
at an early date, bringing with him Lady Lansdowne.
On rising to respond his Excellency, who was again greeted with.
. cheers, said : .
Mr. Mayor and Gentlemen,—You have added this evening one more
to the many acts of kindness and hospitality which I have had the
pleasure of experiencing at the hands of the citizens of Victoria, and
I feel that any acknowledgment which I may be able to offer to you
to-night will very imperfectly express my gratitude. We are all of us,
sir, upon these occasions inclined to make apologies for. shortcomings ■
on our own part. I am afraid I can scarcely make to you the conventional apology of being unaccustomed to public speaking. (Laughter.) I am convinced that those of you who have taken the trouble to
watch my progress through the country must be aware that my publie
utterances have been very frequent, and they may even I am afraid
have observed that those utterances have borne a striking family
resemblance to each other (laughter). I hope; however, sir, that as the
holder of the Queen's commission in this country I shall at least be
able to express to you my thanks for the manner in which you have
taken advantage of my visit in order to extend to me a welcome of
which I deeply appreciate the significance. (Applause). I feel, indeed,
that whatever may be my shortcomings I am at least secure of your
indulgence as the representative of a sovereign, who having in her
public career acquired a knowledge of public affairs greater probably
than that of any living statesman, has yet known how to observe in
the strictest manner the limits of her constitutional position, (loud
applause) a sovereign whose private life has been an example of all
those qualities which are dearest to English men and English women
throughout the world. It is perhaps, true to say that in the eyes of
her subjects here she occupies a position distinct from and greater than
that which she fills in ours. Because while in our eyes she is regarded
primarily as the queen of that little group of islands-in which we have-
our home, in your eyes she stands out clearly as the ruler of that great
empiie of which Great Britain is but a component part, as the visible-
proof of that union which connects with Great Britain not only Can-__-_■__
10
-ada from Prince Edward Island to Vancouver, but also our British
Indian, Australasian and African colonies, in one empire, the like of
which the world has never seen—no, nor shall see to the end of time.
(Great applause.)
For myself, I may say that my visit to British Columbia is the ful-
_llment of an ambition which has been present to my mind ever since
I entered this country. Perhaps having during my first year visited
the maritime provinces, and planted a foot on one Canadian ocean, I
wished to plant the other foot upon another Canadian ocean during my
-second year of office. Perhaps I was also tempted by the fact that
British Columbia is within my experience the only country in the
world with regard to which no visitor has—to me, at any rate—ever
complained that his experience fell short of his expectations. (Loud
-applause.) I need not, however, weary you further with explanations
of the reasons which led me to come, and it is, perhaps, enough to say
that when I found out that my visit to the North-West was to bring
me within two days of the British Columbian coast and that I was
- actually to travel over a considerable number of miles of British
Columbian territory in the mountains, I made up my mind that it
would be distasteful to me and discourteous to you if I did not push
-on as far as the capital of the province.
I may, I think, congratulate myself upon having arrived here under '
fortunate circumstances. When my friend and predecessor Lord
Dufferin visited you nine years ago, I believe that he expressed in his
parting word the hope that he might return to you by rail. No doubt
Lord Dufferin, whose memory I think is not forgotten here, (loud
applause) if the numerous calls which the public service makes upon
him ever allow him to take a run over the C. P. R., will be delighted
to revisit British Columbia. In the meanwhile I am sure that it will
be a pleasure to him to know that after all the anxieties and doubts
which Ave have gone through, his successor has at last made his way
/from Ottawa to Victoria without leaving Canadian territory, and, save
for a few miles upon Canadian rails. Had it not been for an unfor-
seen spell of bad weather the line would by this time have been open
from end to end. It has been a source of great disappointment to me
that for this reason I shall be unable on my way back to Canada to
take part in the laying of the last rail in accordance with the kindly
wish which had been expressed by the directors. Under the genial
skies which have lately shone over us the work will progress with renewed rapidity, and 1 have no doubt whatever that the time which has
to elapse before the gap is closed may now be measured, if not by days,
certainly by weeks.    (Applause.)
I well remember that it was said to me when I was on the point of
starting upon my journey across the mountains that the scenery was
-such that man could not help feeling himself very small when he found
himself face to face with its, grandeurs.    There was a great deal of
•truth in my friend's observation, (hear, hear.)    I cannot conceive any11
sight more impressive than that of the great barriers which nature has
interposed between this province and the rest of the Dominion. But,
sir, when we have admitted this may we not say something in acknowledgment of the determination and the skill which man has shown
in attacking those barriers, penetrating those mountain fastnesses, and
in bridging those raging torrents (loud applause.) For my part while
my first feeling disposes me to bow my head reverently before the
stupenduous monuments which nature has erected in these regions I
feel bound to say something for the enterprise and perseverance of
those who have carried out this work, undeterred by physical obstacles,
in a country throughout a great part of which even the foot of the
Indian hunter has not left a trace.
It has given me much pleasure to observe the confidence with which
your people look forward to the results which the completion of the
line is likely to accomplish for them. For my own part, I do not
hesitate to say that, whether we regard it from the point of view of
this province or from- that of the Dominion, or, again, from that of the
British empire, its consequences are likely to be of the utmost moment.
To your province, the completion of the line means commercial proximity to the rest of the Dominion ; it means an accessible market for
the produce of your fisheries, your mines and your forests. Let me
say one word more especially in regard to the latter. The subject is
one which has occupied my attention a good deal since 1 have been in
the Dominion, partly in consequence of enquiries which have been
■addressed to me by the Imperial government. The conclusion which
has forced itself upon me is to the effect that there is in progress a very
considerable and alarming shrinkage in the timber supply of the world.
The timber producing countries of the old world are quite unable to
supply the demand made upon them. The forest regions of the great
republic which adjoin us have, unless we are misinformed, (I speak of
■course subject to correction in the presence of Colonel Stevens) been
depleted to such an extent that the visible supply will not last for
more than a very limited number of years. In old Canada the devastation occasioned by forest fires, and I am afraid the somewhat reckless
use which has been made of our forest resources, have denuded vast
districts and compelled those who are interested in' the lumber industry
to bring down their lumber from districts more and more remote from
the centres of distribution. After a full review of all the information
which. I was able to collect, I came to the conclusion that in this
province alone the Dominion had still a source of timber supply upon
which no serious inroads have as yet been made. (Applause.) I shall
not readily forget the impression produced upon my mind by the sight
of the huge stems through groves of which I rode day after day on
my passage over the mountains, and I do not hesitate to say that your
hillsides are able to produce a supply which if wisely administered
should for years to come be a source of wealth to the province.
(Applause.)s
fl_8_F
12
There is another respect in which I think you will be largely
benefitted by the improved communication afforded to you. I am
under the impression that from this time forth the tide of settlement
is likely to flow with great rapidity towards your country both from
the old world and from other parts of the Dominion. In this respect
you have an enormous advantage over all other districts which are in
competition with you. You have here a climate resembling that of
the old country rather than that of eastern Canada. I do not wish to
exaggerate the terrors of a Canadian winter. Its severity is not inconsistent with the growth of an active and vigorous race (applause),
and for myself I may say that I have suffered more from the damp
winter climate of the Old World than from the brighter and drier
cold of the New. It is, however undoubtedly the case'that many
settlers are deterred from coming to Canada by their knowledge of the
rigor of its winter climate, and when once it becomes known that an
emigrant can arrive here in less than three weeks from the date of his
departure-from, Liverpool, and find on his arrival such a climate as
yours, you will I think have plenty of occupants for your, vacant
lands.
With regard to your climate I have indeed only one complaint to
make which is that some of your representatives in Parliament at
Ottawa are a little unfeeling in their conduct towards those whose
place of habitation is less fortunately circumstanced in this subject.
These gentlemen are generally good enough to call upon me in the
month of February, by which time the thermometer usually registers
some 30° below zero, and when the ground has been for" three months
buried under a good many feet of snow, and I find that as a rule, after
divesting themselves of their fur coats, they make a point of explaining to me that their latest advices from this province inform them that
exotic plants of all sorts and descriptions, are already blossoming in
your gardens here.    (Great laughter.)
So much for the province. But, sir, I think the completion of the
railway is likely to prove of the greatest advantage to the whole
Dominion. (Hear ! hear !) The great difficulty with which the
Dominion has to contend is her own size and the extent of the territory over which her population is scattered. There are people who have
asked themselves whether the heart at Ottawa is likely to prove strong
enough to pump blood into such remote extremities. I think we may
say with confidence that in your case if the blood was to be pumped
through the veins of a foreign body—if intending settlers in the
country, visitors attracted by your scenery and members of parliament
coming and going from the discharge of their official duties, were to be
obliged, as they are now, to take a fortnight's journey by way of the
United States,-the circulation in your limbs would have proceeded but
indifferently (hear ! hear !)
And gentlemen, if what I. have said with regard to the interests of
the province and of the Dominion is true it is not less true that the13
whole empire has a stake in this great enterprise and is interested in
the construction of a trans-continental line running through British
territory.
If there is one fact more remarkable than another in the political
period through which we are passing, it is the manner in which the
people both of Great Britain and the Colonies are awakening to the
responsibilities which attach to such an empire as ours. How is that
empire to be defended in the hour of need ? How are we to secure
that supremacy at sea which has so long been ours . To what extent
may we count on the colonies and the colonies on us. These are
questions which are being asked day by day at home and abroad You
have here a naval station likely, I think, in time to become one of the
greatest and most important - strongholds of the empire. (Applause.)
You have a coal supply sufficient for all the navies of the world. You
have a line of railway—part of which I had the pleasure of visiting
to-day—which is ready to bring that coal up to the harbor of Esquimalt You will shortly have a graving dock, capable of accommodating all but one or two of the largest of Her Majesty's ships. You
have, in short, all the conditions requisite for the creation of what I
believe is spoken of as a place d'armes. But, sir, it is unnecessary for
_ne to point out to you that if that place d'armes was to remain inaccessible except by sea, and cut off from the rest of the Empire, its usefulness as an addition to the Imperial defences might under conceivable circumstances be very much restricted and diminished. It is
therefore with no little satisfaction "that I reflect that we shall henceforth be able to bring supplies, stores and material of war to this
coast by an alternative route, direct, expeditious, and lying for more
than half its way over British territory. (Applause.) I think, therefore, that we need be under no doubt as to the interests touched by
the establishment of this line, and that we may be assured that if this
province has a special interest in the matter, the whole Dominion, and
not only the whole Dominion but the Empire at large, is likely to gain
in strength and solidity by the change which is about to take place.
^Applause.)
That change, fortunately for us all, comes at a moment when public
attention at home and in the colonies is being generally directed to
these imperial questions, and when the relations of the mother country
and her great self-governing colonies are engaging the earnest attention
•of all thoughtful men. And, sir, it is not too much to say, that there
never was a moment when it was possible to look with more satisfaction
jto the temper in which those relations are being discussed. Those
relations were never characterized by a greater amount of cordial feeling and mutual respect than they are at present. These sentiments
are not of a temporary character or due to accidental circumstances,
nor are they peculiar to any party or class within the British community. The colonial policy of Great Britain is altogether outside of
the disturbing influences of  party politics.     We are, as you know,ï__i
14
keen politicians at home, -and party feeling runs pretty strongly with
us  as it  does  with  you, but you will not find any political pra-ty
or   I  will  undertake   to  say   any   political   section   of  the   slightest   importance, which   is   prepared to   profess   indifference   to   our
colonial   empire   or   to   make   party   capital   out   of   our   colonial
relations.    (Loud applause.)     We have lately had something like a
political transformation scene at home and an unexpected and dramatic
transfer of power from one party  to another.     Political society in
Great Britam has been convulsed, but the vibrations of that convulsion
have scarcely reached our shores.    Both sides are equally sound upon
the colonial question, and although you have been watching  recent
events at Westminister with the intelligent interest which you feel in
all that concerns the fortunes of the mother country, you can be confident that as far as you are yourselves concerned the dethronement of
one party and the arrival of another in its place involves no change
which need in the slightest degree affect yourselves.    A great change
has come over public feeling at home as to our colonial empire.    I remember reading a speech delivered not long ago by Lord 'Derby upon
this subject.    He pointed out and. I think with much truth and force
that there have been three well marked periods into which the history
of our dealings with the great colonies may be divided.    During the
first   of these  periods Great Britain administered them for its own
selfish ends, regarding them as so many outlets for British commerce,
and guiding their affairs without reference to the present necessities or
the probable future requirements of  the colonies themselves.    That
period ended with the loss of the American colonies.    To the period of
selfishness   succeeded  a  period   of   indifference.    Finding   that   the
colonies declined to be administered with a  sole view to the interesta
of the British islands, it became the fashion to look upon them as
useless excrescences which, as far as we were concerned, might be
suffered with feelings of equanimity to drop off whenever it might suit
them to do so, from the parent trunk.     " These wretched colonies,"
said Mr. Disraeli, writing to Lord Malmesbury in 1852,  "will all be
independent in a few years, and are a millstone around our necks."    I
am old enough to remember the time when feelings of this sort were
prevalent enough in the old country, although at this moment there
are probably few persons who entertain them, and fewer still  who
would care to express them if they did.    Lord Beaconsfield towards
the close of his remarkable career would certainly have been the lest
person to do so.    At the present time whether you turja to the speeches
of Conservative leaders or to those of Badicals like Mr. Chamberlain
with his bold conception of an English democracy marching shoulder
to shoulder all over the world, you will find no uncertain note as to the
future of our Colonial Empire.    (Applause.)    We have entered and
are Jiving  in  the   third  period   of   the  life   of   that  empire,   the
period    of    intelligent   and   reasonable    partnership    between   the
mother  country   and  the  colonies.      Under that  partnership  there1
15
have grown up sentiments of mutual attachment and respect so
strong that many of our most thoughtful statesmen here and at-home
have been led to express a desire, not for relief from the responsibilities-
which attach to a colonial empire, but for a still closer union than that
which new exists, and for a more highly developed foim of association,
a form of association resting more than at present upon contractual
ties, defining with greater distinctness the duties and liabilties and
the piivileges of both parties to the contract, and approaching more
closely to what I believe is commonly spoken of as a Federation of the
whole empire.    (Applause.)
Well, sir, that, subject is much tco grave and ferions a one to be
treated within the limits cf an after dinner speech. These proposals
have as yet not taken a very definite shape, or at any rate, if they
have been formulated it has been by individual reformers raiher than
by the recognized leaders of public opinion titber at home or in the
colonics. There aie, however, T think some considerations which are
so obvious and unquestionable that we need scracely le afraid to give
utterance to them.
We ought in the first place, before we attempt to pffecfc a radical
alteration in the system under which the colonies are united to the
mother country, to make up our minds that we will weigh thoroughly
the substantial and undoubted advantages which we enjoy under that
system, and that we will not let them go without a very clear understanding as to that which we are given in their place. I dwell upon .
the fact that these advantages are substantial and undoubted because
there is always a tendency on the part of those who desire a change to
■take a pessimist view of the state of things which they wish to have
altered. I lave seen this tendency illustrated in a curious fashion. I
had the pleasure of reading, not long ago, an interesting article in a
re\itw published on the other side of the fi on tier. The writer ad-
var.Cfd reasons which weie conclusive, in his opinion, in favor of a
radical change in the relations of Canada and Great Britain. One of
those to which most prominence was given was this. I will state it in
the writer's own words: " Still another class of disadvantages must
be mentioned as a îestrlt of the connection. The Dominion is enabled
by being a dependency of Great Britain to borrow large sums of money
upon favorable, terms." This the author very candidly sajs is " cer-
tair ly not regarded in Canada as a misfortune, but there is," he adds
"good ie;son to think that it is a misfortune nevertheless." (Laughter.) So that the,head and front of our offending is that your finance
minister is, thanks to the British connection, a! le to go to London and
get money rather Lelow 4 per cent. (Laughter.) The writer proceeds
to expatiate upon the disadvantages to which Canada is liable from
the fact that her commetcial treaties are negotiated through the
Brilish,foreign office. I must say that 1 should hardly have regarded
that as a disadvantage to the Dominion. (Hear, hear, and luaghter.)
Singularly enough throughout his lamentations I cannot find a single16
reference to the existence of such a personage as the Canadian high
-commissioner, or to the fact that whenever commercial negotiations
affecting the Dominion are in progress the Dominion government is
invariably consulted at every stage, and that'it is usual to associate
the high commissioner for the purposes of the negotiation with the
officials of the foreign office.
But, gentlemen, the matter does not stop there. Is it nothing that
in whatever part of the world you may find yourselves you may claim
the privileges of British citizens (loud applause), and expect the respect and consideration which all over the world a British subject is
entitled to and will receive 1 Is it nothing that having as you have a
.growing trade and a large commercial navy and an extensive coast line
on two oceans, your trade, your navy, your coasts, are under the pro
tection of fleets which even the bitterest detractors are obliged to
recognize as being superior to the fleets of any other nation in the
world 1 Is it nothing that the whole of the resources of the British
■diplomatic service—a service of which the members in point of training and efficiency are not surpassed by the diplomatic service of any
■other nation—is available for the promotion of your interests ? Is it
nothing that the highest tribunal of the empire—a tribunal in which
the most distinguished traditions of the British jurisprudence are enthroned—is accessible to you as it is to us. (Loud applause.) I have
said nothing of the bonds resulting from a common origin and history,
a common language and literature, and from public institutions closely
resembling each other, and giving us an amount of freedom not enjoyed
by any other community in the world. (Applause.) All these are no
imaginary or unsubstantial bonds of union, and their value is recognized both here and at home. I say therefore let us before we
attempt to alter and improve, at least take care that we realize the
advantages which the present state of things undoubtedly affords.
But, gentlemen, when I say that, I hope you will not understand mè
as arguing that that state of things is in all respects incapable of improvement. I will in the first place take upon myself to say that if it
could be shown that under existing arrangements the great colonies or
any of them are not allowed a sufficient opportunity of making their
wishes known in regard to matters of Imperial importance, you will
find nine Englishmen out of ten willing and anxious to improve those
opportunities. For my own part, I am disposed to think that many of
us are unaware of the extent to which the colonies are already consulted whenever questions affecting their interests are at issue. You
have on the one hand the representative of the crown in residence at
the capital and in constant communication both with your ministers
■and with the government at home. You have on the other hand the
official representative of the Dominion living within a stone's throw of
the colonial office and in constant communication with it. Whether
you would improve very much upon this arrangement by, let us say,
•the admission of a few Canadian deputies to an Imperial parliament17
sitting at Westminster, a parliament in which they would  necessarily
be liable to find themselves outvoted, even upon subjects of the great- J
est importance to their own country, by members from the other parts
of the empire, I do not feel at all sure.
There is one other proposition I will venture to make, and that is,
that I should view, and I cannot help thinking the people of Canada
would view, with the greatest suspicion any proposal having for its object what might be described as the affiliation of the Domitrion to the
old country in regard to its fiscal system. You enjoy at .present the
widest measure of independence in regard to the management of your
own financial affairs, and I believe that there are few privileges more
valuable in your eyes. As far as I am aware the only limits which the
old country has sought to impose upon your complete freedom of action
in this respect are two, that you should respect the treaty obligations
which are binding on the whole empire, and that your tariff system .
should not, to any appreciable extent, deny to the mother country any
advantages conferred on a foreign power. Within these limits the
most complete discretion has been cheerfully conceded to you, and I
am not afraid to confess that I should regard with apprehension "any
attempt, however well meant, to invent a financial system which should
be applicable to all the different parts of the British empire, with their
varying and, I am afraid, sometimes incompatible interests.
The only other proposition which I should venture to urge is this,
that if there is any point at which we may reasonably hope to improve
the conditions of  the partnership already   existing between  the old
• country and her colonies, that point is to be found when we come to a.
■consideration of the defences of the British empire. That is a question
which recent events have brought prominently under our notice. How
do we stand in regard to that question1? We must, in the first place,
bear in mind that the Imperial Government has placed upon record a
formal admission of its responsibility for the defence of Canada from
foreign aggression. That is a pledge from which it has never sought
to recede, but if it is to be fulfilled it appears to me to carry with it a
correlative obligation on the part of the colonies to do what lies in their
power to strengthen their own local defences, and to place their forces
in a condition fitting them to bear their part in any great imperial
emergency.   .
I am bound to say that nothing could be more satisfactory than the
attitude of the great dependencies of the empire in regard to this question. It is one of the most vital importance to the empire. It is one
in which this part of the Dominion, situated as it is, has a very
especial interest, and I do not know any question more deserving of
earnest consideration by the governments both of the Dominion and of
the Empire. (Applause.) We on our side have admitted without any
reserve our responsibility for your defence. You on your side are, I
believe, ready to second our efforts, and more especially in regard to
jour local defence to undertake sj  much of this liability as properly18
belongs to you.    But, Sir, these *$
tion and impulse of the moment,
every one of us is bound to
aestions cannot be left to the inspira
They are, rather, matters to which
his most attentive thought.    It is
above all important that they should be thoroughly considered in the
colonies themselves, because you may depend upon it that in dealing
with these questions it will be the desire of the Imperial government
to act with you and not in spite of you, and that nothing will so much
conduce to their settlement as a clear definition by yourselves of that
which you yourselves desire. (Applause.) I feel sure that these subjects will be considered by you as they will by us, under the influence
of a deep conviction-that the unity of the empire is worth preserving,
and that from one end of it to the other we are alike interested in preserving for those who are to come after us the magnificent heritage
which the courage and enterprise of our predecessors has secured for
ourselves.    (Great applause.)Lord Lansdowne in Manitoba.
BANQUET IN WINNIPEG.
HIS  EXCELLENCY'S  REVIEW   OF HIS  TRIP  THROUGH.
THE NORTH-WEST.
On Thursday, the 22nd October, His Excellency the Governor-General
visited St. Boniface, Manitoba. Addresses from Archbishop Taché
and clergy, the town, the convent and the college, were presented and
suitably replied to. The party having returned to Winnipeg, a dejeuner
in honor of His Excellency took place in the Roller Rink, which.-was.
handsomely decorated for the occasion, and around the walls were
appropriate mottoes, including "God Save the Queen," "God bless the
Prince of Wales," " Winnipeg Welcomes His Excellency," " Happy
Homes for Millions," " Encourage Immigration," " C. P. P.., Atlantic-
and Pacific." Mr. C. J. Brydges presided. The guests included
Lieutenant-Governor Aikens, Archbishop Taché, Chief Justice Wall-
bridge, the Bishop of Rupert's Land. In reply to the toast of his
health His Excellency spoke as follows :
THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL'S SPEECH.
Mr. Chairman, Your Honour, Ladies and Gentlemen :—The magnificent reception with which you have welcomed me back to Winnipeg,
the appearance of your thoroughfares last night, the illumination of so
many of your public buildings and private residences, and last, but not
least, this splendid entertainment, have left a very deep impression upon
my mind. Permit me to add that if anything was wanting to give
completeness to that reception I have found it in the eloquent remarks
which fell just now from Mr. Consul Taylor. (Applause.) Let me
before I go further thank him cordially for what he has said ; let me
assure him that no ambition is nearer to my heart than that while I
have the honour of being' connected with the public affairs of the
Dominion  of Canada,  its relations  with the great Republic whichI
20
adjoins us may be of the most intimate and amicable character. (Applause.) Let me, too, corroborate what he has told you as to the action
of the Government of the United States during -the somewhat critical
period through which we passed during the present summer. I am
very glad that he has given me this opportunity of publicly acknowledging our obligations to his Government in this respect. Let me
also join with him in expressing my hope that the negotiations now in
progress between the Dominion, and the Government of Washington
for a renewal of commercial relations—negotiations which I believe
have been entered upon in a spirit of the utmost confidence and good
will on both sides—may be carried to a successful issue.
Mr. Chairman, your city had already given me its formal welcome as
I was passing through it on my way westwards. No want of respect
"would have been shown if you had let me pass through Winnipeg the
second time unnoticed and unhonoured. You have, however, given me
■on my return from a holiday trip, a welcome which a victorious general
would not have despised. But, sir, the explanation of this action on
the part of the citizens of Winnipeg is not difficult to seek. They felt
thattheirloyalty to the Queen required something more than those formal
manifestations which usage had consecrated, and it is for that reason
that last night and to-day you have met the Queen's representative
with these, remarkable manifestations of your good will. (Great applause.) In your kindness to me there is perhaps a slight element of
cruelty, for I feel entirely unequal to the task of .saying anything to
.you worthy of the occasion. I may say, indeed, that during the few
weeks that have elapsed since I last had the pleasure of meeting you I
have travelled over so much ground and encountered such a number of
novel experiences and excitements that I feel as if I stood more in need
of the quiet retirement of my study than of an opportunity for making
^public speeches. I am afraid, therefore, that everything which I
am able to say to you this afternoon must of necessity bear traces of
being somewhat imperfectly digested. It may, however, interest you
to know how we have been spending our time since we saw you last,
and if you care to listen for a few moments to what I fear will amount
to a bare and unornamented enumeration of the different stages of our
journey, I am quite ready to make it. I shall be content if the knowledge that it is possible to see so much that is wonderful and attractive
within a few days inspires some of you with a desire to follow in our
footsteps and to know a little more of the marvellous country which is
yours.
Our first object after leaving Winnipeg was to visit the two branch
lines which, leaving the main track at Winnipeg and Portage la Prairie
respective^ traverse the northwestern and southwestern portions of
this province. We travelled to Manitou by the one, and for a few
miles beyond Minnedosa by the other. Let me, in the first place, say
how glad I am to find that the construction of those branch railways21
is proceeding so satisfactorily. Branch lines of railway are absolutely
necessary if the resources of this country are to be prpperly developed.
(Cheers.) They are as necessary to the main line as limbs are to the
human trunk. That is a conclusion which I think your own people
have expressed pretty distinctly on many occasions. It is indeed perfectly obvious that the finest wheat land in the world will be next door
to valueless if its distance from a railway station is so great as to impose what is virtually a prohibitory tax upon every bushel of grain
which is carried to market. Travelling along both of these lines and
again in the neighborhood of Brandon, I saw a greater extent of first-
rate arable land than it ever had been my good fortune to look upon
before. (Cheers.) I do not mean by this to say that all the land
through which we passed was of the same first-rate quality. There was,
on the contrary, and particularly in close proximity to the tracks, which
often followed gravelly and comparatively unproductive ridges, a good
deal of thinner and apparently poorer soil. A great deal of it, however,
is of extraordinary richness. I may also observe that at some points,
and notably in the neighborhood of Minnedosa, there is much agreeable
scenery and undulating land relieved by copsewood and lake, and likely
to prove attractive to those who object, as some settlers probably will
do,, to the monotony of the flat prairie. During our journey through
these districts I had the opportunity of meeting and conversing with a
considerable number of the settlers, and was glad to find them, almost
without exception, hopeful and full of faith in the future of their
adopted country. We heard, it is true, a good deal with regard to the
injury done to the crop by early frosts, and there can be no doubt that
in certain districts that injury has been serious. I do not, however,
believe for a moment that this obstacle, of which I do not wish to underrate the importance, is going to be fatal to the cultivation of wheat
in this province. That is, I think, the opinion of the settlers themselves, and I must say that I was delighted to find that, even where the
injury was greatest, those who had suffered by it, far from admitting
that this difficulty was an .unsurmountable one, were addressing themselves in a manly and courageous spirit to the task of devising means
by which they might counteract it in the future. And I have no doubt
they will succeed. I say this not because I wash to pretend to any
special knowledge of agriculture, but because I know that in all parts
of the world agriculturists have found it necessary to adapt the methods
which they pursue to the local and climatic requirements of the districts
in which they have to live. This is the case with regard to the breeding of stock, as well as the raising of crops, and I have no doubt that
in time the farmers of Manitoba and the North-West will find it possible
to adopt a system of wheat growing by which they will contrive to elude
the enemy which has up to the present time punished them so severely
in some districts. We must recollect in the first place, that it by no
means follows that, because there has been early frosts during the last22
three seasons, they will always recur at the same time of the year.
We have lately had in the Old Country four or five wet summers in succession, but no one believes for a moment that they will continue for
an indefinite time. There is no district in the world in which agriculture is not pursued subject to some drawbacks, and it is probable that
in this country there will always be a certain amount of injury from
this particular cause. The whole matter, however, lies within a very
small compass.» A fortnight's earlier maturity, whether obtained by
the selection of a different variety of grain or by earlier sowing, would,
I fancy, get rid of the trouble altogether. The visitations of the frost
are also, we must remember, very partial in their character. We saw
many samples of first-rate quality grown on the lands adjoining those
where the damage had been greatest, and I have heard the opinions expressed by some good judges that, as the area of cultivated land in the
country increases, and the sub-soil becomes more generally broken up,
we shall find that the land will become drier, and consequently more
and more free frqm frosts. It is also to be borne in mind that in many
cases the grain which had suffered most has been grown upon newly
broken land, upon which, after the sod has been thoroughly pulverized
by one or- two more croppings, we may fairly expect to see the berry
ripen earlier than it does at present. We should at any rate not allow
ourselves to be over-frightened. (Applause. ) I may say that I think
a good deal of responsibility rests upon those who, having been unlucky
in this respect, at once write to the newspapers, represepting this
country as a frost bitten wilderness, and warning intending settlers
coming near it. This part of the Dominion has indeed been injured
seriously both by those who take a much too gloomy, and those who
take a much too sanguine view of its prospects. I scarcely know which
does most mischief, the false impression, created by hasty generalizations,
■ founded upon exceptional cases, such as those which I have described,
or the over-colored accounts of the advantages enjoyed by settlers
in the North-West, which one sometimes reads — (hear, hear)—and
which represent your prairies as possessing a soil and climate such
as those which the ancient poets ascribed to the Islands of the Blest,
where the earth bore its fruit without the husbandman's toil, and the
vineyards flourished untouched by the pruning knife.
We cannot indeed form any estimate of the future of wheat growing in
this country without the utmost caution. The fall in the prices of wheat,
which, I hope, touched bottom last year, must indeed have caused
many of us to pause and ask ourselves whether the time might not
come when, in the face of such prices, it would become impossible,
even with the finest soil in the world, to grow a bushel of wheat at a
remunerative price. If you care for my opinion, I will give it to you
for what it is worth. I am inclined to think that for some time to
come the price of wheat is likely to rule low, probably not much higher"
than it does at present.    That is,  however, a state of things which23
must in time pass away. The relations in which the demand for, and
the supply of, this great staple of human food stand to each other,
must inevitably fluctuate from time to time. Sometimes there will be
too many mouths to feed, and not enough food to put into them ;
sometimes, when great additions are suddenly made to the food producing area, the supply increases suddenly and altogether outstrips the
demand. That has been the case within the last few years. From the
Western States of America and from British India enormous supplies
of wheat, grown probably at a very small profit, have been poured into
the markets of the world. . There are several considerations of which
we should not lose sight. In the first place the number of mouths is
always increasing, and for the present at all events there'is nothing to
show that the increase is likely to be arrested. The time must come
when, to some extent, at all events, the demand must again tend to
overtake the supply. I was told the other day upon excellent authority,
that at the present time the United States consumed all but 5 per cent,
of the total amount of wheat and corn produced within them. The
time will come when this part of the Dominion will be fully occupied
by settlers, just as in the case of the Western States settlement
followed upon the construction of. the great trans-continental lines, and
when you will require here an annually increasing proportion of the
cereals which you are able to produce.
This is, however, by no means the only consideration which justifies the
belief that you may look forward to an increasing demand for the great
staple of this country. You must not forget that the old world is coming
every year to depend more and more upon the new for its food supplies.
It is more especially in the old country that the proportion of imported
food stuffs shows a phenomenal increase. Twenty years ago Great
Britain imported wheat and wheat flour to the value of £27,-
000,000. We now import them to the value of £80,000,000.
Twenty years ago we imported a million and a half hundredweight of
meat ; we now require six million hundredweight. The total value of
the food stuffs imported by Great Britain alone in 1883 reached the.
enormous total of -6171,000,000, and that figure you may depend upon
it is one which will increase rather than diminish as the population of
Great Britain becomes larger. Those food supplies are drawn from almost every country of the world. Now I had occasion the other day
in addressing an Ontario audience to point out how very small a proportion of this immense sum represented imports from British North
America. Of that total of £171,000,000 about 20 per cent, comes to
us from the United States, about 10 per cent, from Germany, about 8
per cent, from British India, while from British North America we take
only a little over 3 per cent. Taking the case of wheat and wheat flour
by themselves, our total imports reach the value of £44,000,000. Of
this we take 3 per cent, only from the farmers of this country. I cannot bring myself to believe that this state of things will continua.I
24
There are many indications that it is not likely to do so, and that we
shall be obliged as time goes on to look more and more to the broad
acres of this country for our supplies of food. (Applause) I am a
little nervous in speaking about the United States before my friend Mr.
Consul Taylor, but unless we are misinformed, the soil in many parts
of the United States, which now send us our largest supplies of wheat
and flour, is in many districts showing signs of exhaustion and yielding
a yearly diminishing return. That return now stands I believe at a
little over 12 bushels to the acre. We must not forget too that in the
States, land for nothing is a thing of the past, while the estimated
number of acres available for agricultural purposes in Manitoba and
the North-west Territories, including the Peace River district, is, I am
told,no less than 300,000,000, of which less than 12,000,000 are already
occupied. Now if you compare the position of a Canadian settler with
his free homestead, his unexhausted soil, and a yield, which we may take,
I think, without being over sanguine at 20 bushels to the acre, with
his competitor in the States producing between 12 or 13 bushels, upon
land which has been mercilessly cropped for a great number of years, I
do not think the Canadian need have much anxiety as to the result.
(Cheers.) I have seen it said, on what I believe to be excellent authority, that in parts of British India, which next to the United States
sends us our largest supply of wheat, the crops have lately been grown
at a cost which is barely repaid by the prices obtained for them. It is
therefore not too much to say that with abundance of fertile soil, with
every scientific appliance for. its cultivation, and with easy access by
railway to the great centres of distribution, your farmers are pretty
well provided with the conditions of success, and I shall be surprised,
if before ten years are over, the terrors of low prices and early frosts
do not become things of the past.    (Loud applause.)
But, gentlemen, my engine, has got off the rails, and I must resume
my journey or I shall detain you too long. We spent a quiet day at
the thriving little city of Brandon, of the neighborhood of which I had
yesterday another opportunity of seeing something, and we then paid a
visit to the Bell Farm at Indian Head, where we spent a very pleasant
and interesting day. I do not think I need inflict upon you an account
of all that we saw there—first, because it has already been described fully
and accurately by many other visitors ; secondly, because I do not think
that any arguments founded upon the experience of the Bell Farm, where
wheat growing is carried on under conditions, and with appliances and
facilities for access to the railway, not by any means generally enjoyed
by Manitoba farmers, would be worth much as bearing upon the general
question of wheat raising in this country. (Loud applause.) I should,
moreover, be sorry to look forward to a future for this country, in
which it shall become nothing better than a huge wheat field upon
which the human beings would not be much more numerous than the
self-binders,    I say this because, in the first place,   wheat growing is25
not farming in the proper sense of the word, and, however great the
fertility of the soil, I question whether there is any which will stand
continuous wheat production without eventual deterioration. If I had
to describe the future which I should desire for your province, I should
say that I hope to see it some day resemble a portion of the province of
Ontario, through which I have lately had the pleasure of travelling, a
district divided into farms of a moderate size, equipped with comfortable
homesteads and devoted to mixed farming. (Loud applause.) There
is no reason why the agricultural system of Manitoba should not come
to resemble that of Western Ontario.
From Indian Head we made a pleasant excursion to the beautifui
Qu'Appelle Lakes, where I was glad to find a number of bright and
intelligent Indian lads receiving a good education under the kindly
guidance of Father Hugomard. Leaving Fort Qu'Appelle we regained
the line at Troy station after a ride which would have been more agreeable if we had not missed our way just before dark, and spent some
time in recovering it. I have often been told that I should be impressed
by the extent of your prairies, and I must own that upon that parti-
.cular occasion they" appeared to be two or three sizes too large for our
personal convenience. (Laughter.) We proceeded hence - to Regina
and spent a day agreeably at the Capital of the North-West Territories, where we received a welcome not less cordial than that which
your people have been good enough to extend to us. We then travelled
westward until we reached Dunmore, where we joined the new line
recently constructed by the Gait Company to Lethbridge. Here we
made ourselves acquainted with an industry, the development of which
is likely to produce a very marked effect upon the future of this part
of the Dominion. In the cliffs of Lethbridge and the vicinity there
appears to be stored a boundless supply of excellent coal, which
will bring warmth and comfort to thousands of Canadian homes*
and the discovery of which will go far to meet the criticisms of those
who are in the habit of describing the North-West as having a climate
of encountering
In this district alone there are, according to the
of exceptional severity, without the necessary means
it.    (Great applause,
recently issued geological report, some 150,000,000 tons of excellent
coal available.
At Lethbridge we deserted the railway track for a time, and exchanged, the cars for what is to me a very much pleasanter conveyance,
a good broncho horse. During our first day's ride we had, thanks to
the courtesy of Messrs. I. G. Baker à Co., an opportunity of seeing
something of one of their huge herds of cattle, and of the acts of
prowess which their cowboys are able to perform with horse and lasso
We ended the day with a long and interesting meeting with the Blood
Indians, and we pitched our camp in a delightful spot not very far from
their reserve. Upon the following day we pressed on, still on horseback,
as far as the Cochrane ranche.    We were now within sight of the magnU2(5
_cent panorama of the Rocky Mountains, and I wish that my powers of
description were sufficient to enable me to give you an idea of the sight,
which met our eyes, when a little before sunset we found gathered before
us in a kind of natural amphitheatre surrounded by rolling hills thickly
covered with the nutritious grasses of the country, a herd of some 5,000
animals, which had been rounded up in honour of our visit. Of these.
the great majority showed abundant evidence of the good results which
have followed from the introduction of high class male animals. A
number of these pedigree bulls were to be seen throughout the herd,
and it did not require an experienced eye to detect the impression which
had been left on their offspring by the carefully selected sires of the
Shorthorn, Polled Angus and Hereford breeds, which we saw surrounded
by their respective harems. The scene was altogether a striking and
remarkable one, the more so when it is remembered that of these Canadian ranche Cattle scarcely any have been exported to Europe, the
whole marketable supply being required either for the support of the
Indians or for local purposes. (Applause.) From this point we travelled, still on horseback, to FortMcLeod, and thence to Calgary, a long
but most interesting ride, pursued for the most part within sight of the.
Rocky Mountains and through rolling prairie, suitable for carrying
large herds of cattle or flocks of sheep. Calgary is a busy and enter-
prizing little town, the situation of which is not only picturesque in the
extreme, but one which will, whenever a large transcontinental traffic
becomes established, give it very considerable commercial advantages.
From Calgary we travelled eastward for a few miles in order to visit
the Blackfeet Indians. I am glad to say that I was most amiably received both by these and by their kinsmen, the Bloods, and that I obtained from both, and especially from Crowfoot, the venerable Chief of
the Blackfeet, assurances, of the sincerity of which I have no doubt,
that their conduct would be not less satisfactory than it has been during the trying times of the summer through which we have just passed.
(Applause.) It is impossible to meet these poor people and to listen to
their statements without the deepest feeling of sympathy for their present position. They are the Aboriginal inhabitants of this continent.
They regard themselves, and not unnaturally, as the legitimate
-occupants of the soil. We can scarcely be surprised, if, now that
the buffalo upon which they have subsisted for so many years past
has become almost completely extinct, their hearts occasionally sink
within them when they see, as they express it themselves, that the
white man is getting rich and the red man poorer with every year, that
passes. It is quite unnecessary to discuss the question of their so-called
title to the lands of the North-West. The strength of their title if they
■have one is not in its legal aspect, but in the moral claim which they
•have to the most considerate treatment at the hands of those who have
been brought into the country upon that irresistible tide of civilization
'before whose advance the native races have dwindled and receded.    I27
am glad that the Government of the Dominion has never failed to recognize its obligation to deal gently and humanely with them and that
we have upon the whole been extremely successful in doing so. (Applause.) The problem is a very difficult and intricate one and requires
the greatest patience on the part of those who have to solve the difficulty of keeping these unfortunate beings from starvation without
pauperizing them, and of leading them by methods which must necessarily be slow and gradual, and at first full of disappointment, towards
a civilization which at present seems to be so far beyond their reach.
(Applause. )
We now once more turned our faces westward, and soon found ourselves amongst the crags and precipices of the Rocky Mountains,
which we ascended so gradually and with so much ease to ourselves
that it was difficult to believe that we had at last reached the summit
of the famous Kicking Horse Pass. I ought perhaps to refer in passing
to two points of special interest which presented themselves at this stage
of our journey. One of these is a magnificent spring of mineral water
of warm temperature and evil odour—(laughter)—possessing, I have
no doubt, valuable medicinal qualities, in which our party enjoyed one of
the most luxurious baths which T ever took. I have little doubt that
the time will come when our Canadian invalids will repair to Banff instead of Aix les Bains or Wiesbaden for the restoration of their health
by libations of sulphur water, and by the respiration of pure mountain
air, which I have always regarded as having more to do with the cure
than any other part of it. The second point is the. discovery in this
neighborhood of a seam of very high class coal which, I understand,
more closely resembles the hard'coal of commerce than that found further to the east.    (Applause.)
We now travelled down the famous temporary gradient of 4J per
cent, by which the line descends the "western slope of the Rockies. It
will perhaps be sufficient if I tell you that we accomplished this part
of our journey without even a momentary qualm, and with a steadiness and sobriety of movement which I never knew exceeded in my
travelling days. The Rocky Mountains once traversed, the ascent of
the Selkirks begins. It would require the language of a great poet or
the brush of a great painter to do justice to the scenery which here
surrounded us. This was to my mind the grandest and most wonderful
portion of our journey. I will not attempt the task of describing it,
and I will only tell you that at this moment my feelings for those who
have not seen these natural wonders are feelings of the deepest pity,
feelings which I shall exchange for the most unutterable contempt if
within a few months after the opening of the line, they do not avail
themselves of the facilities afforded to them for seeing a region, the
natural beauty of which I believe to be unsurpassed in any other part
of the world.    (Applause.)
At this point, soon after leaving the summit,  we again quitted the
_____I
28
cars and commenced our journey across the gap, the length of which at
that time reached about 47 miles, an extent, let me say, which would beyond all doubt have been very much shorter had not the exceptionally
heavy rainfall of the late summer in many places carried down from the
hill-sides an almost ceaseless flow of clay and gravel and seriously retarded
the operations of the contractors. Our first night was spent in camp
on the banks of the Columbia River, close to the village of Far'well, a
bustling little place of some 400 inhabitants. Every house in it was
destroyed by fire a few months ago, but it has risen from its ashes and
is now full of life and activity. Its position, in a fine open valley
where the railway crosses the waters of the Columbia River, which
are navigable up to this point, gives it very considerable advantages.
It is, however, as a centre of mining industry that Farwell expects to
achieve great things. Immediately to the north of the settlement-lies
the auriferous region contained within the famous Big Bend of the
Columbia River—a region within which the presence of deposits of undoubted richness has long been known. These deposits have been already
worked to a very considerable extent, but the immense difficulties of transport and the prohibitory prices of all the necessaries of life have hitherto
been an unsurmountable barrier in the way of the successful prosecution
of this enterprise. There is every chance that the season of 1886 will
see a great rush of miners to these gold fields, and I hope a great accession of wealth and prosperity to the town of FarwelL (Applause.)
I shall always consider myself fortunate in having been compelled
to ride on horseback by easy stages over this most interesting section
of the line. New wonders are revealed at every turn of the road.
Snow capped pinnacles of vast height and fantastic shape, great glaciers,
precipitous cliffs, raging torrents, tranquil lakes, while almost throughout the whole length of the journey there rise on all sides trees, the
like of which I had dreamed of but never seen. I shall never forget
the spot in which our camp was pitched on the evening of one of the
two days which we spent in traversing the gap. Our tents stood at no
great distance from the clear waters of a mountain lake, in a narrow
glade surrounded on every side by cedars, not the cedars which we are
used to in old Canada, but a variety to which the botanists have very
properly given the name of Giganteâ, and which tower 200 feet and
more towards the sky. By the light of our camp fire it was possible
to see these huge gray stems stretching upwards until they lost
themselves in the darkness, reaching, for all we knew, to the stars
that twinkled down upon us from the vault above, and this grove,
the trees of which were probably 9 or 10 feet in diameter, was only a
fair sample of the forest which, composed partly of these and partly of
the beautiful Douglas fir and hemlock, clothed the hillsides for miles on
either side of us. In order to realize the importance of these forests
we must remember that it is in British Columbia alone that we have "
still a large tract of timber-bearing country, upon which as yet scarcely
any impression has been made either by fire or the axe.29
found ourselves once
r.
But our eventful ride came to an end, and we
more on the cars and travelling over the Onderdonk line along the
valley of the Thompson River towards the Pacific Coast. We had a
delightful cruise on the beautiful Shuswap lakes, a veritable British
Columbian Eollarney. (Applause.) We spent one night here and a
second at the picturesque little village of Yale—one of the loveliest
spots, where almost every thing is lovely or interesting, and one which
is, I think, likely to be largely frequented by tourists whenever the
attractions of this route come to be more generally understood. If we
wanted the poet and the painter in the Rocky Mountains and the Sel-
kirks, we wanted them not the less as we flew along the marvellous
canons of the Fraser River, the. windings of which we followed through
scenery of marvellous grandeur and wildness, the turbid waters of the
river flowing at our feet and directly below us,, until, as the valley
broadened out and revealed longer and wider stretches "of cultivable
land, we left it to strike the salt water at Burrard Inlet, upon which
the terminus of the line is to be established. Here we took.steamer
and sailed for a few hours over the quiet waters which divide the mainland from Vancouver Island. Behind us rose the high peaks of the
coast range, before. us the magnificent outline of the Olympian Mountains, while far away to the south Mount Baker, with its 15,000 feet
of height, loomed up distinctly in solitary grandeur against the sunset
sky.
We arrived on the evening of the 6th at Victoria, the busy and
prosperous capital of the Pacific Province of the Dominion. The next
few days were spent in visits to different portions of the Island, to
Esquimalt, where the graving dock, destined to be of so much service
both to our imperial and mercantile navies, is making good progress,
to Nanaimo, where we saw something of the coal mines so important to this portion of the seaboard, and to New Westminister, the
picturesquely situated mainland capital of the province. It would be
idle for me to attempt to describe all that we saw in this most
attractive and interesting portion of the Dominion. There are, however, two observations which I should like to make in regard to it.
The first is this, that we found the people of British Columbia without exception, full of confidence in the results likely to be achieved
by the completion of the Canadian Pacific Railway for their province,
and ready to forget the many disappointments and anxieties occasioned
to them during the earlier history of the line, in the contemplation of
the great advantages, material and political, which its successful construction is likely to bring to them. Confederation will, as far as they-
are concerned, be henceforth, to use their own expression, a matter of
fact and no longer of theory. (Loud cheers.) I would in the next
place observe that if any 'sacrifice has been made for the sake of bring-
in? the Province of British Columbia into closer connection with the
rest of the Dominion, that sacrifice was well worth making for theI
80
sake of joining to ourselves a country possessing such natural advantages and attractions as British Columbia. Its natural resources are-
considerable. It has immense wealth of timber, of minerals and of
fish. In regard to its timber it has, as I have already said, a larger
area of untouched timber lands than any other portion of the continent. As to the fish I can perhaps give you the best idea of their
abundance by mentioning that salmon this summer were selling on the
Fraser River at one cent a piece. (Applause. ) Its scenery is grand
and majestic, without sternness or severity ; its peaceful inlets fringed
with varied foliage; its quiet waters alive with fish and fowl; its
genial and equable climate, resembling in many respects that of the
old country, require to be known in order to be appreciated. We may
all of us, I think, look with pride and satisfaction to the closer union,
which has now beeir brought about between ourselves and this most
interesting portion of the Dominion.
We now set our faces homeward again. Of our homeward journey
I need only tell you that the scenery appeared to us even finer than be-
- fore when we saw it for a second time, and that we found the gap-
reduced in length by 20 miles during our short absence. We travelled
rapidly over the prairie, spent an agreeable day at Brandon, and yesterday evening found ourselves in the hospitable city of Winnipeg, and
receiving from its inhabitants a reception such as I, for one, never
expected to receive in my official career.    (Applause.)
I have told vou, I am afraid in very trite and unimaginative Ian-
guage, the story of our wanderings: I have returned from them with
impressions which will remain indelibly impressed on my mind.
Amongst these is, in the first place, that which has been left by the
invariable kindness and attention which we experienced at the hands
of all those with whom we came in contact during our journey. From
first to last we were received with an amount of courtesy and consideration which added greatly to the pleasures of our travels. I must
mention more especially in this connection the thoughtfulness and
attention of the officers of the North-west Mounted Police who took
charge of us during our long ride over the prairie. Nor were we less
fortunate in the arrangements made for us from the beginning to the
end of our railway journey by the officials of the Canadian Pacific Rail-
Way to whom I fear our somewhat erratic movements must have occasioned a great deal of trouble, but who, both while we were on the cars
and during our ride over the uncompleted portion of the line, spared no
efforts to make our expedition agreeable to us. There is another thought
which has also been frequently in my mind during the last few days. •
It is impossible to travel from this city to the western ocean without
feelings of admiration for the courage, and I am almost tempted to say
the audacity, both of those who first conceived and of those who have
carried to a successful consummation this great national work. The
construction of the Canadian Pacific railway stands alone in the history31
of great achievements in railway building. (Applause.) The physical:
difficulties which had to be overcome, the shortness of the time in which
the work has been completed, the small numerical strength of the
nation by which the task has been undertaken, are without a parallel
in the history of similar undertakings. Our neighbors in the great
Republic which adjoins us, have, it is quite true, built their transcontinental lines, but it is one thing to follow the route of a waggon road
which has been in use for upwards of twenty years, and another to
build such a line as that which carried us to the Pacific. No one who-
has not threaded the maze of mountains through which your line runs
—a maze through which no path, not even a hunter's trail had been
carried until the surveying parties of Mr. Moberly and Major Rogers,
men whose names certainly deserve a place upon the honor roll of the
Dominion, discovered these passes—can have any idea of the stupendous
character of the task. (Continued applause.) Its successful completion may well be regarded with pride and with admiration, both for the
moral courage of those who from the first never doubted the possibility
pf this great achievement, and for the enterprise and skill of those who
have been responsible, first for the location and afterwards for the construction of the line through a country presenting such enormous difficulties.
' Well, gentlemen, there was another thought which forced itself upon
my mind during my travels. All this country over which we have been
passing, its natural resources- and physical beauties, belong to the
Dominion of Canada. You are entitled to write the word Canada
across the northern half ©f this continent, placing, if you like, the letter
C on Vancouver's Island, and the letter. A on the Maritime Provinces.
But, gentlemen, the map is, .after all, merely a geographical expression.
(Loud applause.) It is impossible to look upon this continent now
sparsely inhabited by a few million of human beings without reflecting
how small are the interests of the present compared with those of the
future which lies before us. Let us then keep our vision fixed
upon that future, and let us remember how vast is the load of responsibility involved by the ownership of this great country. Its destinies,
are in your hands. By the vigor with which this national enterprise—
this national highway over' which we have just travelled—is being
carried out, you have shown your intention of leaving nothing undone
for the material and political consolidation of the Dominion. But
the work is not ended. The completion of the Canadian Pacific Railway
has merely supplied a condition without which that work could not
have been carried out successfully. Confederation without the railway
was not worth the paper on which the British North America Act was
printed. But the railway will not. achieve the results which you expect unless from one end of the Dominion to the /other, your people
endeavor by mutual consideration an l forbearance, by the sacrifice of
all sectional interests, by fostering a .rational spirit,  to bind province
———32
to province and city to city. If I could venture to give you advice I
should say, let us all, let the Dominion Government at Ottawa, the
Provincial Government in each province, the municipal authorities in
your cities, let every citizen in his own place keep before themselves a
eonsciousness that the present generation is not here in order that it
may shape the fortunes of the country for its own selfish ends or
temporary convenience. (Great applause.) Let us bear in mind that
we are trustees for those who will come after us, for the millions who
will one day replace the thousands now upon the soil, that our first
-duty is so to regulate our conduct at whatever point it touches the
public affairs of the nation that when we are gone our successors may
say of us that in the early days of the history of their country those
who were in the position to mould its young destinies used with wisdom
and foresight, and with a full, sense of their responsibilities, the
tremendous opportunities which Providence placed within their reach.
<(Tremendous applause).
|