This Month:
THE   NEW   TYEE   SMELTER   AT   LADYSMITH. (Illustrated.
trKfmfffcViMMm     I
VOL. X.
No."*U
il
IeHinton EleItric Company,
Elecific Mjip|§||J    Blowefs.^    Motors.
Fans.   Dynamos.
select St'. Mining  Apparatus.       M
vfCTpRIA, B. C.
*
H
LIMITED.
Electrical Construction
• ,^Rand SuppliesJ|":-:^|
VANCOUVERiB. C.
iAlDWELl BROS. (101
115 Jackson St., SEATTLE.   174#i174S#acific Ave., TACOMA.
MINING, CANNING, SAWMILL and HYDRAULIC
iMACHINERT|MEROHA|TTSi
AgenSfdr Rand Drill Co.; Hendrie & BolthoffMfg. Co.; Astoria lion Works, DeLoach MilrMfg. Co., A. S. Cam-
mmUSK^IS^mB0Km #°"ible s™ MilIS c-"ied 1,he
iESaeific Coast.
p|cific Coast Smelting and  Refining Works.
^^iSERS, SAMPLERS AND SMELTERS OF GOLD, SILVER and COPPER
ORES AND FURNACE PRODUCTS.
ADDRESS:
Rh#COPPE'R| KING, i-IMITEp
#Fl6Ei tTver Building, San Francisco, Cal.ftrniafrilaa.ldnn Honse, 7 t6 II Mcornate |reet, LBndon, E.C.m
rPtny*
IF #U AtJfBUf DIIJilfiOUSE
We Catty in Stock the Lar^^JTssdrtmetit
in Canada °f *|r^4Sfelij
MAMTI CC  In Oak,  Maple, Cherry, Birch,  White and
Jill  PLACE   GRAfES   <« any Style or Finish
ING     F0R FL00RS> HEARTHS,  BATHROOMS, *c.
Brass Fenders, Fire Sets, Fire Dogs, Brass
Coal Scuttles, &c.
PARQUETTE    FLOORIN<|§
House Hardware in  Latest and Best Designs.
M||ennH Mcpel|s<Si|)o.
Limited
WHOLESALE HARDWARE
VAN^GUVER, B. C. DAWSON&|\ T.
-THE-
Overstrom Diagonal Concentrating Table
Cleami
Concentration
Closip^
Separation.
We are sole licensees forjlhe
manufacture of this table in Canada and cj|r exp§i|8fice wifh it
has been so satisfactory th^we
are^ftprepared to guarantee its
superiority over any other concentrator manufactured,
FOR PRICES AND CATALOGUE ADDRESS
Th^|ncke^lachine Comffany
32-40 Lansdowne St.
HIP Sprbrooklf ft|^»
Rossland, Greenwood, Toronto, Montreal, Halifax.
FRIED KRUPFf GRUSONWERKl
(Madgeburg-Buckau Germany.)
■nwQ MbiiNHH
ORE CRUSHING:
Stone Breakers of Especially Strong
construction. Roller Mills, Chilian
Mills, Ball Mills, for dry and wet
crushing—more than 1,800 at work,
Stamp Batteries—Shoes and Dies of
Krupp's Special Steel.
^AMALGAMATION:
Amalgamation Tables and Pans, Las -
rio'sGold Amalgamators, Settlers, &c
Separation and Concentration Separators, Exhausters, Hydraulic Classifiers, Percussion Tables, Jiggers,
Rotating Round Tables.
LEACHING PLANT.
COMPLETE GOLD ORE DRESSING PLANT
(a) For treating by the Wet Method with Stamp Batterie^V^Amalgamation and
Concentration. ^^p
(b) For Dry Testing by Ball Mills, Dust Extraction and Leaching.
<0»t WAS HI NORPLANT—Large Testing Station for Crushing and Dressing Ores at
the Works. ?Ma?
AGENTS:
For CANADA—Jas, W. Pyke & Co, 35 St, Francois Xavier   eet,   NrjoSjtreal
For the UNITED STATES—Thos. Prosper k Son, 15 Gold Street, New York ||
For MEXICO—Pablo Bergner, Apartado 549,  Mexico .  '■-
|||| For SOUTH AFRICA—United Engineering Company, Ltd., P. 0, Box 399, Johannesburg, S. A. R
MmmMmmiSimM
iiiiiii
"-*-"'•' ■"'-:■.''~.%j-: •'"'.. J)_ >_,)■:■".'.m;j.,|i^,
	
m
mMTHE MINING RECORD.
I.
ELEVATORS AND CONVEYORS.
C. M. PINCKAR.D, President.
E. L. EYRE, Vice-President.
J. M. GRAHAM, Secretary and Manager.
VULCAN IRON WORKS
Manufacturers of
VULCAN
DOUBLE-ROPE
TRAMWAY.
VULCAN
ROPEWAY,
(Single Rope System.)
SAW-MILL
MACHINERY.
MINING
AND MILLING
MACHINERY.
Vulcan   Ropeways and
Tramways.
Office, 505 Mission St., Works, cor. Kearny and Francisco Streets, SAN   FRANCISCO,  CAL.
Link-Belt ELEVATORS AND CONVEYORS
For Handling Ores, Matte, Slas, Crashed Stone, Gravel,
Cement, Sand, Water, Etc.
PICKLING TABLES, SHAKING
AND REVOLVING SCREENS,
COAL WASHING MACHINERY,
SHAFTING, ROPE SHEAVES,
PULLEYS, CLUTCHES,
GEARING,   Etc.
Send for Catalogue.
■■Link-Belt" Coal and Coke Breaker
'Link-Beit" Box Water Elevator.
Capacity 300 to 10,000 gallons per minute
LINK-BELT MACHINERY CO., CHICAGO, U.S.A., Engineers,  Founders, Machinists.
CALCUTTA ORE SACKS
40 in. Hessians, Fire-Bricks, Fire-Clay, Galvanized Sheet Iron.
SOLE AGENTS FOR THE DISTRICT FOR THE CELEBRATED
a
Valvoline 1 Cylinder and Machine Oils,
Steel Rails a Specialty.
The best high-class lubricating
oils on the market.
C.     F.    JACKSON    &    CO-,     Ld.,    COMMISSION AGENTS.
WHARF— Heatley Ave., Vancouver.
151 Hastings St., Vancouver, B. C.
■Brunton's Patent Pocket Transit
For Surface or Underground Surveys.
(Cut about half size).   Write for Catalogue B-4 for full description.
For sale by B. C. ASSAY & CHEMICAL SUPPLY CO., Vancouver, B. C; W. F. TEETZEL & CO., Nelson, B. C; C. M. FASSETT,
Spokane, Wash.; JOHN TAYLOR & CO., San Francisco, Calif.; F. W. BRAUN & CO., Los Angeles, Calif.
The B. C. Assay and Chemical Supply Co., Limited.
Direct Importers of
Hssayers' and
Mill Supplies
Headquarters for Laboratory Apparatus of all kinds, Bohemian
Chemical Glassware, C. P. Acids,
Potassium Cyanide and Quicksilver
THE  MINING RECORD.
ASSAYERS' SUPPLIES AND ENGINEERING INSTRUMENTS.
This is the most accurate, compact and reliable Pocket Instrument made for preliminary surveys of every description.
The case is of aluminum, 1% in. by 2^ in., by I in.; weight eight ounces.
There are nearly 1,000 of the Pocket Transits in use  by prominent mining en-
ineers, mine managers, civil engineers and geologists in all parts of the world.
WM. AINSWORTH <& SONS,
SOLE MANUFACTURERS,
DENVER, COLO., U. S. A.
Sol e agents in British Columbia
for Morgan Crucible Co., Batter-
sea, England; F. W. Braun & Co's
Patent Cary Furnaces. Burners,
etc.; W. Ainsworth & Sons' Fine
Balances
Write for our prices
ADDRESS
733 Pender St.,
Vancouver, B. 6.
MADE IN VICTORIA.
ENGRAVINGS and ETCHINGS.
The Cuts used by the Mining Record are made by us.    Halftones and Line Etchings executed on short notice.
Samples forwarded on application.
BRITISH COLUMBIA
PHOTO=ENQRAVINQ COMPANY,
26 BROAD STREET, VICTORIA, B. C.
Mining and Surveying Instruments
Light Mountain Transits and Transit-Theodolites.
Scott's Mine Tachymeter.
Most Improved Constructions
Best Workmanship.
Send for List
P. & R. WHITSTOCK, Berlin S. 59, GERMANY.
A* Van Der Naillens'
School of Practical, Civil,  Mining,
Electrical Mechanical Engineering.
Surveying, Architecture, Drawing and Assaying, Cyanide, Chlorination, Metallurgy.   Assaying of ores, $25;  Bullion and Chlorination  Assay, $25; Blow
Pipe Assay, $10; Full Course of Assaying, $50.   Established 1864.   Open all year
SEND  FOR   CIRCULAR.
113 FULTON STREET, One Block West of City Hall. SAN FRANCISCO.
THE DENVER FIRE CLAY COMPANY,
I742 to I746 CHAMPA ST.,
DENVER, COLORADO
PLATINUM REFINERS
New York Office-
121 LIBERTY STREET
WE are always in the Market for
CRUDE OR NATIVE PLATINUM.
BAKER & CO.
NEWARK, N. J.THE MINING RECORD.
III.
CABLES, PUMPS, ETC.
ESTABLISHED    1857
MESCHEN 6 SONSMm^CO.
920-922   N.FIRST ST.,    ^LO^fe^O.
AERIAL WIRE ROPE TRAMWAYS
SINGLE AND DOUBLE ROPE
SYSTEMS, AND TWO BUCKET
TRAMWAYS.
BRANCH   OFFICES:
92 CENTRE ST. NEW YORK, N.Y.
137 E.LAKE ST. CHICAGO, ILL.
85FREM0AITST.SAN FRAN CISCO,CAL
DOW PUMPS
Are manufactured in great variety
FOR MINING PURPOSES.
Operated by Steam, Air, Electric or Water Power.
Vertical Sinking Pumps, Bucket or Double Plunger Pattern
Deep Mine Station Pumps.
MAKE KNOWN YOUR WANTS TO THE ^_^ T ^ t- ^,  -, ■-^ t-^-m -i--* -n i  ^, ^-v
GEO. E. DOW PUMPING ENGINE CO.,
SEND FOR CATALOGUE SAN  FRANCISCO, CAL
IM SMITH-VAILE STEAM PUMPS
Are built with special reference to perform the service for which they are Intended with a minimum use of steam.
We Build Steam, Power and Electrical  PUMPS for Every Possible Duty.
Victor Turbine Water Wheels.    Air Compressors and Filter Presses.
If interested, address THE STILLWELL-BIERCE & SMITH-VAILE CO., 293 Lehman St, DAYTON, OHIO, U.S a.11
IV.
THE   MINING RECORD.
1]
Si
HYDRAULIC PLANTS, PUMPS, ETC.
See these wires—how tbey interlock ?    Note the smooth surface also ?
THE PATENT
No displacement of wires in any event.   Gives much greater service than any other cables,
and adds correspondingly to the life or the rolling stock.
Locked Coil
Track Cable
USED ONLY ON THE PATENT
BLEICHERT WIRE ROPE TRAMWAY, Superior to another systems
Manufactured by
THE TRENTON IRON e©., TRENTON, N. J.
Manufacturers, Engineeis and Contractors and sole licensees In North America for the Bleichert System.   Also, Wire-Rope Equipments for Cable Hoist-
Conveyors, Surface Hnd Underground Haulage, Transmission of Power, etc.   Illustrated book upon application.
New York Office—Cooper, Hewitt & Co., 17 Burling Slip. Chicago Office—1119 Monadnock Building
Denver Office—R. D. Seymour Manager, 1711-1713 Tremont St.
Canton Steel
Works
The only plant in the United States devoted
exclusively to the manufacture of steel for
Mining and Railroad construction.
Canton Brands are Hammered, not Rolled,
and sold under GUARANTEE.
Miners
Will find the Steel List published by
eHNTON STEEL C©%
DENVER,   e©L0.,
contains much information which will prove of
interest.    Mailed upon application.
McLennan, McFeely & ©o.,
Agents for
YflweeuvER, b. e.
AERIAL WIRE ROPE TRAMWAY
SINGLE and DOUBLE ROPE SYSTEM
For transporting ore, fuel, earth, sugarcane, etc., by wire rope
Simple, Economical,   Practical,   Durable.
Loads Mechanically, Dumps Automatically
CABLEWAYS.
INCLINE  PLANES.
LOGGING BY CABLES.
TRANSMISSION   BY WIRE ROPE.
CABLE GRIPS.
AUTOMATIC LOADERS.
Plowing, Scraping and Transporting by Wire Ropes, Designed, Supplied
and Erected.   Estimates Furnished.
Improved GRIP PULLEY
Patents Nos. 483,442; 610,353.
Effective, Simple, Automatic.
SAVES WEAR on]WIRE ROPE and CABLE.
Send for Illustrated Pamphlet.
Correspondence Solicited.
Hallidie-Painter  Tramway Co
Successors  to CALIFORNIA WIRE WORKS. 46-48 Fremont St., San Francisco, California.
Eastern Agents  MACOMBER & WAYTE ROPE CO., CHICAGO, ILL.
The Dominion Wire Rope Co., L&
MONTREAL,    CANADA
Manufacturers of All Classes and Kinds of WIRE ROPES FOR ALL PURPOSES.
" LANG'S I PATENT WIRE ROPES FOR COLLIERY AND GENERAL MINING   PURPOSES.
Branches:—Halifax, N.S.: St. John, N.B.; Ottawa, Toronto, Bat Portage, Ont.; Winnipeg, Man.; Vancouver, B. C, Nelson and Rossland, B. CTHE MINING RECORD.
GENERATORS AND MOTORS.
Every   Mine   Equipment  should
Include One or More of
BOLTHOFFS CELEBRATED
v.
For Prospecting and Underground Work
Can be Operated by Either Steam or
Compressed Air.
They are built in two sizes, 4x6 in. and 6x8 in.
Cylinders.    Have machine cut gears and
pinions and band brakes.
Can be Furnished for Mule   Back   Transportation
if  Desired-
flost Extensively Used Small Hoist in the World.
The Hendrie & Bolthoff Manfg and Supply Co.
The Pioneer Mining Machinery House of the West.
DENVER, COLO.,
U. S A.VI.
THE MINING RECORD.
ELECTRICAL MACHINERY.
Electric Power Plants
.*    of All Descriptions
To Suit Any Conditions.    1
^0J$bl*t!<^
FORM L GENERATOR, Direct Connected to Simple Engine.
ANADIAN I ENERAL pLECTRIC
LIMITED.
Head Office, TORONTO, ONT.
Factories:
TORONTO, PETERBORO, MONTREAL.
District Offices:
MONTREAL,   HALIFAX,   OTTAWA,   WINNIPEG,    VANCOUVER,    VICTORIA,    ROSSLANDTHE MINING RECORD.
VII.
MISCELLANEOUS MACHINERY, ETC.
THE FAIRBANKS COMPANY
flONTREAL and VANCOUVER.
Mine, Mill, Railway, Factory, Engineering and
Transmission Supplies.
HP22* Agents for  Canadian Rand  Drill Company.   Full
supply of parts in stock.
151 to 155 Hastings St.,
VANCOUVER, B. C.
747 to 749 Craig St.,
MONTREAL, QUE.
P. S.*~HLS© SCALES HND YflLYES.
GELIGN I      E—Strongest and Best Explosive in the Market.
MANUFACTURED BY
HAMILTON   POWDER   COMPANY
(Incorporated 1861
Manufacturers of High Explosives, Blasting, Mining and Sporting Powder,
Dealers in Electric Blasting Apparatus, Safety Fuse, Detonators, Etc., Etc.
BRANCH OFFICE:
VICTORIA
HEAD OFFICE: MONTREAL.
LOCAL OFFICKS:
VANCOUVER, NELSON, ROSSLAND and GREENWOOD
NANAIMO
Vancouver Engineering Works, Ld.
■  EBTG-IlSrEERS, 1
^■Wl 11II WWII IIi"iiIII1IHHHHIiIiIiI"iI/ii' ililii'illliJil'I'i^ilhWIIII'I'H—
Machinists, Iron Founders, Blacksmiths, Pattern Makers and Sheet Workers.
Hydraulic Riveted Steel Pipe,    Hydraulic Monitors and Water Gates,    Hydraulic Elevators and
Hand Derrick, Riffles, Grizzlies, etc.
Boilers, Engines, Pumps, Hoists, Heaters, Pressure Blowers, Crushers, Marine Engines and  Boilers.
Complete Stock of Iron Pipe and Fittings,  Boiler Tubes, Shafting, Etc.
ESTIMATES   FURNISHED   UP©N   »PPCie»TION.
Office and Works. Heatley Avenue, - VANCOUVER*   B.C.The JAMES COOPER MANUFACTURING CO., LTD.
MONTREAL, P. Q.
INGERSOLL=SERGEANT MACHINERY,
Rock Drills, Straight Line, Duplex, and Corliss Air Compressors.
Complete fline Equipment of All Kinds.
Agent for STANDARD DIAMOND DRILL CO)      R. A. C. McNALLY, Rossland, British Columbia.
Catalogue and Details on Application to \ FRANK DARLING, Molson's Bank Building, Vancouver, B.C.
|Wftj^
We also manufacture the NORTHY GAS and GASOLINE ENGINE, a handy, convenient and
economical little motor that is gaining favor all over Canada, Where any one of these
characteristics—or all three—are particularly desirable.   Send for Booklet.
THE MINING RECORD.
Mine Superintendents and Engineers will
find it to their interest to refer to us
when in need of anything in the Pump
line. We manufacture Pumping Machinery of all types, for all services.
Send for catalogues and specifications.
cunliffe & McMillan,
Agents at Kossland.
VANCOUVER ENGINEERING WORKS,
Agents at Vancouver.
962 King St. Subway
THE
1
I" "he Brackman & Ker Milling Co., Ltd.
¥ T TT __,-^—^T .        _      T_.-_T       ^/MiTimn
VICTORIA, BRITISH COLUMBIA,       Man ufacturers of the Celebrated
.*. Facilities Unequalled for Supplying the West with
the Best Quality of
Grain, Hay or Mill Feed.
•
*K.
ROLLLD
OATS.
(Registered.)
% Victoria. Nelson.
♦*♦        Vancouver. Rossland.
.*. New Westminster. Strathcona
5
Unequalled in the World. |
BOYD, BURNS & e©.
Plumbing and Engineering Supplies
and Ship Chandlery.
lr n and Brass Pipe and Fittings, Boiler Tubes,    Injectors, Oil Cups,   Lubricators,   Asbestos   Board,
Sectional Covering and Asbestos Cement, Leather, Rubber   and   Link Belting, Wire and Manilla
Rope, Paints and Oils, Chain, Spikes, Loggers' Supplies, Sheet Iron and Other Metals
5I"55 HaSttagS ^fwl Street, VANCOUVER, B.C.The Mining Record
VOL. X.
:;
MARCH,   1903.
No. 3
BRITISH   COLUMBIA
MINING   RECORD
Devoted to the {lining Interests of the Pacific Northwest.
PUBLISHED  BY
THE BRITISH COLUMBIA RECORD, LIMITED
H. MORTIHER LAMB,  rianaging Editor.
Victoria, B. C, Office, Province Building.
Vancouver, P. W. Charleson, Hastings St.
London Office: 24 Coleman Street, E. C,
Denver, Col.: National Advertising Co.
San Francisco: Date's Agency.
SUBSCRIPTION TERMS:
Canada and the United States, one year   ■
Great Britain and Foreign, one year   -    ■
Advertising Rates on Application.
$2.00
$2.50
Address all communications to
The Managing Editor, B. C. Record, Ltd.,
P. O. Drawer 645, Victoria, B. 0.
We have to request the indulgence of our readers
for the delay in the appearance of this month's
issue of the MINING RECORD. This delay was
occasioned by a desire on our part to publish a verbatim report of the Mining Convention proceedings,
but at the last moment it was realised that to await
transcript of the voluminous notes would mean
practically that there would be no March issue at all.
The present issue is, therefore, published as usual,
but next month we shall print a Convention Number,
which will contain a full report of the speeches delivered and the resolutions passed at what was undoubtedly the most important and representative
gathering of its kind that has ever been held in British Columbia.
THE MINING CONVENTION.
(By Clive Phillipps-Wolley.)
AS far as one's  memory serves, and we admit that
it is hazy, there was once a professor named
Frankenstein who set himself to make a man,
which (not "who," for it was a machine) should live
to perform all the ordinary functions of a man, and of
course be the slave of its creator.
The professor partially succeeded. His man walked,
talked, and could do all manner of work, but it would
not obey its maker. On the contrary, the Giant Creation took charge of its Creator.
That in a nutshell is to our mind the story of the
greatest creation of modern times in British Columbia, the story of the Provincial Mining Association.
A certain number of extremely energetic and well
meaning gentlemen, occupied for the most part in the
mining of gold gravels, created this association for the
general welfare and their own particular profit, which
was reasonable. They even outlined for their creature
a mind and intentions which might be announced to the
world before its christening.
On the faith of these declared intentions, the creature
found many sponsors and friends in all classes of the
community.
Whether the creators quite meant all that they promised may be doubted now in view of the declarations
made at the late convention with regard to the admission of labour disputes, the duty of advising the Legislature, etc., etc., but what they meant matters little.
They builded better than they knew. The great
creature was stronger than its creators and insisted
upon every letter of its constitution.
The miners, fanners, business men and others directly interested in the mining industry had been told
by the parents of the association that its objects would
be the general welfare of British Columbia, which
would assuredly follow upon the prosperity of mining,
and that this prosperity could, only be attained by an
abolition of unjust mining laws; the introduction of
conditions likely to attract foreign capital; the settling
of labour troubles; the education of our legislators in
mining maters by specialists in mining, etc.
When the associates met to organize, they were
nearly 300 strong and not only were all classes and all
geographical divisions in British Columbia represented
but from the pithiness of the debates it would almost
seem as if the brains of the country were also represented.
But when the associates had been convened, it
seemed for a doubtful day that the matters to be discussed were indeed as represented, but that the onlv
urgent matters were the two per cent, tax upon gross
output; the granting of Crown grants to hydraulic
properties; the endorsement of the silver-lead miners'
London resolution and several minor matters, all tending to lessen the burden upon the mine owner.
After listening attentively for a day the creature
woke and proved that it was intelligent.
It said practically "the two per cent, tax is really a
small matter. In the gross it only amounts to $84,000
and the amount paid under it by some of the biggest of
the grumblers is so small that I will spare their feelings
by not calling for figure?. But the incidence 'of this tax
is unjust, and it may indeed be a bugbear which keeps
out foreign capital and therefore T, because I believe
these thing's and believe that the removal of the two502
THE MINING RECORD.
per cent, tax will cause an increase of mining which
will cause an increase of population, and so of revenue
(probably in excess of the $84,000 which the Government is asked to forego) therefore, and because of all
these things, I will recommend that the gentlemen who
make the laws of British Columbia do abolish this tax.
Again in discussing the troubles of the silver-lead miners, this association said "This seems a matter which
has been well considered by those most interested and
best informed upon.the subject. Their demands'appear
to be reasonable. They don't want our advice, but
they deserve our support.    Let them have it."
But this creature (the association) added riders to
everything and applied the same principle to all questions brought before it.
It decided that the laws relative to the silver-lead
industry concerned first the silver-lead miners and
therefore backed their petition, but when the mine owners wanted the code of signals upon which the lives of
their employees depended altered against the wishes
Oj. those employees, the association said "No." The
men most interested don't want this code altered, therefore hands off and let it alone.
When the two per cent, tax was protested the association assented to the protest, but it added this rider
which the mining men had to affirm: "That with respect to the resolution passed dealing with the abolition of the two per cent, tax, this convention shall not
be understood as being opposed to a fair and equitable
taxation of the mining industry."
The farmers had good right to fear lest the taxes
which were being taken off the miners might light upon
their shoulders, but the creature w s minchd to be fai - to
the farmer and to deal out impartial justice to all men.
When it came to the Crown granting of placer
ground, the creature for the first time showed its teeth.
It suffers acutely, it would seem, from indigestion,
and not being American, refuses to be hurried over its
meals.
It was not opposed to the principle of Crown granting placer claims, but it did not know much about the
matter and wanted to hear more, when therefore a few
experts delivered their explanation which were not
very explanatory and expected their arguments to "go
without saying" and their dose to be swallowed without investigation, the creature, which is still young, did
indeed swallow what it was asked to, but became so
restless and irritable afterwards that it registered its
annoyance and protest against "railroading" measures
through its body, by an attempt to re-open the whole
question, which was only abandoned on account of the
greater importance of settling the Fernie strike.
There is a great deal to be said in favour of these
Crown grants. On all the showings nothing can shut
the country up more than it has already been shut up:
every one is agreed that investing capital does seek
greater security of tenure and that long column of
recommendations which in the report follows the main
contention re Crown grants, contains, if you read it,
answers to almost all the objections which can be urged
against the granting of them, but the creature was not
allowed time to read those recommendations or to dis
cuss them seriatum as it wanted to do, and had no appetite for mental food ready digested by some one else,
or for the pretty poppy-cock about "untold millions
and dear old prospectors," wildernesses which would
blossom with cities, or even for that picture of Mr.
Hobson, its papa, driving droves of shiny American
millionaires in crush hats up the Cariboo road. Therefore it demurred but eventually became resigned again,
remembering that after all the resolution in question
only "urged that the Legislature should give its serious consideration to these recommendations:"
But with regard to certain gross.heresies the creature
was emphatic.
It had been avowedly created to give advice, founded
upon experience and special knowledge to legislators
who were alleged to be insufficiently informed upon
mining matters. The Minister of Mines had attended
the creature's birth in all humility and had asked for
its advice, and now certain of the creature's parents
calmly affirmed that it was no part of the association's
business to advise the Government.
"Then," replied the creature, "you have no business
here at all."
But it may be that the parents meant more than this,
for one of them brought in a motion which for audacity
beats Bannagher.   Here it is:
A C. Galt and J. B. Hobson moved as follows:
"That having regard to the laxity which has heretofore prevailed in the Legislature of British Columbia
in the enactment of laws and amendments to laws affecting the mining industry and the serious difficulties
occasioned thereby, and having regard to the widely
represented character of the association, and the fact
that it includes within its membership many of the most
competent authorities in this province to advise upon
all matters affecting the mining industry, this association do respectfully urge upon the Government and
Legislature of British Columbia the advisability of
enacting that no legislation whatever affecting the mineral industry or any branch thereof shall be introduced
unless the same has been approved by this association,
or unless the association has been given a reasonable
period, not less than three weeks, within which to
consider and advise upon such intended legislation."
This would make of the association an Upper" Chamber, or substitute an irresponsible, unelected body representing one interest only for the duly elected representatives of the whole people.
Of course .the creature told its parents to mind their
own business: to remember that they were an advisory and not a ruling body: that they had not even as
many votes as the farmers, and that they had better
lay this fool resolution upon the table.
On one other important point, the most important
point of all, the creature disagreed with its creator and
prevailed.
The reasons for its creation were principally the revision of unjust taxes, the advising of insufficiently
instructed legislators upon special subjects within the
knowledge of the association, and the settlement of
labour troubles.
We have seen what happened with regard to the two
first points.    When the third came up for discussionTHE MINING RECORD.
503
some of us were paralyzed by the opposition of certain
important members to the admission of labour questions into the deliberations of the association, and
others of us fairly gave up the conundrum when we
seemed to gather from Mr. Hobson that the California
association had not admitted the discussion of labour
questions and yet had triumphed, especially in the allaying and eradicating of such troubles.
At this the creature winked loudly, and a voice we
are beginning to know said, "Good old Hobson, but
it won't go," and it did not. The creature said that
the settlement of labour troubles was its peculiar province : that it was going down to Fernie right away to
settle that trouble, and the Minister of Mines patted it
on its back saying, "Good old horse, I'll pay your
exes," and he did.
What, then, is the net outcome of the whole matter ?
We think that it is this. Thanks to a very whole-souled
friend of British Columbia and of mining generally
(Mr. Hobson) who being Irish, is naturally a little
florid about his millions, the Mining Association has
been born, and because it really is composed of all
classes directly and indirectly connected with mining,
and is not dependent upon votes which can be bought
for its existence, it is wonderfuly representative of the
people, fair and level headed, anxious to get at facts for
itself, intolerant of gas bags and people who want to do
its thinking for it, and being British, suspicious of those
who speak lightly of constituted authorities and
precedent.
Altogether we believe that it has voiced exactly the
mind not only of the mining classes but of those other
classes whose interests have also to be considered. We
have heard what the .miners want and how far the
farmers and others consider those wants to be reasonable. We have threshed out these matters before a
body in which the mine owners and mine workers and
the farmers, have sat side by side, and possibly the two
first may have learned that the farmer would make the
best possible referee between mine owner and mine
worker, because his prosperity depends upon the peace
between them and his sympathies are as much with the
man as with the manager.
He himself is a small capitalist who in this country
must do his own work or fail, i. e., he is man and
manager.
Our success so far amounts to this: We have formed a really representative body of the people who in
British Columbia are interested directly or indirectly in
mining: in that body we have formed committees giving all classes and all divisions reasonable representation : we have elected a Chairman who has our entire
confidence: we have at our first meeting punctured the
gas bag eloquent; smiled down the unconsidered accusations of the intemperate employee; sat upon the
employer who wanted to run the whole show contrary
to the wishes of those more vitally interested than
himself; turned a deaf ear to the man who wanted
to make party capital on the floor of our house; taught
ourselves that what we want is short speeches with
merit in them, and that what the public wants is a spirit
of level headed, absolute fair play for all.
The world has been taught that life is strong in the
mining industry of British Columbia: that it is quite
brave enough to look its limitations and failures in the
face and admit them; quite hopeful enough to believe
that the remedy for them is simple and in its own
hands, and quite sufficiently experienced and intelligent to form an adequate advisory board for legislators
who want to legislate for the country's good.
We believe that the Government realizes the value to
them of the new instrument if properly used and its
danger to them if misused or neglected.
Finally, we have one word only of suggestion to
our own, association.
Would the gentlemen who "have recently been in
contact with the vast aggregation of capital," and
those who have, many millions of European money behind them, as well as that gentleman who can pour
himself several millions into Cariboo, come to stay with
the writer and bring certified cheques.
Mr. S. F. Parrish, M.E., recently appointed General
Manager of the Le Roi mine, at Rossland, is an engineer of wide experience and of great ability. For
twenty-four years he was engaged in mining in Colorado, in charge of extensive operations at Leadville and
Mr. S. F. Parrish, M.E,
elsewhere, filling the positions of superintendent and
manager under the Crysolite Silver Mining Co. and
the Yak Mining, Milling and Tunnel Company. Prior
to his present appointment Mr. Parrish was in charge
of the B. C. Chartered Co:'s mine at Eholt.504
THE MINING RECORD.
Our contemporary, Iron Ore, published at Ishpem-
ing, Michigan, in a recent issue, very properly denounces a fraudulent undertaking known as the
Labourers' Co-operative Gold, Silver and Copper Mining Company of British Columbia. The secretary-
treasurer of this concern is a pious individual named
Nylin, by trade a Baptist preacher. This person has
issued a number of circulars in which in very glowing
terms he describes certain prospects the concern has
got hold of near Sicamous as mines of great value, at
which there are hundreds of thousands of tons ready
for shipment, and that the company proposes to erect
a smelter without delay to treat this ore, which is also
marvellously rich. The circular makes delightfully
quaint reading. Here is an extract: "There are some
people who would advise others not to make an investment. Such is only envy—'Envy, the rottenness of the
bones, as the wise Solomon says (Prov. 14:30.' " And
again, "A number of investors in our company are
Swedes and most of them Christians, who are going
to give their dividends to assist missionary work."
That, in fact, is -Mr. Nylin's object, he tells us, in
turning company promoter, that he may raise enough
money to go out and teach the Gospel in comfort. But
he has since apparently changed his mind on this point,
for we learn he is now living at great ease and splendour in Chicago, having doubtless found a^ sufficient
number of the "Lord's servants" to accept his special
offer of "a reduction of 10 per cent." or an additional
"$2 in shares" for every. $20 subscribed. In .addition
to the undeveloped and probably quite worthless mineral claims at Sicamous, the concern has recently
transferred its attention to Golden, where it is also
proposed to establish a smelter and acquire a number
of /claims. A later circular states that "shares have
advanced from 5 cents to $50," but that as the company does not sell any .of its treasury shares at present
"even if $10 were offered,"' Mr. Nylin generously
proposes "to give his friends a chance and has decided to sell some of'his own shares at $1 each. He
has meanwhile founded a newspaper in his interests
at Golden and has actually succeeded in imposing on
some people. We have no hesitation in stating on
the evidence that the Labourers' Co-operative Gold,
Silver and Copper Company is a flagrant wild-cat, and
that Nylin, its promoter, is a swindler of a very low
and offensive type.
There seems to be fairly good proof that under
normally favourable conditions gold dredging may be
profitably undertaken in British Columbia. Thus from
the report of one company engaged in this class of mining on the Fraser we gather that the change from a
incompetent to a competent manager resulted in a
clean-up representing, instead of a loss on working
expenses, a most substantial dividend on the capital
invested. Unfortunately too many companies operating in the Province have not realized until too late that
failure or unsatisfactory returns are largely attributable to faults of management and that is something
no one can tell them. Reverting to dredging, it has
now been clearly shown that the bucket dredge is the
most suitable type to employ on the Fraser, and mistakes in this regard hereafter should not occur. Meanwhile, at the property leased by the company here referred to some interesting experiments were recently
made by the engineer in charge^ in order to arrive at an
idea of the distribution of gold in the river bed. In
the place where he made his best hole the water was
nine feet in depth; the first two feet below this gave
23 1-2 grains of gold per yard, the next two feet 10
grains per yard, and the next six. had very low gold
values, while the last six feet gave no gold at -all, which
seems to disprove the theory that the gold has settled
down to bedrock.
We have always regarded the Ymir as one of the
best managed mines in British Columbia. So it is
from an engineering point of view. But whether the
London management has been quite judicious is another matter. Apparently the company was forced into
reconstruction as a result of the policy of applying
all profits to dividends. Now that reconstruction has
taken place, and a comparatively small sum of $50,000
realized for development purposes, this same policy is
to be continued. It is true the mine is in fairly good
shape, since the lower tunnel connections were made,
but nobody can pretend that the Ymir at present is in
a secure position, and apart altogether from the question of advisability, it is open to doubt whether in the
case of a mine so situated the occasional distribution
of profits, which of course influences the share market,
is even reasonably honest.
At the recent meeting in London of the Le Roi No.
2 Company the directors placed all the blame for the
fiasco which attended last year's operation on the
engineers, Messrs. Macdonald and Thompson. On a
matter of record we are inclined to think that Messrs.
Macdonald and Thompson would make a better showing than most of the gentlemen drawing fat fees as
directors of the Le Roi No. 2 and such other concerns
in which the movements of the Stock Exchange are
more carefully considered than the condition of the
mine.THE MINING RECORD.
505
THE TYEE COPPER COMPANY'S
SMELTER AT LADYSMITH.
THE smelting works of the Tyee Copper Company,
Limited, are situated.to the west .of the town of
Ladysmith and lying between the E. & N. Ry.
and Oyster Bay, giving a water frontage of approximately 3,000 feet in length. A lagoon in the bay extending 1,000 feet in length by 500 in breadth, forms
an admirable dumpage for slag for years to come,
while on the outside of the lagoon there is deep' water
for   dock purposes.   The ground between high water
whenever the amount of ore procurable justifies the
company taking this step. Two spurs of the E. & N.
Ry. enter the property on the east, the lower one to the
37-foot level, for the shipment of matte, and the upper
into the 51-foot level for the delivery of coke and coal.
At the rear of the smelter buildings, also on the 51-foot
level, are the burnt ore bins, of a capacity of 1,000 tons
for the storage of burnt ore from the roast piles. The
tramway, about 2,000 feet in length, connects the bins
with the roast yards lying to the west.
The ore is conveyed from the Tyee mine in bottom
dumping cars by the E. & N." Ry. Co. and delivered
by them into two sets of bins at the roast yards, having
Smelting Building and Engine House.
mark and the track of the E. & N. Ry. has been laid off
interrace form, which gives a gravity system throughout.
Although the plant as recently designed and constructed is of 200 tons capacity, the power house,
smelting shed and dust chamber have been built for
a capacity of 600 tons per day, so that nothing more
than the actual machinery will be required to treble
the capacity of the works, besides which some 60 feet
ot ground lying between the power house and smelting
shed have been excavated ready for such extension.
The buildings themselves, situated on the 37-foot level,
have been placed sufficiently far back into the hill side
to admit of the installation of a Bessemering plant
a capacity of 1,600 tons. From this point the ore is
trammed out over a series of six permanent trestles
placed 60 feet apart and running north and south. At
right angles to these trestles are six trenches four feet
deep and forty feet apart, thus dividing the ground into
beds 60x40 feet. The piles are built lengthwise with
the cuttings so that half of each pile may be shovelled
into the burnt ore cars on either side, thus reducing
the distance to a minimum. The spreading of the ore
over the ore beds is effected by means of a travelling
bridge, placed between and at right angles to the permanent trestles and running on rails. By this means
the ore can be dumped from the bridges onto any part
of the pile, each series of trestles being provided withOre cars unloading ore from the mine.
are used for running out the ore over the piles, the ter, from the bottom of which bins the charges are
bridge forming a circuit between any two sets of tres- drawn as required for the furnace,
ties     In this manner the piles are built up and the The company have all the machinery on the ground
bridge pushed forward to the next ore bed.   The ore for the erection of a large sampling plant which has
is put up in piles of 250 tons each and require about been designed by Mr. Geo. Williams    This plant willTHE MINING RECORD.
507
be installed in the near future and will be equipped
with Snyder automatic samplers, crushers, rolls, grind-
Track Leading to Ore Piles.
ers and screens, the fuel being delivered from the ore
track on the west side of the sampler.
Chalmers Company of Chicago, 111., U.S.A., and provided with fourteen 6-inch Tuyeres and all the latest
appliances known in the. profession. In front of the
furnace stands a large water jacketed receiver, into
which the matte and slag run from the furnace, the slag
overflowing into a second settler from which the slag
runs into a j et of water under a sufficiently strong head
to granulate it and flume it into the lagoon; the matte
being tapped from the large settler at intervals and
cast into slabs 3x2 feet and 2 inches thick. When cool
it is roughly broken and shovelled to one side, ready
for shipment.
In the smelter shed on the east are two matte bins,
each of a capacity of 40 tons, bucket elevator, matte
sampler, one 7x10 Blake crusher, sample grinder and
hoist elevator.
The engine and boiler house on the east of the
smelter shed and 60 feet distant, is 70x50 feet. In the
rear of the boiler is the coal bunker 20x20, over which
a spur from the E. & N. Ry. track runs for the delivery of coal for power purposes. An 80-horsepower
boiler of the returned tubular type supplies the power
for the Allis-Chalmers (Corliss) engine, which drives
A General View of the Smelter.
The water supply for the works has been provided
by the E. & N. Ry. Co., who have constructed a storage tank on the west side of the track, 60x30x8 feet
deep, which is supplied by a flume one mile in length
from the head of Rock Creek. This gives an ample
supply of water for the furnaces and for the shotting
of the slag at the smelter. A six-inch water main connects the water tank with the smelting works. The
smelter building is 81 feet in length by 51 feet in
breadth. The charging platform covered with steel
plates being 14 feet above the furnace floor is carried
on cast iron columns with concrete foundations. A
ventilator 6x10 feet extends the full length of the
building and gives ample ventilation. The building
is constructed in a most substantial manner, the framework being of 12-inch squared timber, sided with rustic and provided with windows of ample dimensions.
Towards the west end of the building stands the water
jacketed furnace, 42x120 inches, built by the Allis-
the No.
The Assay   Office.
Connersville blower, crushers and elevatorsTHE MINING RECORD
509
in the smelter shed, the power being transmitted by
means of a rope drive. All the machinery and power
plant was supplied by the Allis-Chalmers Co. The
engine, blower and boiler are set on concrete founda-"
tions of ample dimensions. An electric light engine
and dynamo furnishes light for the plant, office and
assay office, bins, etc., while a complete system of fire
hydrants has been installed in each department.
The assay office is located to the east of the smelter
haying a frontage of 46 feet, divided into three rooms^
while in the rear is the furnace room, 20x16 feet. The
front building is divided into balance room, assay
room and analytical room, each 16 feet deep and heated with hot water. The interior fittings are polished
cedar and plastered throughout. The furnishings and
chemical apparatus are of the most complete kind,
consisting of analytical and bullion balances, scales^
platinum ware for the electrolytic determination of cop-
The Manager's House.
per and binettes, etc. In the furnace room stands the
30-foot stack divided into four compartments, while on
either side are located the muffle furnace of the most
improved type and a sand bath with hot air oven; all
being fired from one side, while the openings are i'n
the assay and analytical rooms respectively. In front
of the stack stands a melting furnace, 16 inches square
inside, used for experimental purposes. Abundance of
light and ventilation are provided in each room, every
detail being worked out for convenience of manipulation, making it one of the most complete, if not the
largest, in British Columbia.
The works   were built from   the   designs of   the
smelter manager, Mr. Thos. Kiddie, his son, Mr. John
Kiddie, C.E., being in charge of the construction, and
Mr. Geo. Williams as mechanical engineer.
THE HISTORY AND PROGRESS OF MINING
IN THE BOUNDARY DISTRICT.
(By E. Jacobs.)
(Continued from last month.)
SUNSET AND CROWN SILVER.
THE Sunset group is owned by the Montreal &
Boston Copper Co., Ltd., of Montreal, Quebec,
which was organized in 1901 to acquire the mining properties and other assets of the Montreal-Boundary Creek Mining Co., Ltd., The group consists of
the Sunset, Crown Silver, C. O. D., and the Florence
fractional claim, all adjoining and situate in Deadwood
camp, about three miles west of Greenwood. The
Sunset and Crown Silver were both located on June
2, 1891. They were bonded in 1897 by Mr. W. L.
Hogg, of Montreal, who with his associates did a lot
of development work on them, and organised the
Montreal-Boundary Creek Mining Company to further develop them. The other two claims
were acquired later. In the summer of 1899 Captain
Harry Johns, who had previously been superintendent
at the adjoining Mother Lode mine, assumed charge
at the Sunset and ever since has directed operations
on the group. The number of lineal feet of work
done in development on the Sunset and Crown Silver
totals 7,155 feet, of which 1070 feet represent sinking and raising done on the properties and the remaining 6,085 cross-cutting and drifting. The main
shaft of the Sunset is 412 feet in depth and levels
have been run at 100, 176 and 300 feet depth respectively. The Crown Silver shaft is 265 feet in depth
and from this about 880 feet of cross-cutting and
drifting have been done. The 300-foot level of the
Sunset is a long tunnel driven to cut an ore shoot
cf higher grade than the main ore body and with the
ultimate object of connecting with the Crown Silver
workings. Owing to the rise in the hill the 300-foot
kvel of the Sunset will be about 400 feet below the
surface by the time it shall be under the Crown Silver
shaft. A feature on the Sunset is a knoll of rock,
the weathered exterior of which was much copper-
stained.- A tunnel driven through this knoll disclosed the occurrence here of a big body of low-grade
ore, approximately 300 feet in length by 115 feet in
width and estimated to contain above the 100-foot
level about 250,000 tons of ore. The method of mining this is by opening underground a large stope or
"glory hole" connecting with the 100-foot level by a
series of chutes down which the broken ore is shot
to be trammed to the. main shaft and hoisted thence
to the surface above the ore shipping bins. The
power plant installed at the Sunset includes two Soli.p. boilers, half of a 20-drill duplex Ingersoll-Ser-
geant air compressor, two air receivers, ten Inger-
soll-Sergeant 31-4 machine drills, Jenckes double
hoisting  engine  with   14 by  20  inch  cylinders,  two510
THE MINING RECORD.
mine safety platform cages, dynamo of 125 volts run
by a 12-h.p. engine for electric lighting, well-found
tool and repair shop, etc. The building improvements consist of ore bins with a capacity of 2,000
tons, comfortable bunk and boarding houses to accom-
date about sixty men, men's cottages, villa residence
lor superintendent, assay office, boiler and engine
houses, substantial head-works, etc. A double spur
from the Deadwood branch of the Columbia & West
ern Railway affords facilities for shipment of ore,
which is sent to the Montreal & Boston Copper Company's smelter at Boundary Falls, distant by rail
about eight miles, and to which between 7,000 and
8,000 tons of ore were shipped from the Sunset during the latter part of last year.
EMMA.
Six or seven years ago a shaft was sunk 100 feet on
the Emma claim, in Summit camp, then owned chiefly
by Farrell and Midgeon, well-known mining men of
Butte, Montana. A big outcrop of copper ore occurs on the property, but the grade is not high, though
the constituents of this ore make it very useful for
fluxing purposes. After a Crown grant was obtained for the claim no work of importance was done
until the Hall Mining & Smelting Company, of Nelson, B.C., a few months since made an arrangement
with the present owners (the Dominion Copper Co.,
Ltd., of Toronto, Ontario), to mine and ship ore from
it. Two years ago a quarry was opened alongside
the railway, which crosses the claim, and some ore
shipped thence to Boundary Falls, but as the smelter
did not start work this was dumped alongside the
lailway and lies there still. The Hall Company has
expended about $4,500 in plant and buildings and
shipped 8,530 tons of ore, chiefly to Nelson. This ore
was taken from a big cut made in the side of the
hill just above the railway, this admitting of mining
and shipping costs being kept very low. There appears to be a large quantity of ore available here, so
that a much-increased output is anticipated for the
current year. Later underground work will probably
be done, to determine the extent and value of the
ore at depth. The opening up of the Emma claim
has encouraged an attempt being made to do similar
work on the neighbouring Oro Denoro, owned by the
King Mining Company, of Rossland, and on which
shoots of ore, of a grade that under present smelting,
conditions can be mined and treated at a small margin of profit, have been encountered.
THE B.  C.   MINE.
The B. C. mine, situate in Summit camp, within a
couple of miles of Eholt, the Boundary divisional
point on the Canadian Pacific Railway Company's
Columbia & Western Railway, is one of a group of
mineral claims owned by the B. C. Chartered Co.,
Ltd., of Montreal, Quebec. The claims comprising
the group are: B. C, Truckee, Reveille, Hilda, Vashti,
Falcon, J. W., London, Daisy Fraction, B. C. Fraction and Novelty Fraction, together containing an
area of 268 acres.    The B. C, upon which most of
the development has been done, was located in the fall
of 1896, and the following summer the work of opening up the mine was. commenced. To the end of 1901
-the footage of. work done, in underground development of the mine totalled 5,876 lineal feet, 1,106 feet
being sinking and raising and 4,77° feet cross-cutting
and drifting. The deepest shaft is down 400 feet.
This mine was the first in'the district to ship ore in
quantity to a smelter. Commencing in January, 1900
its shipments during the first half of that year totalled
3.,959 tons, and by the end of the year the output had
been increased to 19,618 tons. Its production during 1901 was 47,517 tons, making an aggregate of
67,135 tons, having an average assay value of .015
oz. gold, 2.45 oz. silver, and 5.8 per cent, copper, wet
assay. About four-tenths of this ore was treated at
the Canadian Smelting Works, Trail, and practically
the whole of the remaining tenth at the B. C. Copper
Co.'s smelter, Greenwood. The price of copper having
iallen the mine was closed down during eight months
of 1902, but underground work was resumed in
September and by the end of that year 14,443 tons
of ore were added to the total output of the mine.
A considerable reduction having been made in freight
and treatment charges the "run of mine" was sent
to the smelter, with the result that the average value
of the ore shipped fell to 1.75 oz. silver and 4.1 per
cent, copper for the 1902 product. A lot of surface
trenching to bed rock was done last summer, resulting in some fair showings of copper ore being met
with. The power plant at the B. C. includes four boilers, together about 225-h.p.; a straight line 4-drill
Pand air compressor; half a Class G Ingersoll-Ser-
geant air compressor rated at 10 drills; one large and
two small hoisting engines; two sinking pumps, an
electric light engine and dynamo, and a full complement of accessories. A spur from the Phoenix branch
of the Columbia & Western Railway gives the mine
railway connection. Mr. S. F. Parrish, M.E., who
was recently appointed General Manager of the Le Roi
mine at Rossland and the smelter at Northport, Washington, has been in charge of the B. C. mine since the
beginning of 1900.
WINNIPEG AND  GOLDEN   CROWN.
The Winnipeg and Golden Crown are adjoining
mines situate in Wellington camp, about eight miles
from Greenwood. Both were among the shipping
mines of the Boundary during part of 1902, though
their production, respectively, was comparatively
small, and both are inoperative at the present time.
The Winnipeg was located in the summer of 1895, and
1897 a company named the Winnipeg Mining &
Smelting Company was incorporated to acquire and
develop the claim. This company did a deal of work
and shipped some ore to the smelters. Towards the
close of 1900 the Winnipeg Mines, Ltd., was incorporated to acquire the assets of the old company. During 1901 this company shipped 1,040 tons of ore, and
whilst operating in 1902 added 785 tons to the total
production of the mine, which, including the output
of 1900, is 2,901 tons, much of it ore running $13 per
ton gross, and consequently of a generally higher gradeTHE MINING RECORD.
511
than the average ore produced by Boundary mines
high assay values could be got from hand samples
but the best returns from carload lots were $48 per
ton from one car, and $27 per ton from 57 tons, these
being the gold returns from two lots from one vein
Silver varies from 1 oz. to 6 oz. per ton, and copper
runs about 1 1-2 per cent. About 4,500 lineal feet of
work have been done in underground development,
two-thirds in sinking and raising and the remainder
in cross-cutting and drifting. The deepest workings
are 400 feet depth. The ore veins are numerous, but
most of the work has been done on three of them, these
yielding practically all the ore produced. The Winnipeg has an area of about 27 acres. A half-mile spur
from Hartford Junction connects the mine with the
Phoenix branch of the Columbia & Western Railway.
The power plant installed included two steam boilers,
two hoisting engines, a 14x22 Rand straight line air
compressor, air receiver, steam pumps, machine drills,
etc., but fire last summer rendered useless some of this
machinery and the mine has not since been worked.
Fortunately most of the mine buildings escaped destruction. Efforts are being made to arrange for a
resumption of work.
Golden Crown.—The Golden Crown has had a
somewhat similar experience to that of the Winnipeg,
in that it was worked from 1897 to 1900 by one company and in 1901 passed into the possession of a reorganized company. The Brandon & Golden Crown Mining Co., Ltd., did nearly 2,500 feet of underground
work, and shipped 2,241 tons of ore of an average
good grade, and then it gave place to the Golden
Crown Mines, Ltd., which has its head office in Brandon, Manitoba. The new company worked only a few
months, during which its output of ore was 625 tons,
making the aggregate of ore produced 2,866 tons. No.
I shaft is 322 feet in depth, and levels have been run
at 50, 100, 150, and 300 feet, the last-mentioned being
about 900 feet in length. Work has been done on only
three veins, the others crossing the property not yet
having been opened up. The mine has railway connection similar to that giving the Winnipeg ore-shipping facilities. The power equipment includes two
boilers together 100-h.p., a 12x18 Rand straight line
?dr compressor, air receiver, hoisting engine, steam
pumps, machine drills, etc. This mine was the first in
the district to put a mine cage in its shaft.
OTHER COPPER-GOLD MINES.
The mines already dealt with are those that produced and shipped more or less copper-gold ore in
1902. Besides these there are some properties, on which
copper ores occur, that were either inactive last year
or did not ship any ore. The best known of these will
have mention before the quartz mines of the district
have notice. In Greenwood camp there are the Brooklyn and Stemwinder group, owned by the Dominion
Copper Co., Ltd., of Toronto (above mentioned as owning the Emma mine) and the Gold Drop, belonging to
the Gold Drop Mining Co., Ltd., of Montreal, Quebec.
The Dominion Copper Company's claims include the
Brooklyn, Stemwinder, Idaho, Montezuma and Stand
ard, all in or near the town of Phoenix, and the Rawhide, distant about half a mile to the southward.
Brooklyn and Stemwinder.—The Brooklyn and
Stemwinder are among the oldest locations in Green-
wood camp, the latter by Jas. Atwood and J. Schole-
field on August 3, 1891, and the former by S. Man-
gott and J. M. Taylor on the following day. There
is but little official information available relative to
these properties. From other reliable sources, though,
it has been ascertained that development work approximating between 3,000 and 4,000 lineal feet has been
done on the Brooklyn, which has a shaft 268 feet in
depth from which levels have been run at 150 and 250
feet respectively, whilst the adjoining Stemwinder has
a shaft 344 feet in depth, but only a comparatively
small footage of drifting and cross-cutting. It is
stated on what is believed to be good authority that
cne shoot of ore in the Brooklyn mine has been proved
to be at least 1,000 feet in length and 20 feet in width
at the 250-foot level. This mine has a considerable
quantity of ore on the dump but has made only one
shipment of about 150 tons, sent to the smelter in 1900
for a bulk test. The average value of the ore is understood to be about $5.00 in all values, but this statement
has not been confirmed by anyone connected with the
company. The Stemwinder has ore somewhat similar
in character to that occurring on the Brooklyn, but as
yet it has not been found in such great quantity on
the former. The Idaho, which adjoins the Brooklyn
on the south, has had a shaft sunk on it and a cross-cut
has been run from this towards the Brooklyn workings, but development here is not yet extensive. The
Rawhide shaft connects at 184 feet depth with a crosscut tunnel run about 450 feet into a high hill. This
shaft passed through a shoot of nice-looking ore which
has not yet been opened out.
The Gold Drop.—The Gold Drop adjoins the
Snowshoe on the west of the latter. No work has been
done on this property since the summer of 1900. Up
to then some 1,905 lineal feet of work had been done in
underground development, 1,510 feet being cross-cutting and drifting and 395 winzes and raises. These
workings disclosed the presence in the mine of large
bodies of ore, but so far as known, only a single test
carload was shipped to the smelter. It is understood
that the owners are not disposed to work the mine at
present, waiting rather for lower freight and treatment rates before resuming operations. The small
power plant installed here includes a 4-drill air compressor, air receiver, 40-h.p. locomotive boiler, steam
pump, machine drills, etc.
Oro Denoro.—In Summit camp, near Eholt, the
Oro Denoro, R. Beil and Blue Bell each had attention
at one time or another between 1897 and 1901. The
Oro Denoro was owned until recently by the King
Mining Company, Ltd., of Rossland, B.C. Last December the Denoro Mines, Ltd., was incorporated to
acquire from the King Mining Company this and other
mineral claims. More than 1,100 lineal feet of work
have been done on the Oro Denoro, including a shaft
185 feet in depth and three cross-cut tunnels.      The512
THE MINING RECORD.
showings of ore on the property are promising, whether
outcroppings at the surface or encountered in the tunnels, and it is confidently believed that when work
shall be resumed, which it is intended shall be at an
early date, the output of ore will, at the lower freight
and treatment rates now obtainable, bring in returns
more than sufficient to pay operating expenses. There
is on the property a small plant Consisting of a 40-h.p.
locomotive boiler, a 10x12 air compressor, air receiver,
hoisting engine, steam pump, machine drills, etc. The
R. Bell shipped 480 tons of ore in 1901, but no work
has since been done on this claim. More than 1,000
feet of work have been done, including a vertical shaft
215 feet in depth with levels at 80 and 200 feet, respectively.
R Bell. —The grade of the ore obtained was satisfactory but no permanent shoot of pay ore was met
with, only bunches here and there, so that there was
not sufficient encouragement to continue prospecting
under the conditions then existing. The claim will likely receive renewed attention later. A 25-h.p. boiler, 6x8
Bacon hoist, and a 3 1-4 Little Giant machine drill
operated by steam, were in use whilst work was being
done underground.
The Blue Bell.—The Blue Bell, situate in the
neighbourhood of the B. C. mine, was for some months
under bond to a company formed in Illinois, U.S., but
the option to purchase was not availed of. Whilst the
agreement was in force a shaft was sunk 133 feet, but
at that depth it was in a sheet of porphyry which cut
off the ore. As similar conditions were found to exist
in the B. C. it is probable the ore occurs below the
porphyry, as it does in that mine. However, the owners declined to extend the time for a substantial payment under the bond, so the Eastern men threw it up.
Short drifts were run in ore at 50 and 100 feet depth,
respectively, whilst work was in progress. The Mountain View, situate between the R. Bell and the Blue
Bell; Maple Leaf, one of the Rathmullen group; and
the Rambler, prospected by shaft, cross-cuts, and diamond drilling, by the Everett and Spokane Mining
Company, are other mineral claims within a couple of
miles of Eholt that have been prospected considerably.
The Morrison.—The Morrison, in Deadwood camp,
is a property that will probably ere long be placed on
the list of regular shippers, but for some months this
mine has been closed down. For several years the
Morrison was operated by the Morrison Gold Mining
Company, of Spokane, Washington, until, in January
of 1900, the Morrison Mines, Ltd., was organized to
take over all the assets of the old company. There are
three veins of ore opened on the property, but only
one has been explored to any extent. The ore bodies in
the main vein upon which work has been done are
from 10 to 40 feet in width. Altogether about 3,000
lineal feet of work have been done underground, some
450 feet being sinking and raising and 2,550 feet cross-
cutting and drifting. The diamond drill bored 1,011
feet of holes (all on the 300-foot level, and this crosscut several large ore bodies, which have not yet been
opened up though trial shipments of ore,   433   tons
in all, were made to the Greenwood, Grand Forks and
Trail smelters for test purposes, but the mineral content was not published. An announcement was made
recently that a contract had been arranged with the
Montreal & Boston Copper Company's smelter to take
ore and that consequently operations would be resumed at the mine at an early date. The mine is equipped
with two boilers together 110-h.p., a 16x24 straight
line Rand air compressor, rated at 5 drills, machine
drills, air receiver, No. 7 Cameron sinking pump, and,
at the 200-foot level station, a 7x9 Lidgerwood hoisting engine. With the plant and equipment now at the
mine a daily output of 100 tons of ore is stated to .be
practicable. There are about 5,000 tons of ore on the
dump. The mine buildings include boiler and engine
house, boarding and bunk houses, and all other requisite accommodation. The mine is on Copper Creek,
about three miles northwest of Greenwood, with which
it has waggon road connection. The Deadwood camp
branch of the Columbia & Western Railway, from
Greenwood to the Mother Lode and Sunset mines,
passes within a mile of the Morrison, to which a survey has been made for a spur, giving about a three
per cent, grade on a direct route.
King Solomon and Copper Mine.—In Copper
camp oxidized copper-bearing veins are met with on
the King Solomon and Copper Mine (the later known
locally as the Big Copper) mineral claims. It is not
unlikely that these also occur on other claims in this
camp, but the two properties named are the only ones
opened up in that locality. Some interesting observations by Mr. R. W. Brock, geologist, of the Dominion
Geological Survey, on these veins were quoted in the
first of this series of papers (See Mining Record for
January, 1903, page 455). On the King Solomon the
oxide zone is found, and on the Copper Mine the richest sulphide zone. A prospect shaft was sunk on the
King Solomon several years ago, but the work done
last year was the making of a deep open cut into the
side of the hill, taking out rich iron and copper oxide.
Some 850 tons of this ore were sent to district smelters, but as it had to be.hauled by horse teams about
four miles to the railway at Deadwood for shipment
thence to the reduction works, freight costs took too
large a proportion of the returns to induce the owner
of the claim to continue shipping. Work done last
year on the Copper Mine claim exposed an ore body
174 feet in length and 82 feet in width. An open cut,
averaging 15 feet in width and 26 feet 6 inches in
height, was run 93 feet in the ore, of which there is
a considerable quantity on the dump ready for shipment whenever market conditions shall be deemed favourable enough. The opening up of this property
directed attention anew to Copper camp, and it is likely
that it will lead to the claim being sold ere long to a
strong company. The Copper Mine is owned by Mr.
Geo. B. McAulay, of Spokane, Washington, managing director of the Cariboo McKinney Mining & Milling Co., Ltd., and Mr. John Morand, of Greenwood,
Mr. D. C. Corbin, the well-known builder of the Spokane Northern Railway, also of Spokane, owns the
King Solomon.THE MINING RECORD.
513
Rubv and Golconda.—There are several promising
copper claims in Smith's camp, near Boundary Falls
among them the Ruby and the Golconda. In 1901 the
Ruby was under bond to men resident in Detroit
Michigan, who did a lot of surface work, uncovering
several shoots of copper-gold ore of good grade, of
which they sent to the smelter 85 tons. They installed
a 45-h-P- boiler and worked two machine drills by
steam, these facilitating the driving of two tunnels,
one about 165 feet and the other of shorter length!
Financial difficulties eventually necessitated a cessation
of operations and the bond lapsed. The Ruby, which
is owned by Messrs. W. G. McMynn and Geo. Cook,
is situate within a quarter of a mile of the Boundary
Falls smelter, but the Golconda group is in the hills
to the west of Boundary Creek and about a couple
of miles away. No work was done on the Golconda
last year, but men are now doing some further prospecting on the property. A shaft was sunk four or
five years ago, and later a cross-cut tunnel was driven
280 feet, the calculation being that the ledge would be
encountered at 450 feet in, and would there give a
vertical depth of 275 feet, but there remains 175 feet
tunnel to be driven before this expectation can be realized. The group comprises the. Golconda, Cleveland,
Laocoon, York, Wild Rose and Gold Bed. Hon. Geo.
E. Foster is one of the owners, and another 1 C. Haas,
now of Spokane, has directed the prospecting work
done on the claims. There are numerous other promising copper claims in the several camps of the
Boundary.
1902 IN THE SLOCAN DRY BELT.
(By W. D. McGregor, ME.)
BEFORE giving an outline of the more important
developments of the year, it may be as well to
notice one or two general matters that have affected our mines.
The district has always suffered on account of the
extreme richness of the ore—or rather of the rich
lenses of ore in many of the ledges. This may
seem an unreasonable statement, but it is easily understood that a prospect owner finding a bunch of ore
that assays from $50 to $150 per ton, and knowing
that $15 per ton will pay shipping and smelting charges,
may very likely decide that there is a good thing in it
for him, and he consequently starts in to make .his mine
open itself. Everything is done in the most expensive
way, and after driving his little development tunnel
through the rich shoot he finds that the ore sorted
from the rock broken in the tunnel is not a very large
percentage of the whole, that the little stoping ground
available will hardly pay expenses and that he has no
funds for further development. The chances are that
he not only breaks down the ore from above, but "un-
derhands" everything in sight and most fatal of all,
sorts rather loosely. Then when his returns come in
and he finds that his shipment ran about $50 per ton
and it cost him $60 and he has gouged out all the rich
ore in sight; the face of his tunnel is in low-grade and
the once promising prospect is a "frost," though he
may have cut through the top of an extensive ore shoot
and others may, and probably do, exist on the same
level ahead of his work, making the proportion of ore
in the whole vein large enough to pay handsomely if
properly and economically developed.
If, on the other hand, such a prospect cut into ore in
one, two or more places, falls into the hands of a promoter, together with an optimistic report on ore not
in sight, he (more or less self deceived) is likely to sell
at a vastly increased price to some syndicate which
probably unloads, at another killing profit, onto a company. The problem presented the directors is probably
only the extracting of $100 ore at a profit. This being
the case a. small fund in the treasury is looked on as
ample, and this is probably expended on trails, buildings, etc., as development and ore extraction are expected to be synonymous, with dividends after the first
month's operation. Of course the end of this is worse
' than the first case. The district is discredited and what
^might have been a good mine is an eyesore and a
stumbling block to the whole camp.
Now, I do not wish to pose as a "calamity howler"
or "knocker," though we have suffered severely from
this kind of thing in the past, and I must say I do not
know of a good surface prospect in a good locality that
has proved worthless under proper development.
Also, the past year's development has been quite as
satisfactory as that of any previous twelve-month,
though of course the drop in silver hits us all hard.
In outlining the year's work I cannot pretend to
touch all the working properties, so confine myself to
types and those I am best acquainted with.
Beginning at the extreme north, the most important
work of the year has been done on the Fisher Maiden,
which produced, several years ago, some very rich ore
from a shoot near the centre of the property and was
then practically abandoned. Surface prospecting in
the fall of 1901 showed rich ore near the south boundary. Two' adit tunnels have proved a more important
ore body than the original discovery. No. 1 tunnel
shows ore from 4 inches to 6 feet wide and about 75
feet long. The ore is rich, sorting to about 150 ozs.,
complex, various sulphides in quartz gangue and easily
mined.    Now shipping steadily.
Coming south to Ten-Mile Creek, we find the Enterprise mine with an output of 2,200 tons, chiefly concentrates, just about paying expenses for the season,
and at present shut down, owing to the drop in silver
and unsatisfactory results from the mill.
The Iron Horse, half a mile west of the Enterprise,
operated by the Burlington Company, has been doing
steady development work since the resumption of work
last fall.
The Recowilabi Company owning the northern extension of the Arlington mine, under the same management and consisting of largely the same shareholders, has decided on the erection of a large reduction
plant as soon as the snow goes. Satisfactory tests are
reported from the experimental plant set up in Spokane and it is expected they will handle the low-grade
ores, not only from their own vein, but from othersTHE MINING RECORD.
i!5
in the vicinity. As the manager of the Arlington estimates 40,000 tons of low-grade, most of which is on the
dump, encountered in mining some 7,000 tons of shipping grade, all of which can be treated at a profit and
representing the comparatively small vein area worked
as yet, it will be seen that the value of successful treatment on the lines laid down will be very great, not to
the Arlington, etc., alone, but to other mines of the
same class. It is understood that the method includes
table concentration and an electro-cyanide treatment of
the tailings, giving a very close saving of values. Of
course I believe that the final step in the treatment
question will be the smelting at Slocan of the dry ores
en masse, giving the necessary flux for the galena from
the Upper Slocan. There is not ore enough cut as yet,
to warrant the necessary outlay, but we are distinctly
nearer the point than a year ago. One of the marked
steps toward a big tonnage is the development on the
•Black Prince, situated about one and a half miles
southeast of the Arlington and near the divide between
Springer and Lemon Creeks. This has been developed
under option by Mr. Hy. Norman, of Spokane, during
the season. The work under the bond includes a crosscut tunnel between 400 and 500 feet in length and
some 150 feet drifting and cross-cutting, exploring the
vein at this depth. As the vein is opened at the 80-foot
level by a cross-cut and some 300 feet of drift a fairly
good idea of its value is now available. It is shown
to be from 8 to 16 feet wide; gangue, quartzose, banded
highly mineralized in shoots. Ore dry, largely sulphides ; large quantities second grade, has yielded five
carloads sorted ore showing over 100 ozs. Altogether
a most satisfactory showing.
On the same ridge one and a half miles west the
Meteor claim is being re-opened under lease. The
leaseholders have shown the old ore shoot to extend
down 60 feet below where it was thought to be worked
out. They have driven a cross-cut at this level and
are now stoping ore which is concentrated into a quartz
"pay streak" a large proportion of which is charged
with grey copper, argentite and pyrites, the sorted ore
showing in the neighbourhood of 1 oz. gold and 300
ozs. silver.
West of the Arlington one and a half miles on the
same range and at about the same elevation lies the
Ottawa. This is one of the marked successes of the
year. It is owned by a Pittsburgh syndicate, having
been purchased by them in the latter part of the summer, after developing for some six months under bond.
The mine is in charge of Mr. McPhee, who opened the
property for the owners and is working a full force
on development while shipping about 15 tons of sorted
ore weekly.
Coming west down Springs Creek, the next point
of interest is the Dayton at the mouth of the creek of
the same name. This also is being operated under
lease and the leaseholders have been working in ore
almost from the beginning. The gold values in this
would seem to mark a belt a mile or more wide extending from Ten-Mile to Lemon Creek.
The Republic group, two and a half miles northeast
of Slocan, has been under development all summer.
A waggon road has been built and two long cross-cut
tunnels run from a gulch to tap the two main veins.
This has not yet been accomplished, but since November they have been working a small force taking ore
from the old workings where the showing has
greatly improved. They' are shipping steadily ore
that returns somewhere in the neighbourhood of $1,000
per car.
The owners of the Myrtle group, about one mile
northeast of the Republic are putting in their second
winter developing this, which they have already shown
to be one of the big deposits of the camp. They count
on defining the walls and getting a working estimate
of its value this season.
On Lemon Creek probably the most important work
is that done on the First North Fork, showing the continuity of the gold content with depth. There is no
doubt that a considerable area here is well worthy investigation, as good gold values are shown in many
places, and the deepest work on the creek shows satisfactory ore at the bottom, say 200 feet depth.
It might be well to note here that exploration so far
seems to show that all of the ore-bearing deposits or
veins in this vicinity belong to one of three main
classes: First—The big veins or shear zones, running
across the axis of upheaval, in the granite, sometimes
over 100 feet wide, characterized by quartz deposits on
each side or wall, which appear two distinct parallel
veins and are often so described.
On examination, however, the belt between these
"veins" is found to be fissured, twisted and more or
less altered and mineralized by the passage of hot
liquids and vapors. Lenses of ore are common and
may occur in any band, though all the more important
deposits of high-grade ore seem to be, in or connected with, one of the wall deposits. It would appear,
however, that the ore will cross, sometimes in a series
of steps, from one wall to the other, sometimes folding
back on itself. The mineralizing action, of course,
varied constantly; in some parts converting the whole
mass into low-grade ore and again concentrated into a
single band of varying width, of high-grade sulphides.
These form a field for mining on a large scale and
development should be provided for, with this end
always in view.
The second is a simple fissure vein in the granite,
running generally at a wide angle with series No. 1,
marked by very distinct ore shoots, and with, as a rule,
the values so concentrated that outside of the shoots
the vein is worthless, and the ore in the shoots very
rich and calling for the tenderest handling to prevent
loss. A careless shot among dusty sulphides that assays $1,000 to the ton is apt to not only lose a week's
wages or more but to so plaster with mineral the barren rock adjoining, that another week's pay is lost
by sending worthless granite to the smelter.
The third vein is probably the simplest proposition,
as it is the gold-bearing, comparatively flat seam, enriched on the surface for the undoing of prospectors
and the two optimistic operator, but proved to carry
good values to depth and offering no special obstacle to
treatment.
The Arlington might be cited as an example of No.
1, the Enterprise of No. 2, and the Violet of No. 3.516
THE MINING RECORD.
To summarize: The products of 1902—6,400 tons,
from 13 properties with values ranging from $40 to
$250 and averaging as" near $90 per ton or $576,000 as
need be. Results of season's development, satisfactory. The gold belt calls for more investigation and
offers a promising field for experience backed by capital. The existence of low grade ore in large quantities
proved by the Arlington, etc., and their determination
to put in a plant for the treatment of these ores. Altogether the outlook in spite of low silver and some gross
mismanagement is good, or even very good.
AN "ALL-FIRE " METHOD FOR THE ASSAY
OF GOLD AND SILVER IN BLISTER
COPPER.*
(By Walter G. Perkins, Grand Forks, P. C.)
AS this particular product holds a place by itself,
it   seems   desirable   to give   a   paper   dealing
especially with  it  as. a  corollary  to  my paper
entitled "The Litharge Process of Assaying Copper-
Bearing Ores and Products and the Method of Calculating Charges."*
The process is first to convert the metallic copper
into matte by the addition of sulphur, allowing the
two elements to combine at the bottom of the crucible
when heat is applied. The flux then acts on the sulphides, oxidizing some of the copper which goes into
the slag, while the gold and silver are collected in the
lead-button reduced by the sulphur. These buttons
are combined and scorified twice, for the purpose of
concentrating the values and eliminating the remaining
copper, thus reducing cupal ■ absorption-loss to a
minimum.
Charge for a 20-gm. Crucible.
Sulphur  800.0     mg.
Cu (approx.)  0.083 A.T.
Na2C03 plus K2CO3 (1-2 & 1-2) 0.5     A.T
PbO (free from Ag)  8.0     A.T.
Si02  0.5      A.T
Salt Cover.
Method of Operation.
Weigh out 0.25 A.T. of copper borings, divide it
approximately into 3 equal parts, and place in 20-gm.
crucibles; repeat the operation • until four sets have
been weighed out, thus having twelve cruQibles in all
for one assay. Weigh'800 mg. of pulverized sulphur
into each of these, and mix with the copper; then add
one charge of flux, but do not mix the copper and sulphur with the flux, as these two elements should remain at the bottom of the crucible, to form matte when
heat is applied. Shake down; fill the remaining portion of the crucible with salt (NaCl), and place in a
dull-red muffle. Raise the temperature very gradually for thirty or thirty-five minutes, at the end of
which time some salt should remain, not quite molten,
*Trans. American Institute of M. E.
in the centre of the top of the charge; this will melt
and become quite fluid in a few minutes. The temperature should then be raised, so that, in forty-five
minutes from charging, the muffle will be of a bright
red colour, the charge quiet, and perfectly fused.
T he success of failure of this method, especially the
silver result, depends upon the proper regulation of the
furnace. Therefore, a detailed description of the
manipulation, as practiced'by the writer, is necessary
at this point.
The muffle used is 17x19x8 1-2 inches, outside dimensions, in which twenty-five crucibles can be placed
at a time. Twelve crucibles containing the blister-copper charges should be placed in the front part of the
muffle, so that the action can be watched carefully.
In the back part of the muffle may be placed ore-assays,
etc., the result of which are not so easily affected by
temperature.
The atmosphere in the muffle must be reducing;
otherwise, as the charge fuses, the silver seems to
come to the surface, and a-portion of it is apparently
oxidized (or volatilized) and lost in the slag, making
the result from 0.4 to 1.0 oz. per ton too low. A muffle
that has a good draught through it always has an oxidizing atmosphere when fired with coal; therefore,
some artificial means must be resorted to in order to
bring about the desired result. The practice here is to
plug the holes in the back of the muffle with bone-ash.
Then distribute five crucibles (which are about three-
fourths full of fine coal and covered with 3-in. scori-
fiers) amongst the charge, thus: Two in the back
row, one in the centre and two in the front row of
crucibles, closing the front with a tight-fitting door.
This will reduce 1 to 2 gm. of Pb from PbO, if a
blank charge is run. In case a gas or gasoline furnace
is used, the atmospheric conditions would probably be
correct without resorting to artificial means.
Pouring, Slags and Buttons.—All conditions being
perfect, the charge will pour very fluid. But care must
be taken to rotate the crucible quickly, and tap sharply
several times, in order to settle any fine shots of lead
that may otherwise be held in suspension or adhere to
small recesses in the walls or bottom of the crucible.
The slag, on cooling, should be a yellow silicate of
lead at the outside of the cone, becoming finely crystalline and deep-green immediately inside the outer skin.
If more than merely the skin of the slag shows as a
silicate, the heat has been too great; and if the entire
slag is crystalline, with large coarse crystals pointing
towards the centre, the temperature has been too low,
and has most probably left some shots' of lead in the
crucible. The salt on the top of 'the cone will be of a
deep brownish-red, the depth of color lessening when
overheated or when the atmosphere of the muffle had
an oxidizing effect.
The button from each crucible should weigh about
18 gm., and break clean and bright from the slag. Care
must be taken that a film of lead is not left on the slag
where the button breaks from it, as a gas-bubble that
has a thin covering of lead appears to form at the top
button, which adheres to the 'slag.THE MINING RECORD.
517
Scorification.—Each set is now represented by three
buttons weighing 18 gm. each. These are now scorified, to eliminate more copper and concentrate the value
The four sets, each representing 0.25 A.T., are manipulated as follows:
Place four 3-in. scorifiers in a hot muffle for ten or
fifteen minutes; then, having reduced the temperature
in the.muffle to about the right heat to open cupella-
tions quickly, place the sets of three each in four scorifiers ; close the door, and the scorifications should open
as quickly as cupellations. When properly opened,
lower the temperature to a heat that will just permit
the operation to be carried on successfully until covered. Raise the temperature until the slag is hot enough
to pour freely: decant as much slag as possible without
losing any lead; return the scorifiers to the muffle and
allow scorification to go on until covered again; close
the door to heat up the slag, and then remove the
scorifiers and pour. Each resulting button will weigh
about 5 or 6 gm., if the temperature has been kept low
from the start.
Second Scorification.—Four 2-inch scorifiers are now
heated as before. The buttons from the first scorification are broken down and the slags scraped free of
any lead-films on to a filter-paper. Each 5-gm. button
is made up of 25 gm. with CP. test-lead. The filter-
paper containing the button and test-lead is folded and
put into the already hot scorifier. Conduct the opera-
tians at as low a temperature as possible, as these buttons will open easier than the first scorification. Raise
the temperature when the buttons are nearly covered
with slag, pour, cool, and break down again, watching
for small amounts of lead on the slag.
These buttons are now ready for cupellation, and
represent four assays of 0.25 A.T. each. Carry on this
operation to get "feather" PbO on the cupels. This
needs careful watching, as the buttons only weigh 5
or 6 gm. Weigh the beads for silver plus gold in 0.25
A.T. Combine two and two, part, and weigh for gold
in 0.5 A.T.
summary.
1. The litharge must be absolutely free from silver,
or, at the most, contain only small traces of silver, in
order to avoid the necessity of correcting by difference.
The kind used is of Pueblo manufacture.
2. The temperature must be carefully regulated in all
operations. Also, have a slightly reducing atmosphere
in the crucible operation, otherwise the silver result
will be too low.
3. Great care must be exercised in watching for
shots and films of lead, especially after the concentration of sets.
4. The cupels should be nicely "feathered," and
when cold should be of a very pale greenish-yellow,
•denoting the almost entire absence of copper. It is
possible to get a good result by leaving more copper
in the lead-button, thus doing away with the second
scorification. It is best, however, to do as directed,
placing beyond doubt the question of the absence of
•copper in the silver-beads.
5. The flux can be mixed in large batches and measured by having a cup made that equals one charge, the
formula being:
Na2C03 plus K2CO3 (1-2 & 1-2     5 lbs.
PbO 80 lbs.
Si02     5 lbs.
6. The advantages of this method are:
That it gives results in gold equal to the "all-scori-
fication" method, and in silver equal to the combined
wet and fire method.
That it does away with the necessity of making separate estimations for gold and silver, thus saving the
time and expense of working the combination method
for silver.
That the time taken is less for each estimation than
in the all-fire scorification. In practice it takes from
five to six hours to do three determinations of gold and
silver.
APPLIED MECHANICS
(By Geo. Williams, Mecli. Eng., Ladysmith.)
THE subject of this article is most especially the
application of the science of mechanical engineering to the different methods of turning ore
in the ground to as many dollars as possible in the
pocket of the mine owner and operator.
It is an unfortunate fact that more often than not, the
persons who in the first place discover a certain property, have not the necessary money to develop it, so
the "prospector"* looks for a capitalist.
We may suppose that all goes well, a company perhaps formed,- with a president or general manager at
the head, who as is often the case, knows nothing of
mining or mining machinery. The mine is then developed in a more or less economical way, depending
on the ability of the man in charge on the spot. Then
machinery is needed, manufacturers consulted, whose
interest is not the welfare of the mine, but to sell and
get as large a price as possible. The more ignorant of
such things the executive force is, the bigger the bill, as
no intelligent check is put upon them.
All then going well, the cry is, "We must have a
smelter." The manufacturers are again consulted, and
advise the installation of whatever they see fit.
As the day of "secret processes" is practically at an
end, the economy and proper working of the plant
depends very considerably on the mechanical arrangement of it, and the steady and economical running of
the machinery in it. A good engine well set with a
good ordinary boiler furnishes power at a reasonable
figure. For instance about 100 pounds of coal will}
~ furnish one horse-power per 24 hours, a non-condensing Corliss engine being used, or about 60 pounds
tnrough the medium of a compound condensing ohe.
On the other hand the amount of fuel may reach as
high as 300 pounds of coal per horse-power per day,
a poor class of engine and boiler being used.518-
THE MINING RECORD.
Moreover, good and suitable machinery properly
arranged, will run without frequent shut-downs for
repairs. What is more annoying or expensive than
having frequently to shut down a furnace, on account
of shafting being out of line, or a boiler not large)
enough? The hoist at a mine being disabled, shuts
down the mine, time and money being lost in both
cases.
To a mine or smelter which is being run on a narrow margin of profit, this means ruin, which might
perhaps have been averted, had the machinery been
selected and arranged by a competent engineer, or in
other words, the principles of mechanics applied as
they should be.
Another large item of expense, the handling of material, may be reduced to a minimum by the best arrangement of the integral parts of the works in
question.
BRITISH COLUMBIA IN LONDON.
(From our own Correspondent.)
ALTHOUGH the tone of the B. C. market has been
somewhat firmer recently, it cannot be said that
there has been any material expansion in the
amount of business transacted in this section. To a
very large extent the prices quoted for British Columbian mining shares on the London Stock Exchange
are still nominal, and it is only in Le Roi group, Ymirs,
Velvets and a few others that there is anything like
a free market. As a matter of fact the changes during
tlie month of January were few and far between, but
it is satisfactory to record that they were mostly in
favour of holders. Le Rois fluctuated between i 1-4
and 1 11-16, the best mentioned price being 1-16 only
above the final quotation. As a result of the cheerful
and straightforward remarks made by Mr. MacMillan
Le Roi market was decidedly firmer, whilst Le Roi No.
2 were steady notwithstanding the remarks made at
the meeting as to the improbability of any immediate
amalgamation of the two concerns. Rossland and
Kootenay remain at about 3-8, and although a proportionately large gain is shown by L. & B. C. Gold-
fields as a result of better news about the Ymir, the
shares of the parent company have never recovered
from the blow sustained in connection with the collapse
of the Ymir. The shares of the latter have been as good
as 3-4, for the reason above given, but are of course
still only about a third of the price to which they at
one time advanced. This company is a striking instance of the folly of precipitancy in the matter of
dividend payments, and it is to be hoped that if ever
the concern is again able to enter the dividend list it
will have a longer sojourn there than it had before.
At present, however, there seems little possibility of
the Ymir re-entering the charmed circle. The better
news to hand for the mine, was, of course, welcome;
good news is welcomed in a market not too plentifullv
supplied with cheering statements. One of the most
notable features was the sharp advance in New Gold-
fields of B. C. in sympathy with the sharp advance in
Velvets based on the reported new discoveries on this
property. Velvets are about 6s. higher on the month.
It will give you some idea, however, of the way in
which the London market exaggerates the relative importance of a cable from a property when I point out
to you that the advance in New Goldfields of B. C.
which followed the publication of the news in question
amounted to no less than four hundred per cent. In
other words the shares which had been knocking about
the market at about 60 cents, were suddenly inflated to
$3. Of course the mining department has little or no
sense of proportion at the best of times, and here is
one of those examples which will prove this very
clearly to your readers. Snowshoes are one of the best
markets in this section, and are wonderfuly well held.
Your description of this property in the January
Record has attracted quite a lot of attention, and it is
hoped that the property has a good future before it.
You will, of course have heard that two .of its board,
Mr. G. S. Waterloo, and Mr. MacMillan, have been
elected directors of the Le Roi, and it is to be hoped
that their accession will prove helpful to the board of
what is—through good and evil repute—still regarded
as the premier British Columbia mine, despite Mr.
Curie, and his pessimistic utterances regarding B. C.
mines in recent issues of the Economist (London).
I have made a little comparison of the prices of what
may be regarded as the representative B.  C. mines
dealt in on the London Stock Exchange, at the 31st
December, and at the end of January, and the following ■
is the result:
ADVANCE.
DECLINE.
UNCHANGED.
ConsofdMines selection Hall Mining 3d.
1-16. Le Roi No. 2, 1-16.
Le Roi l/z. Nimrod Vs.
L. & B. C Goldfields y&.\
New Goldfields jj|.
Velvets-16.
B. C. Develop Ass'n.
Duncan.
iEnterprise.
jQ.ueen Bess.
Rosslane-Kootenay.
JSnowshoe..
I Whitewater.
lYmir.
jGiant,
The above will show pretty clearly the drift of the
market in London, viz., steady to firm.with a better
tendency for certain shares, due to exceptional causes.
With anything like a continuance of favourable advices from British Columbia there would probably be
an expansion of business in this section; but the British investor has had such a bad time as a result of his
connection with B. C. mines that he naturally wants
to see some definite prospect of a return on his capital
before increasing his interest in the Province.
It is satisfactory to be able to note that Mr. Turner's
efforts to enlighten the public here as to the attractiveness of the Province as a home for the British emigrant are being ably seconded by the Canadian Pacific
Railway. I do not, of course, mean that the C. P. R.
have ever been backward in this respect, but rather
that they have lately hit upon a happy method of introducing people in this country to the Dorriinion of
Canada by means of the bioscope. A few days ago
the company gave an exhibition of animated pictures
at the Palace Theatre representing Canadian life and
scenery.   The pictures thrown on the screen illustratedTHE MINING RECORD.
519
a journey across the Canadian Continent, and represented in the most realistic manner town, farming and
ranching life, lumbering, sport and mountain scenery.
The views, which were witnessed by an enthusiastic
audience, were a splendid advertisement for the Dominion, and I can only hope that the C. P. R. people
will endeavour to give residents in the provinces an
opportunity of obtaining such an excellent acquaintance with its industries and beauties. One could have
wished perhaps that an effort had been made to give
a little more attention to the mining side of Canadian
life, but no doubt the C. P. R. officials recognized the
necessity of dealing more with the phases of everyday life which attract the man in the street, rather
than with a subject which is necessarily extremely
technical and not of general public interest. The exhibition was under the patronage of Lord Strathcona
and Mount Royal, and amongst the crowd of people
present I noticed the Duke of Argyle, Lord Mount
Stephen, Sir Spencer Walpole, the Hon. J. H. Turner,
your hard working Agent General, Messrs. A. Lang,
Cameron Alexander, J. G. Colmer, W. T. Preston, and
many others. This useful work of education reflects
much credit on Mr. Archer Baker, whilst the Warwick Trading Company of this city are to be congratulated upon their excellent photographs, which in
their aggregate represented approximately 100,000
pictures. The run through the Rockies, Selkirks,
Gold Range and Coast Range of mountains was the
largest and one of the most realistic series of animated
photographs that has ever been shown in this country.
It is to be hoped that when the complete—or approximately complete—returns of mining in 1902 are
to hand, the same will at once be cabled over to Mr.
Turner, so that he may have them circulated officially
from the Agency. It is neither dignified nor in the
best interests of the Province that these should be
allowed to leak out in an incomplete form, and be so
forwarded to London by news agencies. The Minister
of Mines will no doubt see to this in future. The output of our mines is too important to be transmitted in
a mutilated or inaccurate shape, and we trust that
the methods of other Colonies will te adopted, and the
information forwarded so soon as it is available without an instant's delay to London. British Columbia
needs all the support that can be afforded it in the capital of the Empire at the present juncture, and such a
piece of information as the yearly mining output
should not be divulged to any one here until it has
first been flashed over the cable to the Agent-General.
He can be left to arrange for its immediate circulation
both on 'Change, and in the press. Private enterprise
is all very well, but when it is not always able to ensure accuracy it is liable to be harmful to the state's
best interest.
THE CANADIAN MINING INSTITUTE.
names of the officers and council nominated for
WB
THE Nominating Committee of the Canadian Mining Institute has reported the names of the
officers and council to be elected at the Annual
General Meetings on 4th,. 5th and 6th March next.
Mr. Charles Fergie, of the Intercolonial Coal Co.,
Westville, N.S., who has held the position of president
for two years, retires, his place being taken by an Ontario man, Mr. Eugene Coste. Mr. Coste is one of the
oldest mining engineers in Canada, having been the
first chief of the Division of Mines and Mining Statistics in connection with the Geological Survey. On
leaving the Survey, Mr. Coste was successful in locating, opening up and equipping the Welland Natural
Gas field. He has contributed several valuable papers
to the Geology of Canada, and particularly on the characteristics of the oil and gas fields of Ontario. The
complete list is as follows :—
President—Mr. Eugene Coste, mining engineer,
Provincial Natural Gas and Fuel Co., Toronto.
Vice-Presidents—John B. Hobson, mining engineer,
Consolidated Cariboo Hydraulic Co., Bullion, B.C.;
Dr. F. D. Adams, McGill University, Montreal; Robert E. Chambers, mining engineer, Nova Scotia Steel
& Coal Co., Bell Island, Newfoundland; George R.
Smith, M.L.A., mining engineer, Bell's Asbestos Co.,
Thetford Mines, Que.
Council—Edmund B. Kirby, mining engineer, Centre
Star Mining Co., Rossland, B.C.; S. F. Parrish, mining engineer, B. C. Chartered Co., Eholt, B.C.; J. H.
Tonkin, mining engineer, Crow's Nest Pass Coal Co.,
fernie, B.C.; Frederick Keffer, mining engineer, B. C..
Copper Co., Anaconda, B.C.; A. P. Turner, Canadian
Copper Co., Sudbury, Ont.; E. A. Sjoostedt, metallurgist, Consolidated Lake Superior Co., Sault Ste.
Marie, Ont.; D. G. Kerr, mining engineer, Cordova
Exploration Ltd., Cordova Ont.; Dr. W. L. Goodwin,
School of Mining, Kingston, Ont.; Harry J. Williams,
mining engineer, New England Canadian Asbestos
Co., Thetford Mines, Que.; Dr. J. Bonsall Porter,
mining engineer, McGill University, Montreal, Que.;
B. Bennett, mine manager, King Bros., Asbestos Co.,
Thetford Mines, Que.; F. Cirkel, mining engineer,
Montreal, Que.; C. Shields, Dominion Coal Co., Glace
Bay, C.B.; Dr. E. Gilpin, Jr., mining engineer, Halifax, N.S. > Thomas Cantley, Nova Scotia Steel & Coal
Co., New Glasgow, N.S.
Treasurer—J. Stevenson Brown, Montreal Que.
Secretary—B. T. A. Bell, editor Canadian Mining
Review, Ottawa, Ont.
RECENT PATENTS OF INTEREST
TO MINING MEN.
w
E are indebted to Mr. Rowland Brittain, Patent
Attorney,   of   Vancouver,   for   the   following
report:
Sulphide Ore Smelting   and Concentrating Process.520
THE MINING RECORD.
Canadian patent No. 78,857, granted December 30th,
1902, to Emil Knudsen, of Sulitjelma, Norway.
SmszM
gip
ml
Claims : i. The method of treating ores, which consist in first imparting to the lining of the furnace a
high degree of temperature then charging the furnace
with ore, then admitting a cold air blast to the charge
at a low pressure thereby initiating the smelting of the
. charge and subsequently increasing the pressure of the
blast causing thus the smelting and concentration of
the charge without the addition of carboniferous fuel.
2. The method of sme'fting ores which consists in
charging the ores into a furnace having a highly heated
lining, introducing a cold air blast at the bottom of the
furnace and below the surface of the ore, thus utilizing the sulphur in the melted ore as fuel, emptying the
furnace and re-charging the same while the lining retains the heat imparted thereto by a previous smelting
operation.
3. The process of smelting pyrites or sulphide ores
which consists in charging the same into a furnace having its interior lining previously heated to a sufficiently
high degree to fuse the ore, injecting into and through
the melted ore a blast of cold air whereby the sulphur
in the ore will be oxidized and the resulting heaf utilized to smelt the charge without other fuel, then emptying the furnace and re-charging while the lining
retains the heat imparted thereto by the previous
smelting operation.
THE   CANADIAN   SMELTING   CO.'S   ASSAY
OFFICE AT TRAIL.
TO replace the assay office which was destroyed by
fire in July last, the Canadian Smelting Works
has completed at Trail, B.C., a new structure,
which, in point of modern equipment, equals, if not
surpasses, any assay office on the American Continent.
The purpose of the management is to keep pace with
the progress and needs of the rapidly increasing resources of a new country, and to that end the assay
office has been constructed and equipped to permit of
the running of all classes of work that might be presented, such as coal and coke, iron and nickel ores, gold,
silver, copper and lead ores and other mineral deposits, in addition to any experimental work which might
be necessary in connection with the smelter and the
new electrolytic lead refinery.
In the case of the Canadian Smelting Works, where
the ores are so varied, coming as they do from all parts
of the province, containing anything from 200 oz. down
in gold, and 5,000 ounces down in silver, from 30 per
cent, down in copper and 82 per cent, down in lead, in .
practically every combination—and such impurities
as molybdenite, arsenic, zinc and antimony—the assay
office holds even a more important relation to the
smelting industry than is generally the case, the great
variety of ores making it necessary to analyze nearly
every shipment. Such large quantities of zinc and
other impurities demand the closest tab on the furnaces,
roasters and every part of the works, necessarily increasing the demands on the assay office.
The new structure consists of two large brick buildings, the smaller or furnace building being built into
and at right angles with the main structure, yet being
entirely separated by brick walls. The main building
which is 70x35, contains the office, two balance rooms,
an electrolytic and parting room, the chemical laboratory, bucking room, store room and basement. In the
basement is the motor, which furnishes power for the
mills and crushers.
Two samples of every shipment of ore are sent to the
assay office, where they are placed in electrical dryers.
On one the moisture is calculated and the other is
pulped. The mills and crushers are all on separate
foundations to prevent vibration in the-building. The
sample is divided into four parts, one of which goes
to the mine, one is sealed and put aside for use of an
umpire, the third being stored for reference and the
fourth is assayed. In case of dispute, the umpire
sample is sent to some assayer agreed upon by both
mine and smelter, and his assay is final. All samples
are taken to the pulp room, where there is a cabinet
capable of holding 10,000 pulps. All the weighing
of pulps for chemical, furnace and electrolytic work
is done in this pulp room, which is equipped with
glass top tables, built from the ground, and carrying
four chemical balances.
On one side of the pulp room is the chemical la- '
boratory, fitted with every new labour-saving device.
The chemical and draft chambers, for the purpose of
carrying off all aqid fumes, are brick the full height
of the building. The chemical hood has four electric
hot plates, each 12x18 inches, for chemical work, with
separate adjusting apparatus, so that the chemist may
have any degree 'of heat, from 50 degrees centigrade
to the melting point of tin, without the slightest inconvenience. The hood has two similar electrical
plates, three sulphretted hydrogen and one dionide
generator. In the laboratory there are two hot water
tanks, one of which is connected with a still for distilled water, heated by electric coils and provided
with syphons and rubber tubes for washing precipitates.    Amongst other    useful     equipment  are theTHE MINING RECORD.
521
vacuum and pressure pumps and the hot and cold
water throughout.
On another side of the pulp room is the entrance
to the furnace building, the walls of which are surmounted by large ventilators and skylights. The furnaces, four in number, have 23x17 1-2 inch muffles,
and are constructed to burn Crow's Nest coal. They
have a common 40-foot stack. The fire room is also
open to the roof, and is divided from the furnace
room by a brick wall. The floors are concrete, covered with quarter-inch sheet iron.
Two electrolytic plates and a hood for fumes, similar to those in the laboratory, are contained in the electrolytic parting room. The electrical equipment in this
compartment also comprises a set,of storage batteries,
connected with a dynamo in the basement, which are
capable of delivering a continuous current of 20 amperes at 6 volts, the distribution of which is governed
by rheostats, capable of cutting the whole down to one-
tenth ampere. Larger currents, up to 500 amperes,
may be had direct from the dynamo, when required for
experimental work.
Not the least interesting, however, is the balance
room, which contains three gold balances and one analytical balance. To insure greater accuracy, they are
mounted on tables and are so delicate as to weigh the
ten-millionth part of an ounce.
.The building and its arrangement and equipment
was planned by S. G. Blaylock, assayer for the Canadian Smelting Works.
THE STRIKE AT FERNIE.
IT is to be hoped that the Board of Conciliation appointed by the Provincial Mining Association to
proceed to Fernie and endeavour to bring about'
a satisfactory settlement of the present deplorable
strike situation at these collieries will be successful in
their efforts. Meanwhile it will interest many of our
readers to learn something of the issues at stake, and
we therefore extract the following information published by a local contemporary, the Fernie Free Press.
To show that the miners are exceptionally well paid as
a class, Mr. Tonkin, the General Manager, has made
a sworn statement of miners' earnings at the respective
mines.   These are:
morrissey mine.
Miners' Averages for Three Months—November, 1902,
to January, 1903.
«
No. 1 Mine—
Highest average net earnings per shift $6 54
Lowest average net eanings per shift 3 14
Average net earnings per shift 4 66
No. 3 Mine—
Highest average net earnings per shift  8 38
Lowest average net earnings per shift  2 77
Average net earnings per shift  431
No. 4 Mine—
Highest average net earnings per shift  6 96
lowest average net earnings per shift (this party
worked only four days) 1 81
Average net earnings per shift 4 72
ALL MINES.
Average net earnings per shift 4 64
Miners' average earnings— Per Cent.
Exceeding $6 per shift     20
From $5 to $6 per shift      18
From $4 to $5 per shift     28
From $3 to $4 per shift     21
Under $3 per shift      13
Miners whose net earnings exceed $100 per month—
November     16
December     20
January     32
Note: During the months of November, December and January, the Morrissey mines were operated
under a schedule of wages proposed by the Coal Company. During these months, and while the schedule
was under advisement it was current information that
the local union had instructed the men not to overexert themselves; that is, to hold themselves dovvn to a
certain amount of work daily until the schedule was
finally approved.
The schedule as approved, with several minor amendments, was finally approved of by a committee of eight
men from the several mines, who met with General
Manager Tonkin and General Superintendent Stockett
at Morrissey in January. The schedule was then printed and posted at the mines.
COAL   CREEK   MINES.
Miners' Average for Five Months—September, 1002,
to January, 1003.
Highest average net earnings per shift $7 29
Lowest average net earnings per shift 3 19
Average net earnings per shift 4 63
Miners average earnings :— Per cent.
Exceeding $7 per shift  1
From $6 to $7 per shift  12
From $5 to $6 per shift  16
From $4 to $5 per shift  41
From $3 to $4 per shift  30
Miners whose net earnings exceed $100 per month—
September  68
October  66
November . .  .  32
December  27
January  31
MICHEL  MINES.
Miners' Averages for Five Months—^September, 1002,
to January, ipoj.
Highest average net earnings per shift $6 93
Lowest average net earnings per shift 3 42
Average net earnings per shift 4 87
111522
THE MINING RECORD.
Miners average net earnings— Per cent.
Exceeding $6 per shift     14
From $5 to $6 per shift     26
From $4 to $5 per shift     50
From $3 to $4 per shift     10
Miners whose average net earnings exceed $100
per month—j
September -      50
October     50
November—only two months account local strike.
December .     18
January     46
In an interview Mr. Tonkin is reported to have made
the following statement:
(1) That only 18 per cent, of his employees had
voted for a strike.
(2) No notice of a strike had been served on the
company.
(3) He did not ask for 81-2 hours' work, but that
it was agreed that a majority of the men employed
must vote for the old system in order to re-introduce it.
(4) The statement was incorrect that he was present at the vote.
(5) Contract men were not affected by the 81-2
hour regulation and probably not more than 10 per
cent, of his employees were directly interested in it.
(6) A reduction of wages of 15 and 20 per cent,
had not been made at Coal Creek. Five cents a ton
was taken off when the new closed lights were intro-.
duce'd, and this affected only one mine.
(7) The timber question was settled as soon as the
landing room could be prepared and the men are having no more trouble with lack of timber. No miners
were dismissed on this account, but because it was
known that the four men in question were trying to
incite a strike.
(8) He had never refused to meet a committee from
any one mine, or from any local union, and if necessary
was willing that the local union should refer their
grievances to a higher tribunal, the District Union of
the Western Federation of Miners.
(9) The objection to the company stores was certainly late in making its appearance. It was well
known to every miner that the company was disposing
of their stores at the three camps and he felt reasonably assured that the transfer would be made i.v
March ist.
He was at a loss to understand what was meant by
the "buttying" system at Michel, unless •? referred to
the back-hand system by which the contractor generally earned a "rake off" from his helper. This system
was employed by all mines and without it no one could
become a practical miner as the laws of the province
require a contractor to hold a miner's certificate and
such a certificate cannot be obtained by any who has
not worked in a mine for at least 12 months.
(10) As to the question of the net average earnings
of the men employed in all the mines, Air. Tonkin
offered the books of the company for inspection, in
order to prove that the figures represented the'net
earnings after back-hand, powder and smithing had
been deducted. The case of Mr. P. Christopher was
given as an example. In December he earned $133.25;
50 cents were deducted for smithing and $46.25 for
back-hand; no powder was used. This left a balance
of $86.50, which, divided by twenty shifts worked in
the month, leaves a daily average of $4.32 1-2. All
the others are worked out on this basis, and are sworn
to as being correct.
THE MINERS'  SIDE.
Referring to Mr. Tonkin's table of miners' earnings,
the union offer the following criticisms:
After an investigation of numerous statements we
find that the Coal Company method of book keeping is
not infallible,.as a cofry of some of the statements will
prove. Now we do not make statements we are not
prepared to prove and to do this let us look at the
following lists of wages :—
J. Ballusky worked 18 shifts, earning $173.20. He
had the following back-hands:—
M. Kovalik, 2j days at $2.50 $67 50
H. Smith,.5 days at $2.50 12 00
G. Erison, 1 day at $2.50     2 50
J. Terman, 7 days at $2.50 17 50
Total for back-hand labour $100 00
Now this man had nothing stopped out of his earnings to pay these men. Had their earnings been deducted from his net earnings there would have been
a remainder of $73.20 for his 18 shifts instead of
$173.20 as given by the company due bill.
Wm Murray worked 20 shifts, earning $143.65. .
Now $51.30 of this amount is given as consideration
for which nothing is shown. He employed three backhands for 20 days each at $2.50 per-day, making a
total for back-hand labour of $150. Take $150 from
$143-6-5 and poor Murray is in debt to the back-hands
to the amount of $6.35 after working 20 days for nothing. But this would not do to put before the public,
so the company generously deduct $33.20 to pay for
60 days' work instead of $150. For what purpose this
is done we cannot tell.
Phil Christopher worked 16 shifts:
To mining 113 tons at 40c. per ton $45 20
To 13 1-2 yards entry at $2 per yard 26 65
To 3 days' company work at $3-.  q 00
Total earning $80 85
I The company give a total of $102.85. What is that
$22 given to Christopher for? Again the company deducts $39.00 for back-hand labour instead of $60 Whv
was not full back-hand earnings - stopped from Chris-
§¥1 •$6Vr0m ?8°-85 leaV6S $20'8S' P^ So cents
for smithing leaves $20.35 for 16 shifts, or an average
of $1.27 per shift—a magnificent sum for the dan<4-
ous occupation of coal miner &
John Spok worked 9 days in No. 3.mine, earning
*20.40; $22.50 the company deducted for back-hand
labour so for the privilege of working for the C N  P
Coal Company nine days he paid them $2.10.    In factTHE MINING RECORD.
523
to pay- these back-hands their proper days' compensation he started on company work in preference to dig-
ding coal. &
mg?
Question:    Have the contract men room for kick
The men whom the company call pushers are actually engaged in loading coal for miners. They are paid
by the company rignt along and have been paid by
them ever since the miners have been working under
the protested wage list. We know by experience that
as soon as the men would accept this scale of 40 cents
per ton that they would be required to pay all the pack
hands themselves according to the usual
custom.   There
are several reasons why the company have given these
miners so much help. It may have been that they wanted to make a big average wage for the miners to get
them to accept the wage offered or it may have been
to bribe them to work away contented and not to trouble about their less favoured fellows, for they undoubtedly would not leave these men to work as pushers
and loaders as soon as the price of 40 cents per ton was
established. It has come as a revelation to the miners
of this valley that the company are in the business as
pnilanthropists; if not why are these men's wages
(loaders and pushers) not deducted from the miner's
due bill?
Why did they not deduct $100 from Ballusky's
pay and give it to the back-hands? Why did they not
deduct $150 from Murray's $143.65 and leave him
$6.35 in the hole? Why did they pay Christopher $22
more than he had earned and why did they deduct $39
for back-hand labour instead of $60 and pay the difference themselves, for Christopher's back-hand statement showed that he received $60. Again, why was
the back-hand's wages deducted from J. Spok? In
nine days he earned $20.40 and $22.50 was deducted
for back-hands. How was it that he was not to enjoy
the same privilege as others? Was it because he was
not able to put his trouble into good hands or was it
because he was not occupying any prominent position
in the local union and therefore they did not consider
that it was worth the expense to bribe him into quietness ?   This question we leave to the public decision.
The statements prove conclusively that the net earnings do not show all reasonable deductions since in
many cases no back-hand labour is deducted at all. On
the point of wages we believe the contract men have
just room for "kicking," and we cannot see how we
materially; weaken our cause by raising this question.
The miners at Morrissey were always likely to earn
: high wages under the objectionable rate for the reason
shown. No greedy coal miner expects a larger'average than $4.50 for eight hours' work. As long as the
management ignore the union and refuse their officers
audience misunderstandings will never be cleared up.
The secretary of Gladstone Union and also of the District Board has asked time after time for an audience
and were invariably refused.
The union officials, however, have not been idle for
the past week. With much labour the January statements have been collected in the three camps and in
order to save space the results have been boiled down.
The officials of the union will take an affidavit as to
their accuracy before Mr. Tonkin himself. Again you
seem to believe that only contract miners are kicking
about the wages. This is not the case, but all company men, all outside ,men and all coke oven men as
well. The accompanying list of wages show how
these men are paid. In many instances the wage would
nto be sufficient for a man to live in an Eastern' town,
much less in the West.  .
Taking 73 of the Fernie miners' due bills for January after smithing and blasting expenses are-deducted
we find that 11 men earn $100 and over, 22 men under
$100 and over $75, 14 earn under $75 and over $60, 25
earn under $60.
The following is the list of 130 men employed in the
Fernie mines at company work, such as shiftmen,
trackmen, rope riders, drivers, brattice men, couplers,
switch boys, etc.
1 man earns $3.50 per day.
I
'    3-25
7 men
3.00
()    -
'    2.75
l5    .-<
2.50
0    "
2  OO
6
i-75
4    "
1.50
■3       "              '
0
1.00
The following is a list of
and number of ovens drawn
coke drawers for January
and shifts worked:
Ovens
Per
Shifts
Cons
ider-
Total per
drawn.
Oven.
ation.
month.
57
75C
19
$42 75
57
75   1
19
42 75
40
75
19
25c
3° 25
57
75
19
50
43 25
57
75 •
19
75
43 5°
57
' 75
19
$1
25
44 00
57 •
75
19
42 75
445*
75
18
40 50
5°
75
17
I
00
38 50
.">o
75
17 .
39 75
6
75
2
4-50
79
75
75
60 00
57
75
25
43 00
The following are coke loac
worked in Tanuarv. tons load
ers with number of shifts
ed and price per ton.
Tons
Price
Days
Total for
Loaded.
Per Ton.
Worked.
Mouth.
3J9
17c
30
$54 25
281
17
26
47 75
289
17
49 15
226
17
26
38 40
211
T7
25
36 05
226
17
25
38 40
211
17
25
36 05
24I
17
24
40 95
274
17
46 55
26l
17
44 35
3*9
T7
30
..54 20
389
17
49 10524
THE MINING RECORD.
These are only Fernie prices and at Morrisey and
Michel they are even lower.   We regret that we have
not been able to get the due bills from these places in
time for the Press as it would have shown just how
much lower they are than here.   However, we are safe
in saying that they are below a fair living wage, and
that they should be raised to Fernie rates is only just.
In the interview with the Press representative Mr.
Tonkin states that the timber trouble was settled as
soon as landings were made and that the men are having no trouble about lack of timber.    We say the timber trouble was not settled and the men did have trouble for lack of timber right up to the time they came
out.    Those four men spoken of last week were dismissed for trying to get some redress to the timber
trouble and for coming out of the mines for want of
it.    Indeed several other men on different occasions
were told by the overman, that if they went out for the
want of timber they would be dismissed.    Further,
Mr. Tonkin states that he was always willing to meet
the committee of the local union.   Well, the local committee did meet him often, and stated their grievances
but could get no redress.    So at last to stop further
encroachments they had to place the whole of their
troubles before the District Board.   The trouble with
the buttying system is that under that system the company do not pay enough to give the miner a good wage
and allow him to pay a helper as he should be paid.
It forces the helper to work for a lower wage than the
general rate of the country.   In all the West the Government price for outside labour is $2.50 and in quartz
mines the muckers get $3 per day, yet these men are
expected to work in the hazardous calling of coal mining for $2.50 when they are working for a miner, and
$2.25 when they are working as helpers for the 'company at Michel.   These are the complete facts of the
case as taken by the Press    Committee after going
through all the due bills that could be got, and we think
it answers the question "Are the men of the Crow's
Nest Valley well paid?"
REASONS OF THE STRIKE.
The men and boys working in and'around the mines
and coke ovens of the Crow's Nest Pass Coal Company
at Morrissey, Michel and Fernie came out on strike
on the morning of February nth.   In Fernie the men
and boys have been working under protest since August 4, 1902.   The public at large are more or less acquainted with their grievances.    Just one month and
tour days after the big explosion of May 22, 1902  in
which 130 men and boys were killed because coal is
mined for profit instead of being mined for use   Mr
John H. Tonkin, who by the way, came direct 'from
Pennsylvania after the explosion to fill the position of
manager of the Crow's    Nest Pass Coal Company
without consulting his employees, imposed upon them
an extra half hour underground, or in other words
made it nine hours from bank to bank instead of eight
hours, as it had been previous to his coming here and
as it is in every other coal mine in British Columbia
the men were forced to strike or submit to the impo-
sition. F
After a six weeks' strike, and on August 4, the
Gladstone Miners' Union, No. 76, of the W. F. M.,
entered into an agreement with Mr. Tonkin on behalf
of the Crow's Nest Pass Coal Company and clause 5
of that agreement in part reads as follows: "If at the
expiration of two months from date of this agreement
the union shall signify in writing to the company after
a vote by ballot among the employees employed by the
company underground, that they are dissatisfied with
tne extra time underground, the company hereby agree
that this agreement shall be at an end; and thereafter
a day's work shall consist of one eight (8) hour shift."
The day they signed this agreement Mr. Tonkin
told the committee that he intended in the near future
to draw up a scale of prices which he wanted the committee to sign on behalf of the union. He assured the
committee that he would not cut prices, or in other
words, that the prices would remain as they were when
he came. The day following the signing of this agreement he submitted his scale of prices to the union, and
to the surprise of all concerned there was a general
cut. of from five to twenty per cent. Of course the
union refused to sign it. But what could they do?
They had pledged their word and honour to try the new
system for two months. They went to work under
protest of prices. At the expiration of two months
the union took the vote by ballot, which resulted as
.follows: Thirty-three for the new system—who, by
the way, were largely petty bosses of the company—
and 129 votes to return to the old system. The union
notified Mr. Tonkin in writing that they wished to
return to the old system. He wholly ignored their
notice.
Section 6 of the agreement reads in part as follows:
"There shall be no discrimination by the company
against any of the miners or working men employed
by the company previous to the inauguration of the
strike." This the company almost wholly ignored and
many a good man left the camp rather than allow the
union to get into trouble fighting his case.
At Morrissey they have been working under a protested wage scale since the middle of last October, 40
cents per ton for digging coal, and the company^ stores
to deal in. If I am correctly informed this is the lowest
price ever paid for digging coal on this continent.
At Michel where everything is owned by the company
except the C. P. R. tracks, the union men in order to
hold their^neetings have to walk about three miles into
the woods to an old logging camp with neither doors
or windows. The company have positively refused to
rent them a place to hold their meetings. The company stores are at the mines in all the three camps and
none others are allowed.
Men and boys are killed or crippled almost daiLy in
these mines. It would take a whole column to enumerate all the grievances in the three camps; I merely
mention a few So it will be seen that the employees of
the Crows Nest Pass Coal Company have not been
waiting for an opportunity to strike, but all these
months they have been working under protest with the
hope that they could adjust their grievances without a
strike, and knowing that to win a strike all three camps
must strike together, in that way shutting off all theTHE MINING RECORD.
ozo
.coal supply and thereby closing down the smelters of
West Kootenay and shutting down all the quartz mines,
which will throw thousands of our fellow workmen
out of employment and practically stop the wheels of
industry. Realizing all this, the employees of the
Crow's Nest Pass Coal Company have done everything
in their power during these months that they have
been working under protest to get the company to adjust their grievances without a. strike.
The foregoing represents as near as possible the
questions in dispute and we think any fair-minded
person will conclude that the grievances of the miners
are by no means all imaginary. It is, for example, an
abominable system where a man may obtain a, favoured
position in a mine and so earn a very large wage, while
another equally competent can only make a pittance by
being obliged to work in a less favoured spot. Meanwhile, the strike at Fernie has demoralized the metal
mining industry in the whole of Southern British Columbia, and unless steps are taken to prevent the recurrence of these continual labour troubles, we can
never look forward to a period of permanent 'prosperity. The public should be informed at once who is
really responsible for the present calamitous state of
affairs.
CANADIAN LEAD AND LEAD TARIFF.
j HE Canadian Smelting Works at Trail have in-
A stalled an electrolytic lead refining plant, which
is now in successful operation, and as the process has
proved to be more economical than the old zinc desil-
verisation process universally used in the United States,
and to a large extent in Europe, this electrolytic refinery will immediately be enlarged to handle the bullion (lead, silver and gold) output of Canada. Unfortunately the present output of bullion in British Columbia is not sufficient to enable any refinery to earn
the full amount of the Government bounty, namely,
$5.00 per ton on 20,000 tons of refined lead per year.
This bounty cannot strictly be considered in the same
light as a protection upon lead, as it was mainly for the
purpose of offsetting an indirect bounty upon refining
in the United States amounting to something over $3.00
per ton of lead produced. The lead smelting and refining industries now having been established, furnishing competition in the purchase of lead ores, it now
remains with the Government to secure for the lead
miner the home market for the sale of his lead at prices
which will enable him to make a profit upon the large
amounts of money expended in lead mining in British
Columbia and elsewhere, and also to secure for Canada
an industry which may develop into an extremely large
and important one, namely the corroding of lead, producing white lead, red lead, litharge orange, etc.
The present injustice of the Canadian tariff, so far
as the lead miner is concerned, is due to the fact that
he pays for practically everything which he purchases
on the basis of 25 per cent, to 35 per cent, duty, whereas in the sale of his product, which from his standpoint
is a manufactured or finished product, there is but 15
per cent, protection less the differential of one-third,
making a net of 10 per cent, or approximately $5.00
per ton of lead. On white lead, which represents the
main consumption of pig lead, the protection is but
5 per cent, less a third, making 31-3 per cent, net, or
approximately $2.00 per ton, in other words, not only
has he far less protection in the sale of his product
than he has upon the articles which he .must purchase,
but in the case of his purchases the differential duty is
not effective, the prices being made practically by the
United States, whereas in the sale of his product the
differential of one-third is effective and fixes his selling
price.
It is interesting to compare the protection accorded
Idaho miners working under similar conditions and
on practically the same general mineral deposits as in
British Columbia, and it will be noticed that the British Columbia miner has a protection upon his pig
lead of $5.00 per ton, while.the United States miner
has a protection of 2 1-8 cents per pound, or $42.50
per ton, a net protection in favour of the United States
miner of $37.50. In the case of white lead, which takes
the greatest amount of the lead production, the comparison is worse, the United States protection being
2 7-8 cents per pound, or $57.50, while the Canadian
protection is only jbout $2.00 per ton, making a net
difference in favour of the United States miner of
about $55.50 per ton of white lead. The relative du-.
ties, therefore, on pig lead between the United States
and ( anada, are:—
United States $42 50
Canada _.:     5 00
In favour of the United States miner.$37 50
which amounts to $18.00 or $20.00 per ton of lead ore
containing from 50 per cent, to 60 per cent, in lead.
To be entirely fair to the B. C. producer of lead,
as well as others who have invested large amounts in
that country in its development, it would be no more
than fair to start upon a basis of charging 2 cents per
pound duty upon pig lead and 3 cents per pound duty
upon white lead, the other lead industries consuming
lead or white lead to receive a protection over and
above these figures an amount equal to their present
protection. Duties of this kind would immediately
have the effect of stimulating mining in British Columbia, increasing its smelting and refining industries
to a great extent, being the means of establishing an
entirely new industry, that of the corroding of lead in
Canada, and would otherwise directly and indirectly
give employment to a large number of men and the
employment of a greatly increased amount of capital.
This would be a marked contrast to the present state
of affairs, when British Columbia producers of lead
have now large quantities of pig lead on hand which
they are unable to dispose of at several dollars per ton
less than a London price, which is only about $48.00
per short ton, while Mexican bullion, the product of
Mexican smelters and Mexican mines, is being refined
and corroded in bond in New York and vicinity, being shipped into Canada in the form of white lead.
The Canadian producer of pig lead can now dispose
of but 3,000 to 4,000 tons of pig lead in Canada, due526
THE MINING RECORD.
to the fact that corroding works -cannot be established
under the present tariff regulations, while from 7,000
to 10,000 tons of lead is being annually imported from
the United States, Germany and England in tonnages
approximately proportional to order named. The
British Columbia producer of lead is marketing the
balance of his production (over and above the 3,000
or 4,000 tons, which he is enabled to market in Canada) in China, Japan and England. This can only
be remedied by making such duties as will encourage
and stimulate the mining industry in British- Columbia, will give sufficient protection to those caring to
invest in the corroding business. There can be no
question but this can be accomplished by duties starting with 2 cents per pound on lead and 3 cents per
pound on white lead, or if this is inconsistent with the
present general tariff, to make these duties in this proportion not under any circumstances, however, making the duty upon pig lead less than 1 1-2 cents per
pound and 2 cents per pound upon white lead.
There is, meanwhile, absolute stagnation in all the
silver-lead camps; and such properties as the St.
Eugene, which are capable of producing large tonnages, are completely closed down. This is due
primarily to the very low price of London lead arid silver. In spite of the cheap labour in Mexico, a number
of their properties are also closed down. The Broken
' Hills Compan)', of Australia, seems to be making absolutely nothing; and the chances are the only people
who make a^'thing at present prices of lead arid silver
are the Spaniards.
It has been suggested by a few that a bounty paid
direct to the lead miners would relieve the Canadian
situation, but the Government intimated last year that
they would not consider the granting of any additional
bounties—but they did admit that where it was shown
that the tariff needed revision they would be glad to
correct it. A further objection to a bounty is the fact
that it is unsatisfactory to the producer, as the Government must of necessity make it for a limited 'period
only, and usually at a rapidly decreasing rate per tori
of material produced. A still further objection to the
bounty in the case of lead ore is that the Government would not under any circumstances be willine
to grant an amount of bounty which would to any degree or material extent improve the conditions in
British Columbia.
The
many.
reason for
a revision of the lead tariff are
First, the product of this country—pig lead—
which is the result of mining British Columbia lead
ores, at a high cost, smelting them, which is also an
expensive operation, and refining the resulting bullion,
is only protected to the extent of 10 p. c. net, or about
$4.50 per ton, whereas mines, smelters and refineries
must, purchase articles at prices which are regulated
by a duty averaging something over 30 per cent.
Second—White lead is only protected to the extent of
5 per cent., less one-third, or 3 1-3 per cent., and consequently is all imported from England, the United
States and Germany; England securing but a very
small amount of this business. The white lead and
other lead coming from the United States is not of
United States origin, but is the result of refining and
corroding Mexican bullion in bond. At the time the
present tariff was framed, white lead was considered as
crude material, Canada not being in a position then
to produce either pig lead or white lead. There is
every reason, therefore, for a revision of this portion
of the tariff, making sufficient increase between pig
lead and white lead to insure the construction of corroding works in Canad" which will have the effect
01 giving the Canadian miner the benefit of the Canadian market.
A third reason for a revision of the tariff is the fact
that the United States ,through its duties on lead and
lead products, has always discriminated against Canadian lead, and as their mines, particularly those of
Idaho, are operated under similar conditions to those in
British Columbia, it is very difficult for people owning mines just north of the line to understand why the
Canadian Government should not give them the same
benefits as are granted by the United States Government to the Idaho mines.
It is not a pleasing contrast to find properties like
the St. Eugene closed down in Canada while those a
few miles to the south are operating on a large scale,
employing many men, and paying splendid dividends
to their owners.
British Columbia mines are open to the smelters of
the world; and United States smelters are treating
about one-half of the tonnage produced, yet Canadian
smelters are limited to their own market, being unable,
on account of the United States tariff, to purchase a
single pound of lead ore in the United States. Is there
any reason why Canadian institutions should be placed
at the absolute mercy of the large trusts of the United
States, while Canadian institutions are prohibited from
competing in the United States with those trusts?
In spite of the fact that Canadian institutions are
in a position to smelt and refine as cheaply as in the
L nited States, Canada seems perfectly satisfied to allow
the smelting, refining and manufacturing of the various metal products to go to the United States.
Reciprocity with the United States on lead and its
products would be most- advantageous to Canada, but
this can never be brought about until Canada makes
her duties just as prohibitive as has the United States,
and so long as that country is securing the cream of
tne Canadian business, as is the case to-day, there will
be no inclination upon the part of the United States
to grant reciprocity excepting on such items as coal and
lumber, which they actually require for the protection
of their immense industrial resources.
COMPANY MEETINGS AND REPORTS.
A
WAR EAGLE.
T the annual meeting held in Toronto on February 24th, the following statement was presented
to shareholders showing gross receipts from sale
of ore during the year of $207,393.44.    The amount
charged to mining in 1902 was $172,096.32, to diamond
drill prospecting $24,896.49,  to provincial taxes  onTHE MINING RECORD.
rW,
gross output of ore $4,144,42, to interest and exchange,
legal expenses, municipal taxes, insurance and sundry
$77>7I4-55> and to depreciation of plant and equipment
$30,57741 •
The statement demonstrates that
mining was carried
on only during the last four months of the year, while
•the expenses for development exploration, etc., were
continuous during the entire year. These costs could
only be met out of the proceeds of the ore sold in September, October, November and December, with the
result that the current indebtedness has been increased by something less than $20,000.
During the months when shipments were under
way the mine shipped 21,455 tons of ore to the Trail
smelter. This tonnage had a full assay value of $403,-
193:33 The indirect smelting charges, which means
tne difference between New York and Trail metal quotations, were $90,386.95 and the direct charges, including freight from the mine, $105,412.94. - The net value
of the ore, f. o. b. cars at the mine, was therefore,
$207,393.44. In the same shipment it is shown that
the output at the mine has increased from 48 tons in
1894, valued at $2,053.56, to 21,455 tons m 1902, with
a value of over $400,000. The total- tonnage shipped
since the inception of the mine has been 180,372 tons,
having a gross assay value of $4,371,436.91, and a net
value on cars at the mine of $2,192,995.63.
In the table of mining costs it is shown that the expense of operating in the camp is being steadily reduced. The cost per foot of sinking the 116 feet of main
shaft in 1902 was $91.55 per ton; for sinking small
shafts the cost was $27.41; for raising $31.98, and for
4,183 feet of drifting $20.86 per foot. The cost of ore
extraction was $3.20 per ton.
Ari important statement was made anent per ton
values. Average values per ton during 1902 were as
follows : Gross $18.79 § °- D- cars at mine $9-°7-
The statement of costs since 1897 shows a steady and
consistent reduction has been made from year to year.
GENERAL' MANAGER'S  REPORT.
The following is an excerpt from the report of the
General Manager, Mr. Kirby:
Explanatory Note: The values given are based upon the price of 12 cents for copper instead of 16.25
cents as in previous reports.
It is the usual practice of mines in pricing and recording ore to use the "Full Assay Value" instead of
the "Smelter's Gross Assay Value," which is less.
While this plan is often preferable, it has so far been
more convenient at the War Eagle mine to use the
latter value which, as shown by the table opposite, has
on shipping grades ranged from $4.68 to $5.07 less
than the full assay value.
"During the past year development work has been
steadily pushed and the ore reserves increased1. The
heavy decline in the price of copper has been offset by
the reduction in smelting rates, while the satisfactory
solution of the problem of treating.the low grades by
milling now makes it certain that the large bodies of
this ore exposed throughout the mine will soon be
available.
"The third "level has developed on the cross vein an
ore body 100 feet in length, 12 feet wide and extending
to the second level above with an average grade of
$12.00 smelter's gross assay value.
"The fourth level has developed on the cross vein
three bodies of pay ore. One is 30 feet long, 9 feet
wide, averaging $7.80 smelter's gross assay value. The
second is 45 feet long and 6 feet wide, averaging $9.64
smelter's gross assay value. The third is 20 feet long
and 5 feet wide, averaging $7.63 smelter's gross assay
value.
"The sixth level has reached the cross vein and
drifting has begun upon it. The heading has so far
cut a small body of milling grade. A third branch or
vein, 120 feet north, has been located by the diamond
drill. It is strong and well mineralized, carrying milling ore and a cross-cut to explore it is now in progress.
"The seventh level has now developed four branches
or veins. The eastward extension of the third vein
(which passes north of the shaft) is being explored.
The fourth vein, still further north, has been located
by diamond drill work and is known to be strong and
well mineralized. It will soon be reached and exposed
by the workings..
"Upon the eighth level the work has developed four
branches or veins, the most northern of which has been
located at several points by the diamond drill. It is a
strong vein, heavily mineralized and is now being ex-
- plored by the heading. Generally speaking, the work
done upon this level has cut several ore bodies, two
of which were especially promising. One of these,
on the second vein west, was found to have an upward
extension. Its downward extension is still untested..
The other pay body on the first or south vein west has
so far continued and the stope upon it, 45 feet long and
6 feet wide, is at present averaging ore of $10.50
smelter's gross assay value.
"The- ninth level has exposed but one of the vein
branches, finding this of no value. Cross-cutting has
not yet shown the other veins.
'On the tenth and eleventh levels, the shaft crosscuts fail to disclose any of the veins owing to the
broken nature of the ground and the presence of a belt
of dikes. The development of these levels was therefore suspended to await further exploration by the diamond drill and the developments in progress on the
eighth level.
"The ore sales during the year were 2i',455 tons.,
averaging $14.58 smelter's gross assay value. The
average contents were: Gold .66 oz., silver 1.2 oz., and
copper 2 per cent. The present reserves of ore payable
under the new smelter rates are estimated at about
42,000 tons, averaging $10.95 smelter's gross assay
value, (pricing copper at '12 cents instead of 16.25 as
in previous reports).
"The development of the mine has from the beginning continued to expose large quantities of ore too
low in grade for smelting, but rich enough to promise
■ a handsome profit to successful milling. Now that the
difficulties of such treatment have been overcome, these
low-grade masses will soon be available. It is impossible to present any reliable estimate of their quantity528
THE MINING RECORD.
or precise value, because their limits have not been
clearly defined, and, until milling begins, they cannot
be accurately sampled without excessive expense. The
process of stoping them for the mill will undoubtedly
develop much ore of a higher grade which is not now
disclosed by the workings.
GENERAL REMARKS.
"Work after the strike was resumed early in December, 1901.   The smelting works were not just then able
to receive ore owing to unexpected delays in the completion of their new sampling works.    Before shipments could be begun the large and sudden decline in
the price of copper seriously reduced the net profit of
the estimated ore reserves.      In    view of the heavy
loss this entailed and of the expectation which then
prevailed that there would soon be a partial recovery
in price, it was decided to postpone shipments temporarily.    After it became apparent that relief of this
kind would at least be long deferred, the difficulties
of the situation which affected both the mining companies and the Canadian Smelting Works led to conferences which resulted on August 4th in a voluntary
reduction of smelter rates.    This was in view of the
fact that the fall in copper reduced the tonnage of pay
ores which the War Eagle and Centre  Star mines
were able to furnish to the smelting works.    In order
to prevent this reduction and also further increase the
tonnage to the amount desired for economical smelting the smelter works reduced the treatment charge
from $6 to $5 and made an experimental rate of $4
to reach ore which could not be stoped under the $5
rate.   This lower grade is to be shipped in such quantities as the smelter works find it possible to treat with
profit.    Under the new  arrangement ore  shipments
were commenced August 21st.    They are now progressing at the rate of about 200 tons daily.
"Much work has been done upon the milling problem and a successful method of treating these ores has
been devised. It is expected that a preliminary or trial
mill for perfecting the details of the process will be
constructed this winter, and that by spring a regular
tonnage of War Eagle low-grade ore will be under
milling treatment."
LE ROI.
The third ordinary general meeting was held in
London on Jan 30th. The chairman stated that although the accounts showed a debt to profit and loss
°i £46,551, the late manager, Mr. Mackenzie, claimed
to have made a profit, and gave reasons for saying so.
After referring to these in detail, the chairman pointed out the desirability of a local audit to prevent mistakes in the figures in future and said that since the
30th June, they had published month by month the
profits made. These had amounted to £90,000, thus
entirely changing the position with regard to the Bank
of Montreal. They had converted a deficiency of net
assets amounting to £40,000 into a surplus of £80,000
and they proposed to ask the Bank for a reduction of
interest. Mr. Mackenzie had found more high-grade
ore than was anticipated, whilst rates had been further
reduced between the mine and the smelter, and the
coke had been more freely obtainable. With good,
honest, careful management, reduced charges, and improved processes, he looked for a satisfactory change
in their prospects. They had a great mine, with large
reserves of ore, valued at from $10 to $12. It was
expensively equipped, and they intended to devote
themselves to its development.
The Managing Director, Mr. A. J. McMillan, also
spoke in a hopeful strain.
CARIBOO   (CAMP   MCKINNEY).
The annual meeting of this company was held in
Toronto on February 4th. The mine earned during
the year 1902 the sum of $136,000, which represents
the net profit on the ore shipped. Of this sum some
$60,000 was expended in new development work;
$50,000 has been distributed as dividends and the balance, $50,000, deposited to the credit of the company.
THE ELMORE PROCESS AT ROSSLAND.
TO THE EDITOR :-You will be no doubt interested to hear that the Le Roi No. 2, Ltd., have
ordered a two-unit Elmore oil plant, capacity 50
tons per day, the erection of which will be commenced
as soon as the weather permits. Being satisfied with
the experiments made on their ore, they now intend
further proving the process by continuous working on
the spot with the above installation, and if the result
is what is anticipated they propose erecting a plant of
large capacity.
Referring to my article which you were good enough
to insert in your February number, I beg to draw your
attention to a slight error on page 478, second column,
viz., Freight and smelting charges should be $o67=t
not $6.75. /zy
Yours faithfully,
t, H. H. Claudet.
Rossland, B.C., February 24th, 1903.
COSTS OF SHAFT SINKING AT MT. SICKER.
nrq THE EDITOR: The Richard III shaft on Mt.
i.      Sicker was down 250 feet on January 31st, 95
feet of sinking having been done during that
month.   The shaft is in crystalline schists and diorite
two compartment and 4x8 feet in "the clear."    The
work was well timbered throughout with 5-foot sets
of squared timber, which with lagging and blocking,
was all taken from "the stump."    Ladders and iron
shod guides were installed.    The total cost was well
under $15 per foot.    This includes expenses of office
salaries and all expense incurred.    Engineers, miners
and one carpenter were paid $3.50 per day, foreman
$5, outside men $2.50 and two Chinese wood cutters
$1 each per day    W. C. Rannells, late of the Nahmint
mine  was m charge of-the work, and we consider a
record for shaft sinking, with hand steel, in British
Columbia has been established.    If we are in error
will some reader of    your    estimable journal unde- •
ceive us.
Director.THE MINING RECORD.
529
MINING RETURNS AND STATISTICS.
ROSSLAND.
SHIPMENTS from this district for the two months ending
Feb. 28 are as follows:— °
Tons.
}f Tl-al     32,739
Centre Star     V6'm
War Eagle	
Giant 	
      9,035
Velvet      l 391
Kootenay
Le Roi No. 2
Homestake
225
2,799
90
T°tal    60,044
SLOCAN.
From January 1st to February 21st.
_, Tons
American Boy  245
Antoine  ~16
Arlington ' ' 40
Black Prince  35
Bondholder  1
Bosun     140
Blue Bird.
Enterprise	
Dayton	
Fisher Maiden.
Idaho 	
  20
  160
  2
 ............'.'....'.'. 200
  21
Ivanhoe  240
Monitor (Jan.)  144
Ottawa  80
Payne  566
Queen Bess  20
Rambler  120
Reco  70
  20
..-  21
  146
Republic ...
Ruth	
Slocan Star
2,276
THE LARDEAU.
In the last two months the Silver Cup and Nettie L. mines
have shipped 597 tons of high-grade ore. The Lardeau Eagle
publishes the following interesting returns of shipments from
these mines:—
Silver Cup.—Total for 1902, 555,900 lbs., containing gold
192,496  oz.,   silver    54798.63   oz.,   lead   144,770   lbs.       Value
$31,434-59-
Total for 1903 to date, 650,293 lbs., containing gold 212,615
oz., silver 59977.42 oz., lead 156,17s lbs.   Value $34,393-89-
Nettie L.—Total for 1901,1,755,507 lbs.     Value $63,460.95-
Total for 1902, 1,057,120 lbs.   Value $43,236.83.
Total for 1903 to date, 927,033 lbs.   Value $36,237.71.
COMPANY NOTES.
Cariboo (Camp McKinney).-Work is proceeding satisfactorily with a force of between 40 and 50 men employed.
At the Waterloo a force of 17 men is at present employed.
Bosun.—Cablegram from the manager reports 60 tons galena shipped during the month of January and 50 tons zinc
produced.
The Ymir—The following are the returns for January:
Battery-Number of tons crushed: 4,200 tons crushed-60
heads of stamps running 29 days, yielded 1,711 ounces of bullion. Gross estimated value, $i9,750 (£4,072}-h™eshWpf
265 tons of concentrates-gross estimated value, $8,750 (£1,-
804A timateinet proceeds, $5,7Sc,(£1,186).   Cyamde-Tons
treated, 2,550 (20,00 pounds ^^-^^^f^
$4000 (£825). Total working expenses, $16,250 (*3,350j.
&pTnditure on capital account-Cost of development, $2,500
(£515)-    Sundry receipts,  $800   (£165).    Net profit, $11,550
(£2,380). T   'D0 -
Morrison (Boundary.)—It it reported that arrangements
are being made for the amalgamation of the Morrison Mines,
Limited, owning the Morrison mine in Deadwood camp, and
the Athelstan Gold and Copper Mining Co., owning the Athelstan mine, in Wellington camp. A joint meeting of the shareholders of both companies for the purpose of ratifying the
terms will be held in Grand Forks on March 28th next. The
Athelstan Company will go out of existence, its property
passing into the possession of the Morrison company. The
latter is incorporated for $150,000, in shares of a par value
of 10 cents each, and the Athelstan has a capital stock of
$50,000, or 1,000,000 shares of the par value of 5 cents each.
According to the terms proposed the shareholders of the
Athelstan will receive shares on a certain basis in the consolidated company. The capital stock will remain at $150,000,
or one and one half million shares of the par value of 10
cents each.
Le Roi.—Shipped to Northport during January 16,377 tons
of ore, containing 5,673 ounces of gold, 10,695 ounces silver,
479,i83 pounds copper.    Estimated profit on this ore, $15,000.
Dominion Power and Irrigation Co.—A new company, the
Dominion Power and Irrigation Company, Limited, is being
formed, with a capital of $250,000, to buy the water rights
held by the Dominion Consolidated Mines Co., Limited, and to
develop the water power. The necessary capital is subscribed partly in Montreal and partly locally. The company intend to
develop the water power of Okanagan Falls to the extent
of 1,000 or 1,500-h.p., and the company is asking for tenders
for the supply of the necessary turbines, dynamos and motors.
R. H. Parkinson, C.E., of Fairview, B.C., is in charge of the
construction works.
Victory-Triumph.-—A new milling plant is being installed
at the Victory-Triumph mine, Rossland, of the high-speed
gravitation type, the first of its kind on the continent. The
mill is a new design evolved after years of investigation and
experimenting by a practical mechanical engineer. A description of the apparatus states that in ordinary practice the best
results obtained from the usual cam stamp with a drop of
71-2 inches effective height is about 95 drops per minute,
while the weight of each stamp rarely exceeds 1,250 pounds,
in the high-speed mill, the mean velocity at which the stamp
is raised by the cylinder so far exceeds the limit velocity
imposed by the essential features of the cam mechanism that
from 132 to 135 drops per minute each of 7 1-2 inches effective
height, can be obtained. It is therefore, much more effective
and economical.
RECENT PUBLICATIONS.
PRODCCTION and Properties of Zinc, by Walter
Renton Ingalls. The Engineering and Mining Journal,
New York and London.    1902.    First edition.
This is probably the most complete and comprehensive
treatise yet published dealing exclusively with the mining and
metallurgy and marketing of zinc. In British Columbia at
the present time the subject is one of exceptional interest,
and Mr. Ingalls' book should have a wide circulation in this-
field. The work, which is well illustrated, is divided into
twelve chapters dealing with the following matters: ■ \ The
History of the Zinc Industry; Present Economic Conditions;
Uses of Zinc and Zinc Products; Statistics of Production and
Prices; Analysis of Zinc Ores and Products; Properties of
Zinc and its Alloys; Chemistry of the Compounds of Zinc;
the Ores of Zinc; Occurrences of Zinc Ore in North America; Occurrences of Zinc Ores in Europe, Africa
and Australia; Mechanical Concentration of Zinc Ores; and
Sampling and Valuation of Ores.
We notice that under the heading of the occurrence of Zinc
ores in Canada, no reference is made to the British Columbia
mines in which zinc in considerable percentages is found.
The omission is, however, excusable enough in^hat it is only530
THE MINING RECORD.
LOCAL STOCK MARKET FOR  THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY, i 903.
Prepared by the Stuart Robertson Co., Ltd., Stock Brokers, Victoria, B.C.
Week landing Saturday,
7th  February.
Week Ending Saturday,
14th February.
Week Ending Saturday
21st February.
Part Week   Ending
28th February.
Companies.
Highest.
Lowest.
Highest.
. Lowest
Highest
Lowest.
Highest.
Lowest.
IB
M
i
1
I
W
2
•6
CD
M
<
13
s
1
V
M
co
<!
$0 18
5
17
■d
v
,=4
CO
-d
S
•a
V
M
CO
13
- S
m
cy
M
CO
<
•6
V
k
CO
|
"2
•d
V
S
CO
■d
s
4)
CO
<
S
Cariboo McKin'y,.
Cariboo   Hydra'lic
Crow's Nest P. C.
$0 19
$   17
I         19
$     ....
$        19
$      ....
$   19
? ....
*       19
$    ....
?        19
$   ....
$        19
{     ....!
33/£        33
33
32Ji
33
32^
32%
32
&p
30K
3°K
29
3JK
3°!4
3°}»
29
Fairview Corp'n..
4l4\        4
4lA
4
5
4^
5
4M
4%
4^
4%
4lA
5%
|§
5K
tm
North Star	
11            ioJ£
33            3°
11
9%
32
9
28
13
22
32
11
20K
28
ioJs'
20
31
9
17^
28
ioj*
22
30
9^
20
28
10'A
21
30
9%
18
26
12
22
3°
10
19^
26
11
21
28
9%]
18  1
24
Sullivan	
44]         3%
■ci/!         c
4K
18
5J£
3-
17
5
4
18
5H
*A
-7
5
4
18
2
17
4
19
5^
2^
18
5
4
18
5X
2^
17
5
4
3'A
17
5
3
16
n
14
5
4 50
4 5°
4 5°
4 50
3 90
4 5°
4 00
4 50
4 00
5 50
4 75
5 5°
4 5°
5 50
4 5°
5 50
iif!
quite recently that any real attempt has been made to turn
the zinc contents of the Slocan ores to commercial account.
''The Investor's Blue Book (1903)" is, as its title indicates,
a Blue Book for the Investor. A Blue Book is a publication
containing a full summary of evidence collated regarding a
specific subject, with opinions based upon such evidence. This
principle has been applied to the compilation of this new
reference work treating with joint stock undertakings. For
many years the investor, and particularly the investor with
small capital situated in the provinces, has felt the need of
a book which would furnish him immediately with salient
facts regarding the chief companies whose shares are actively
dealt in.on the Stock Exchange. "The Investor's Blue Book"
endeavours to furnish not only the chief facts regarding companies, but also with an indication of their financial position.
It also does what no other publication has yet ventured upon,
namely, expresses opinions regarding the value of the shares,
and whether, at a price stated, they are a good, bad, or indifferent speculative purchase. • "The Investor's Blue Book"
is edited and compiled by Herbert H.. Bassett, joint editor
of "Fenn on the. Funds," and editor of "Men of
Note    in     Finace     and     Commerce,"     etc. There     is
a special section on mining companies. Some leading financial
writers in London and New York contribute special practical
signed articles upon markets of which they are known to
possess intimate knowledge. Other contents include tables
showing the highest and lowest prices of stocks and shares
over a period of four years; particulars regarding transfer
fees, stamps, etc.; an article on trustee stocks; a complete
dictionary of technical terms in use upon the Exchange; and
much other miscellaneous information of great value to the
investor. "The Blue Book" is published by the investor's
Chronicle (Tower Chambers, London Wall, E.C.) at 2s. 6d.
net, cloth boards (2s. 8d. post free) ; and is. 6d., linen covers
(is. 8d. post free).
THE METAL MARKET.
A GENERAL improvement appears to have taken place
during the month. Copper is strong and has advanced
considerably, on the New York market, and in Europe
lead is commanding a somewhat higher figure. Silver is also
for the time being stronger, but whether the higher prices
ruling recently will be maintained is strongly open to doubt.
The latest quotations for copper are: Lake, 12 3-4 to 13; electrolytic in ingots, cakes and wirebars, 123-4 to 127-8; cath
odes, 12 1-2 to 125-8; casting copper, 12 1-2 to 125-8. Statis--
tics for February show a considerable decrease in visible supplies. Lead is quoted at 3.95 to 4, St. Louis; 4.05 to 4.10 New
York, while the London market is more active, Spanish lead
being quoted at in 17s. 6d. to £12; English lead, £12 to £12
2S. 6d. Spelter is firm at 4.85 to 4.87 1-2 St. Louis; 5.05 New
York. Ingot platinum is quoted at $19 in large lots, and
quicksilver at $47 per flask, New York; $45.50 to $46.50, San
Francisco.
COAL EXPORTATIONS AND TRADE.
BUSINESS during February was much demoralized by
the strike of coal miners at Nanaimo and at Fernie.
In the case of the former the matter at issue was happily adjusted, and it is also hoped that by the intervention
of Mr. Mackenzie King, Deputy Minister of Labour, and of
a Board of Conciliation appointed by the Provincial Mining
Association, the dispute at the latter collieries will be ere long
settled.
It is announced that R. Dunsmuir & Sons will re-open the
Alexandra mines at South Wellington, near Ladysmith. New
bunkers will be built. The old bunkers were torn down a
year ago when the mine was closed after the labour troubles
with the miners arising out of the project to make a federal
union of all the Vancouver Island miners. The Wellington
Colliery Company has also started boring for coal four and
a half miles north of Ladysmith. At Extension the output
may be increased by the addition of a third shift, employing
200 extra men.
Shipments by the Western Fuel Co. during February aggregated 6,406 tons.
NewfCatalogue
ELEVATING-CONVEYING
MACHINERY
Now Ready,        Send for Copy
The JEFFREY MFG. CO., COLUMBUS, O-, U.S.A.THE MINING RECORD.
XJ
W^^^KufK^^
no
Sta
CI
^workinrorder^^o118 f<Vny Sta?dard Process aud  turn  them °ver in perfect
working order to our customers after operating them for any specified time.
P- M|.'-|S   «•■■ Sampling Works Boilers and all kinds of
orinatron  Mills ^ii„«»r i.,^   r ' ..
r       ,.     „., Silver-Lead, Copper Heavy Sheet Metal Work
V      '"       ' " and PyriticSmelting Plants. Hoisting Engines
Copper Bessemerizing Plants Blowing Engines
Mine Equipment Transmission Machin
Concentration and
Combination Mills
ery
COMPLETE   POWER, LIGHTING, HEATING
AND PUMPING PLANTS	
CHAS. C. MOORE & CO., Engineers
PACIFIC COAST AGENT FOR
The Holthoff Machinery Co.,
>CUDAHY,   WIS.
32   FIRST   ST
NEW YORK, 1303 Havemeyer Bldg.
Adver. No. 223.
MAIN OFFICE
SAN   FRANCISCO,   CAL.
BRANCHES
SEATTLE, 218 Second Ave., So. LOS ANGELES, 321 Trust Building
WIRE
ROPE
DON'T BUY       i
UNTIL YOU HAVE WRITTEN TO US FOR PRICES
AND   PARTICULARS.
Wilkins & Co.,
of London, England, Wire Rope Manufacturers,
Established 1850, are known throughout the
MINING WORLD. The wire used in their rope is made from steel specially
prepared to insure absolute reliability. The preferential tariff permits of
our quoting low prices on all descriptions of Steel Wire Ropes. A large
stock of the principal sizes kept on hand at Victoria and Vancouver for
immediate delivery. Our stock includes a full line of Logging Ropes, Ships
Rigging and Hawsers.
ROBERT WARD & CO., LIMITED, Agents.
Telegraphic address—ROBERTUS
VICTORIA and VANCOUVER, B. C.
•ST^»:KSSS£g»
I
Y
Y
Y
5*
Y
t
t
S
Y
Y
Y
Y
t
t
I
t
Hic<i&&*<j*^^
Canadian Ore Conc<
n, Limited.,
SALISBURY HOUSE, LONDON, E. C.
 CONTROLS	
ELMORE'S CANADIAN PATENTS ft
r the Concentration of Ores by Oil
its treating pro-
The most recent installations comprise six units of plant handling tailings from 50 head of stamps, and 4 un
duct of 20 head of stamps, and 2 units treating product of 10 head of stamps.
In all cases of difficulty by ordinary methods correspondence is mvited. -
The mefhodt fully protected by patents and all infringers will be proceeded against.
Full particulars may be obtained on application to
H. H. CLAUDET,
or
F. W. ROLT,
Rossland Office, 28 Columbia Ave.
Technical Representative.
Commercial Representative.
I
Y
Y
Y
Y
t
T
Y
5
Y
V
f
V
Y
Y
T
Y
Y
T
Y
1
^•^^.♦X~M~:~XKKK~K^Capital of British Columbia, Pacific Ocean Terminus
Railway, and the Great Northern
The Canadian Gateway to the Orient, the Sandwich
Islands, Australia, New Zealand, etc. The starting
point of steamship lines to the Yukon, Atlin and Cassiar Gold Fields, and the Canadian port of call for tourists on the lines between San Francisco and Alaska.
TEMPERATURE 1902.
354
31.5
38.5
Mean.
Victoria   . .     67.6
London, Eng     68.1
Torquay, Eng.     65.5
RAINFALL 1902.
Inches.
Victoria     26.45
London, Eng     20.84
Torquay, Eng     30.22
The Province covers a superficial area of 381,000
square miles abounding in minerals, timber, fish and
game in endless variety. The opportunities for the profitable investment of capital are practically unlimited,
and the markets for the disposal of metals, lumber,
fish and agricultural products lie waiting in Russia,
Japan, China, India and Australasia. The tourist will
find mountain scenery and mountain climbing unequal-
THE  MINING RECORD.
Highest
Lowest
Mean.
of Canadian Pacific   Railway,   Canadian   Northern
Railway of the United States.
led in the old world—a new field for exploration—and
the sportsman with first class hotels as bases of operation may penetrate a new world in his pursuit of the"
bear, the panther, the elk or the mountain goat.
The City of Victoria is becoming widely noted for
the beauty of its situation, its homes and its surroundings ; so that the number of strangers arriving, for short
visits and for permanent residence, continue growing
annually larger. Of its beauty H.R.H. the Duke of
York said: "The most beautiful place we have seen in
our journey around the world," and the following may
be quoted from the correspondence of Mr. E. P.
Knight, of the London Morning Post: "One would
fain have stayed longer, for of all the cities that have
been visited in the course of this long Royal progress
the fair capital of British Columbia seems to me the one
which the Englishman would most gladly make his
home. * * * Never in the environs of any other
city have I seen such a glory of flowers as surrounded
each of these lovely homes."
Pamphlets containing views of local scenery and information of interest to investors, tourists, hunters and
amusement seekers may be obtained by addressing the
Clerk of the Municipal Council, Victoria, British
Columbia.
COAL MINES REGULATION ACT.
Board of Examiners.
TOTICE is hereby given  that the following constitute the Board o
Examiners for the Comox Mine during the year 1903:—
Appointed by the owners—(1) Richard Short, (2) David Walker.
Alternates—(1) James Strang, (2) John Kesley.
Appointed by the Lieut.-Governor in Council—Wm. Johnston.
Elected by the Miners —(1) James Reid, (2) John Comb.
Alternates (1) Richard Coe, (2) William McLellan.
N ote—Alternates act as Members of the Board in the absence of those
regularly appointed or elected to act thereon.
All persons interested may obtain full information by applying to the
Secretary to the Board, Mr. Wm. Johnston, of Comox, B. C.
Dated this 18th day of February, 1903.
R. F. TOLMIE,
Deputy Minister of Mines,
THE   INVESTOR'S   BLUE   B00K   FOR   1903.
Edited by Herbert H. Bassett,
With. Special Contributions by Leading Financial Writers.
Complete    Digest  of Information,  Statistical  and   Critical,  regarding   all
Companies in whose shares there is an active market.
" Will appeal to a large constituency."—Financial Times.
Cloth, Cr. 8vo., 280 pp., 2s. 8d., post free; limp covers,  is. 8d., post free of the
" INVESTOR'S   CHRONICLE,"
Tower Chambers, London Wall, London, England.
COAL MINES REGULATION ACT.
Board of Examiners.
N
OTICE Is hereby given that the following constitute the Board of
Examiners for the Coal Creek Mine during the year 1903:—
Appointed by the owners—(1) Robt. Drinnan, (2) David Martin.
Alternates—(1) John Hunt, (2) John McClimont.
Appointed by the Lieut-Governor in Council—Andrew Colville.
Elected by the Miners—(1) John Cobus, (2) John Norton.
Alternates—(1) Chas. Burrows, (2) John Howbrook.
Note—Alternates act as Members of the Board in the absence of those
regularly appointed or elected to act thereon.
All persons interested may obtain full information by applying to the
Secretary to the Board, Mr. Andrew Colville, of Fernie, B. C.
Dated this 18th day of February, 1903.
R. F. TOLMIE,
Deputy Minister of Mines
UL»    KLJ.   M^.%. JJCJIl^J-M-fl
WC.EMJGH RlD. I
ANALYTICAL'
CONSULTING*
H76w.2-*s»g SALTLAKrTCrnrL
■-»i*,~*-*\? wr r"«*-^*' "1 -"-iiir ■utii iffjriTHE MINING RECORD.
XIII.
Fire Boss Becomes Mine Foreman
Through  the I.  C.  S.
The information gained from my Metal Mining Course has been.of great practical benefit
to me in my position. The instruction papers are so well chosen, and so easy to understand,
that any man can complete a Course with a little study and make it a means of future success.
The Reference Library which is furnished free, is worth more than the price of the Course.
As a result of the knowledge gained through your Schools, I have advanced from fire boss to
assistant foreman, and then to mine foreman, with proportionate increases in salary.
Henry Parmley, Scoh'eld,  Utah.
♦ ♦
International   Correspondence  Schools,     ♦
This is but one of many hundred indorsements
proving that our students succeed.   Our new
free booklet, "1001 Stories of Success," gives
the names, addresses, and progress of over a
thousand other students, whom we have placed
>                                       Box 82G, Scranton, Pa.                                        *
I          Please explain how I can qualify for the position marked X below.
>	
Metal-Mine Supt.
Metal-Mine Foreman
Metallurgist
Mining Engineer
Fire Boss
	
Foreman Blacksmith
Foreman Molder
Refrigeration Engineer
Traction Engineer
Electrical Engineer
Marine Engineer t
Hydraulic Engineer #
Municipal Engineer ,
Bridge Engineer t
Railroad Engineer
on the road to progress and prosperity.   Every
student of the I. C. S. is entitled to the assist=      \
ance of the Students' Aid Department in secur=      <
	
Civil Engineer
Surveyor
Coal-Mine Foreman
Mine Surveyor
Mechanical Engineer
	
Elec. Machine Designer
Electrician
Electric-Lighting Supt.
Electric-Railway Supt.
Telephone Engineer
—
Cotton-Mill Supt.           ,
Woolen-Mill Supt.
Chemist
Sheet-Metal Draftsman ,
Bookkeeper
ing advancement  or   a  new  position.   Start      <
TODAY to rise I                                                               {
Fill in and Mail the Coupon NOW!      ;
	
Machine Designer
Mechanical Draftsman
Foreman Machinist
Foreman Toolmaker
Foreman Patternmaker
Wireman
Dynamo Tender
Motorman
Steam Engineer
Engine Runner
Stenographer .
Teacher 4
To Speak French ^
To Speak German .
To Speak Spanish          t
Knmc                                                                                                              CitV                        	
Ct     />nW    V/>           '-00ti
■"»'«                                              tmM$
DICKSON 8^i& CO.,.
MACHINERY
6=Foot Bradley Improved
Chilian==
Grinding  Mill
This mill is driven from underneath to avoid oil from the
driving gears dropping into the
grinding pan. The three solid
rollers, each weighing 6,^)0 lbs.,
are so rigged to the vertically-
adjustable driving spider that the
centrifugal force of the rollers
augments their efficiency for
crushing and grinding.
The roller shaft journals are
hinged in the spider so as to permit each roller to independently
adjust itself to the amount of
material on the ring die. A step
box fitted with steel wearing
rings not only supports the
spindle's weight, but also prevents its being lifted by the
centrifugal force of the rollers.
All bearings are made extra
large and adjustable, and special
care has been taken to overcome
end thrust. The ore and water
are fed to the annular launder,
placed directly on top of the
driving head, and are from it
spouted right in front of each
roller. Back of each roller is a
scraper to agitate the ore bed and
to assist in washing pulp against
the screens. The screening surface is extra large, and the ring
die and roller tires are made of
extra hard and tough rolled steel.
Sole "Builders of
Reynolds Corliss Engines for all
§ Power Purposes
Riedler Pumps and Air Compressors
GfeNBifAL,
CHICAGO,
LLJU.nj.A.
HOME  INSURANCE BUII/DING
Skit PEAHCISGO, Saywarf Bid* >
rSEATTtE, Ltunbermea's Exc#j§||g^
CHARLOTTE, S^-^gB^ISiMJbl
SEW OStgAiSiSi Heioett B.l<ig.:Vi
ATLANTA; GA., Eftmta&JejBSpK?
tONDQN, ENG., MO DashwoodHoase:.
JOHASH^KrmG, SonaAftipft.   1THE MINING RECORD
XV.
ffflS&IUHHMI
THE EDWARD V. AlXIS CO.,:
I      < 5      MTLWAOKI r -ffia,
SUCCESSOR   TO
FRASER & CHALMERS,
CHICAGO, ILL       _      =
GATES IROwrORES,
c '      .'(.  IIL    _ '
DICKSON agfe CO.
MANUFACTURERS   OF
Mining Machinery
The Presidio Mining Company, of Shafter, Texas, operates a fifty-stamp, wet-crushing silver
mill. Careful records of cost of shoes and dies have been kept for twelve years. The Presidio
Company has used high-grade Open Hearth and Crucible Steel castings, Chrome Steel, Ferro-
Aluminum, Forged Steel, Harveyized Steel, Manganese Steel and Projectile Steel. The best
records made by each kind of metal used in the shoes and dies show the following:
iLLIS-J^LMERSt
CHICAGO, U.S.A.
GATES'"CfiILL ED  IRON
SHOES  AND DIES.
o
Cost of Castings
Purchased
per Ton of Ore
Crushed
Harveyized Steel 1629
Forged Steel 1227
Chrome Steel 1107
Chrome Steel 1057
Chrome Steel 0786
Projectile Steel 1051
Projectile Steel    0538
Manganese Steel 0995
Ferro-Aluminum 0960
Cast Steel 0705
Gates Chilled Iron 0348
Gates Chilled Iron 0285
Gates Chilled Iron 0227
Gates*Chilled Iron,
dies only 0199
We have perfected a mixture of iron for Stamp Shoes and Dies that is unequaled for wearing
qualities. After very severe competitive tests with other brands of iron and steel (see accompanying record of tests made by the Presidio Mining Co.), the Gates Chilled Iron Shoes and
Dies have been pronounced by the leading mill men of this country to outlast any other material
on the market, price being considered. For the past few years we have been supplying the
Homestake Mining Company, Lead, S. D., and several other of the leading mining companies
of the United States with their entire supply of Stamp Shoes and Dies made of this special
mixture of chilled iron. The Homestake Mining Company has, in the past few years, purchased
in the aggregate about 30,000 Stamp Shoes and Dies, and according to their own record, the
average life of our chilled iron shoes working on their ores runs from 55 to 65 days each, which
includes all breakages and defects in castings.
WRITE   US   FOR   PRICES   AND   FURTHER   INFORMATION
|W ;-BRA3^^Wffff^&
QiiSaifjiQgK, Broad Exchange Bldg.
BOSTON, Board of Trade Bldg.
PITTSBURG, Jgflk Building :•I-*®:
MBrjreA£0£,IS, Corn Exchange WiJfei
.BENVERj.l^iTreiwint Street
4t&T£c£&£ CITY, Dooly Block y
SPOSASE WaBhmjAift.s_/. -
GENERAL
oFiircB
HOME INSURANCE BUII/JjjlMQ
BlUHCff OfffftCE&    ~-
SAN FRANCISCO, Hay-ward BMg-.
SEATTLE, Lombermen'sExch'geBlcii.
CHARLOTTE &;<fc*Trtt3t Bldg
NEW ORLEANS, Bmmen Stdg
ATLANTA, GA  irritable Ifldg
LONDON,I ENG;, iWJDashtj ■ .ud Hoase
J0HANNL ^IKQ, -6ttiJk Ata*.xvi:
THE MINING RECORD.
BRITISH COLUMBIA
THE MINERAL PROVINCE ©F eRNflDA.
Gold, Silver, Lead, Copper, Cool, Coke, Oil Iron, Mercury, Platinum, etc.
The Mines of British Columbia have produced over
¥ $180,000,000.    :    M
Amount and Vaeue of Mineral Products for 1899, 1900 and 1901.
■
Customary
Measure
1899.
1900.
1901.
(Estimated).
Quantity.
Value.
Quantity.
Value.
Quantity.
Value.
Gold, placer	
Gold, lode
Ounces    	
67,245
138,315
2,936,413
7.722.591
21,862,436
1,306,324
34,25t
$1,344,900
2,857,573
1,663,708
i,35i,453
878,870
3,918,962
171,255
206,400
63,936
167,153
3,958,175
9,997,080
63,358,621
i>439,595
85,149
$1,278,724            43,204
3,453,38ii          227,696
2,309,200       4,685,718
t firc^Ra       5n nfiioS
$      892,500
2,704,200
2,614,002
A   OCT   fioR
11
Silver   	
tt
Lead	
Pounds    	
Tons, 2,240 lbs....
il              ft
2,661,887
4,318,785
425,745
251,740
50,529,260        1,970,641
1,529,210        4,587,63'-'
134,760           673,800
Coal	
Coke	
1
$12,393,121
$16,344,751
$ 20,713,501
Production for 1890, $2,608,608; for 1899, $12,393,131; for 1900 $16,344,751; for 1901, $20,713,201.
GOLD.—Placer gold mining, which in early days formed the
chief mineral industry of the province, and made it famous all
the world over, still continues to be important, while improved
methods of working the gravel deposits, together with cheaper
transportation and cost of mining, have '-enlered the working
of large deposits, long known to exist, now profitable where
previously impossible.
The area of country known to contain placer gold is enormous, and has only been touched, leaving still virgin ground
well worth the prospecting for this, the only class of " poor
man's  mine."
Recent discoveries of new placer fields in the Atlin district,
the Cassiar district, and the Cariboo district near the Horsefly
■river, are proof that the field is riot yet exhausted, and promise
a revival of this important industry.
HYDRAULIC MINING plants costing large amounts of
•money are being installed in Atlin, Cassiar, Omineca and Cariboo, at points widely separated, indicating the extent of the
gold deposits. One company recovered $350,000 in gold during 1900.
DREDGING FOR GOLD is receiving deserved attention,
■.and dredges are at work on the Fraser, Thompson, Quesnel
.and other rivers, on all of which streams good ground may yet
be obtained.
LODE GOLD MINING is now being prospected in various
•parts of the province, and in certain instances very successful,
notably at Ymir, Cariboo-McKininiey and elsewhere.
GOLD-COPPER ORES are being extensively worked at
Rossland by tbe Le Roi, War Eagle and associated companies,
while other mines in the camp are rapidly becoming important
producers.
The tonnage of this camp alone in 1900 was 217.676 tons, and
-there will be an increase this year.
SILVER-LEAD.—The silver production of the prov'ncc
-in 1900 showed an increase over 1899 of 39 per cent, while the
lead production increased 206 per cent., largely derived from
properties in East Kootenay, rendered available by railroad
construction.
This year the increase will not be as great, but the industry
is expected to hold its own.
COPPER.—Copper is being produced to a limited extent
at Rossland, where the chief value of the ore is in gold, but the
feature of this branch of the industry is the development and
mining of a large tonnage of low-grade copper ores in the
Boundary district, of which there seems to be an almost un-
mited amount. The output of ore from this district alone will
amount to from 1,200 to 1,500 tons of ore per diem.
The Coast district wlill this year show a very considerable
copper production, from the Vancouver Island and Texada
Island mines.
Prospecting for copper is receiving great attention, and the
discoveries made on the Coast, in the Similkameen valley, etc.,
give great promise.
IRON.—With the great probability of an iron-smelting plant
on the Northern Pacific Coast in the near future, what promise
to be extensive bodies of magnetite iron ore have been developed on the Coast, while other deposits of iron ore are now under
development in the Goat River and Fort Steele mining divisions, and still other bodies occur near Kamloops.
COAL AND COKE.—In 1900 the Vancouver Island collieries made a net output of 1,336,023 tons of coal and 19,234 tons
of coke, and in 1901 even this output promises to be exceeded.
In 1900 the Crow's Nest collieries made a net output of
103,572 tons of coal, and 69,915 tons of coke. In 1901 this output
will be doubled at the least. These mines alone are putting out
from 1,500 to 2,000 tons of coal per diem.
Of this output in 1900, 914,183 tons of coal and 51757 tons of
coke were exported, chiefly to the United States. The remainder was consumed in local smelters and other industries.
SMELTERS.—In the province there are smelters in active
operation at Trail, Nelson, Grand Forks, Greenwood and Van
Anda ; while this coming year will probably see one erected in
East Kotenay and two others on the coast.
Refineries are yet lacking, but the building of at least one
is pretty well assured.
CAPITAL.—Capital can now find here many excellent opportunities for investment, as the values placed on mines and undeveloped properties has reached a reasonable basis. If proper
business care is used, and the experience of competent men
utilized, these investments should be safe as well as profitable
MINERAL LANDS.—Mineral lands are open to location
to any person over 18 years of age, who has obtained a free
miner's certificate, and perfect title to lode claims can be
easily secured after $500 worth of work has been done per claim.
A great extent of territory has yet to be prospected.
For information, reports, bulletins, etc., address
The Hon. the Minister of Mines,
VICTORIA, B.C.
W. F   Robertson,
Provincial Mineralogist,
VICTORIA, B.  C.THE MINING RECORD.
XVII
BENNETT'S  FUSE
CROWN
BRAND
THE   KING   OF   FUSES ^
The WHITE COUNTERED GUTTA PERCHA FUSE is the POPULAR FAVORITE in the
mines of British Columbia, Australia, the Transvaal, and the World over.      Beware of Spurious
Imitations Made to Catch the Unwary.
HOLMAN BROS.
CAMBORNE, CORNWALL
Manufacturers of
Boilers, Air Compressors, Mining Machinery
The Holman
Patent Roek Drill
s
Specially Adapted to B. C: Mining.
Awarded Gold Medal Greater Britain Exhibition
Awarded Gold Medal
CHARLES
I¥fELL & CO. Ld
SHEFFIELD,   ENGLAND,
Manufacturers of Drill Steels, Best Refined Cast Steel Files, and Rasps, -Steel Axles, Wheels
and Cranks.    Rails and Fish Plates made to any specification.
Steel Plates, etc.    Stamp Mill Dies and Shoes.
ROWLAND MACHIN,
5 Yates St.,   VICTORIA,   B. C.
General Agent for Canada.XVIII
THE  MINING RECORD.
PROFESSIONAL AND BROKERS.
J. C. GWILLIM, B. Sc.
Mining Engineer.
Late of Geological Survey of Canada, (Atlin District), six years' experience in
B. C. mining districts.
BAKER STREET,
NELSON, B.C.
JAMES BRADY,
Dominion and Provincial Land Surveyor,
Mining Engineer.
Properties surveyed, examined and reported on.   Agent for procuring
Crown grants.
GOLDEN, B. C
CHAS. E. OLIVER, M. E.
HBDLBYf    B. C.
Properties in the Similkameen carefully sampled and reported on.
I have the hapdling of three of the standard properties of
Camp Hedley and solicit correspondence from any first-class mining man or corporation regarding same.
s. m. McGregor, b.a. sc.
w. d. McGregor, m. e.
McGregor & co.,
MINING and CIVIL ENGINEERS        «.     _ _
and LAND SURVEYORS. oLO .O
Reports on Mines and Prospects.
Act as agents in doing assessment work, applying for Crown grants and in
taking general charge of preliminary development work.
P. 0. Box 453.
A. R.
!ARROW,a.w.
ine Surveyor
Telephone 895
I.C.E.
Mine Surveys instituted and plans brought up to date at regular
intervals.    Steam Engines and Air Compressors
Indicated and valves Set.
PROVINCIAL   LAND   SURVEYOR.
4 View Street, Victoria, B.C.
^X jVtfl j   |3    is one of the most promising gold camps in
I   I V I I n    British Columbia and now offers many capital opportunities for profitable investment.
For further particulars write
PERCY J. GLEAZER,
MINING BROKER AND AGENT, YMIR, B. C.
Code—Moreing & Neal's.
E. W. WIDDOWSON,
PROVINCIAL ASSAYER.      -      -     -      YMIR, B.C.
Late Assayer to: The Hali, MrNES Smelter, Nelson Be'
The Winnipeg Mining and Smelting Company
Late Chemist to: The Hollow ay Chemical Works, London, N. Etc.
Mineral Analysis and WorkingTests a Specialty.   All samples received bv
mail or express receive prompt attention.   Reliable reports on
Mining Properties in this District.
P.O. Box11. YMIR.B.C. G. N. Express Company.
J., R GIFFORD,
Consu ting Mining Engineer, M.C, M.L
Late Manager The Hall Mining and
Smelting Co.,  Ltd.,  Nelson,  B. C.
Room 20, Flood Building.     San Francisco, Cal.
J. McLELLAN,
Associate Royal School of Mines, London.
Mining Engineer and Assayer,
TROUT LAKE CITY, B. C
J.  H. BROWNLEE,
Provincial and Dominion Land Surveyor
Civil and Hydraulic Engineer.
Seattle office 528 Broadway
ATLIN, B.C.
RELIABLE ASSAYS
Gold $ .75 I Gold and Silver $1.00
I,ead 75 I Gold, Silver, Copper  i-5°
SAHPLES BY MAIL RECEIVE PROflPT ATTENTION.
Gold and Silver refined and bought
OGDEN ASSAY CO. ,725 ^^vf^,.^..
THE STUART ROBERTSON CO., Ltd.,
Successors to A. W. MORE & CO.
MINING AND STOCK BROKERS
Codes used: Bedford-McNeil's, Moreing & Neals,
Clough's, and A.B.C., Fourth Edition.
VICTORIA, B. C.
23 BROAD STREET,
OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
SMELTER AND MILL
DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION  AND   DETAILS.
Geo. Williams, M. E.
P.O. Box 341, LADYSMITH
Converters,  Reverberatories,  Concentrators.
000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
THOS. DRUMMOND, M,E. and C.E.
B. A. Sc. McGill University, Montreal,
Member Canadian Society of Civil Engineers.
Mining Properties reported upon. Information furnished. General Engineering work promptly performed. References furnished.
QUESNELLE FORKS, CARIBOO, B. C.
JOHN B. HOBSON,
Manager Con. Cariboo Hyd.       C*\r*e..A*.l~.~. TUT'^' I-"        .
Mining co., ud. t^onstiltmg Mining Engineer,
BULLION, BRITISH COLUMBIA.
28 years' experience in the equipment and operation of targe hydraulic,  Deep Gravel,  <Drift and Gold Quartz Mines, in
California and British Columbia.
Telegraphic and Cable Address "HOBSON" Ashcroft B. CTHE MINING RECORD.
XIX
PROFESSIONAL ADVERTISEMENTS.
H. E. T. HAULTAIN, C. E.
CONSULTING
MINING ENGINEER,
QFF1CE: I I-yv^ SU,  Nelson, B.C.
J. B. TYRRELL, |
M. Inst. M. M., M. ISL Eng. Inst M. M. E., F. G. S.,
Mining Engineer,
DAWSON, YUKON, CANADA.
Cable Adcress:   " TYRRELL," Dawson.      Code: Bedford McNeil's
T. H.Gore.
J. H. McGregor.
•   Gore & McGregor,
Provincial and Dominion Land Surveyors
AND   CIVIL   ENGINEERS,
Five Sisters' Block. VICTORIA and NELSON.
WALTER E. SEQSWORTH
Licensed Provincial Assayer
Control Assays and Supervision of Ore Shipments a Specialty.
GREENWOOD, B. C.
WILLIAM A. BAUER,
Dominion & Provincial Land Surveyor
Surveys of Mines, Mineral Claims and Crown Lands.
Crown Grants obtained and Assessments managed for absentees.
Offices-FERGUSON and VANCOUVER, B.C.
M.I. M. M.,M. I. M. E.,
M. Can. I.M.
Cable Address : Phloxes, Nelson
A. B. C. Code.
/?. C Campbell=Johnston
Mining Engineer and Metallurgist.
Nelson, B. C.
A. A. HOLDICH
Analytical Chemist and Metallurgist
Royal School of Mines, London.
Seven years at Morfa Works, Swansea.
Seventeen years chief chemist to Wigan Coal and Iron Co.
Late chemist Hall Mines Co., Ltd.
Assays and Analyses made on all varieties of mineral and many organic
substances.
Special experience in Smelting—both Swansea and American process.
FERGUSON, B. C.
RELIABLE ASSAYS
Gold.
Lead.
• $ .50
•5°
Gold and Silver $i-00
Gold, Silver and Copper  1.50
Samples by mail receive prompt attention.
Gold and Silver refined and bought.
OGDEN ASSAY CO.,   1725 Arapahoe St., DENVER, Colo.
POHLE & PARMELEE
ASSAYERS and CHEMISTS,
Special Attention to Control and Umpire Work.
Ores tested to determine the best method of treatment.    Experimental work on chemical processes or patents.   General
Commercial analysis.     Thirty years experience.
Prices and sample sacks free on application.
 1627 CHAMPA ST., DENVER, Cole.
CHRIS.  OUTHETT,
Associate of Royal College of Science, London, England.
Inland Assay Office,        KAMLOOPS, B.C.
Provincial Assayer.
Mineral and Coal Analysis a specialty.       Reports made on Mining Properties
Mail samples receive prompt attention.
Richard H. Parkinson
Provincial Land Surveyor,
Hydraulic Engineer.
FAIRVIEW, B. C.
Associate Member of the Canadian Society of Civil Engineers.
Water Works, Water-power Plants, Irrigation Projects, Bridges, Roads,
Tramways, Estimates of Construction, Surveys.
Cecil M. Bryant, A.R.S M., A.I.M.M.      E. Philip Gilman, A.R.S.M., F.G.S.
Pellew-Harvey, Bryant & Gilman
PROVINCIAL ASSAYERS.
The Vancouver Assay Office and Ore Testing Works.
Established 1890.
MILL, SMELTER, CONCENTRATION AND CYANIDE TESTS,
Reliable reports on mining properties. Complete analyses of Ores and Coal
Victoria Office : 4 View Street (Opposite Driard Hotel.)
fe-'lStag   III I'I IIP ■——miBiUMflHJH III III Mill ^^MSB—
Wn. M. BREWER, HININQ ENGINEER,
MEM. N. of ENG. INST. MINING & MECH. ENG.
and AM. INST.. M. E.
Molsons Bank Building,
VANCOUVER, B.C.
TEL. 846.
M
T. J. SMITH,
irMIIMG  BROKER.
P. O. BOX 43
Syndicates and Companies formed to develop mining claims
Secretary Vancouver Mining Stock Exchange.
611 Hastings Street West, VANCOUVER, B. C
A. A. WATSON, B. Sc.
PROVINCIAL ASSAYER, VERNON, B. C.
Analyst and Mineralogist
Honours Graduate in Chemistry, Victoria University, England.
Reports made on Mining Properties.
Seven years experience in Australia. South America. England and B. C.
Assay Charges—Gold, $1; Silver. $1; Copper, $2 ; Lead, $1 ;  Gold and Silver, $1.50 ; Gold and Copper, $2,50 ; Gold, Silver and Copper, $3 ; Gold, Silver,
Copper and Lead, $3 50 ; Complete analysis of any ore, $10.
J|ay~SPECIAL ATTENTION TO SAMPLES BY MAIL"**
Assay Office and Chemical Laboratory,
28 BROAD ST., VICTORIA, B. C.
(Opp.  Driard Hotel.)
WILLIAM F. BEST, F.C.S.
ANALYTICAL CHEMIST AND ASSAYER
(Heidelberg and Leipzig.)
Personal attention given to all assaving and Chemical A11 aWsis
Rroert evidence before the Courts.XX
THE MTNING RECORD.
i
1
MINING PUBLICATIONS, ETC.
BUY VANCOUVER eiTY REHL ESTATE
You Cannot Make a Safer Investment*
WRITE   F"OR   PARTICULARS.        Money Invested for Clients on First Mortgages on Best Business Property to yield 5 per cent, to 6 per cent.
PERCY W.  CHARLESON
INVESTMENT     BROKER,  4'7 H«°"9S st   vmwemnw. B.e.
NOTARY PUBLIC FOR BRITISH ©©LUMBIH.
CORRESPONDENCE  INVITED. References, Dun or Bradstreets Agencies, Canadian Bank of Commerce.  P.O. BOX187
NOW READY.
TheMINERAL INDUSTRY
Its Statistics, Technology and Trade in the United States and other
countries, to the end of 1900.
Edited by Joseph Struthers, Ph. D.
Volume X.—Copiously illustrated, containing numerous diagrams and
working drawings.   Price ?5.00, post paid.
THE SCIENTIFIC PUBLISHING CO., 253 Broadway New York.
IT IS NO   GOOD ADVERTISING
In the British Press unless you understand  how to  approach
the British public.    The best way to do this is to
Employ an Up=to=date Advertising Expert      Photographic    Supplies
Who can advise you and do  your  business  at  Lowest
Possible Rates.    Quoted by newspapers themselves.
Let us know what you want and we will be pleased to assist you.
POGSON, PELOUBET & CO.
Public Accountants
NEW YORK 20 BROAD STREET
CHICAGO MARQUETTE  BUILDING
ST. LOUIS  CHEMICAL BUILDING
BUTTE HENNESSY BUILDING
R. MAYNARD
ImDorter and dealer in all kinds of
Also Amateur Outfits, Kodaks, Hawkeyes,
Premos, Pocos.etc,
C. J. WALKER'S
British and Canadian Press Bureau.    24 Coleman St., London, E.C.
My Price List for Fall and Spring
is the most complete yet issued, containing all the different varieties in
Fruit, Shade and Ornamental Trees,
Roses, etc., etc.
Send for a copy.
LARITZ NURSERY, CAREY ROAD,
Victoria, B. C.
Agent for
Imperial, Cramer   and   Hammer
Plates, Aristo-Platino, Solio, Klo-
ro, Velox and Dekho Papers
41 PANDORA St.
Victoria, B. C.
THE NATIONAL BANKER,  Chicago, Illinois.
Is recognized as the leading financial journal of the United States. Ih addition
to its circulation ainong banks it reaches the leading'business industries of the
country. It reaches more private invertors and capitalists than any publication
in the U.S, It goes to retired merchants, conservative investors and thousands
of people with money to invest. The best evidences of its worth as an advertising medium is the fact that its advertisers remain with it permanently year
after year. In banks and business houses it is used as a work of reference. If
you desire to reach the moneyed class of the country, large or small, you should
place an advertisement in the National Banker. Any legitimate enterprisee
can secure all the money desired by making an announcement in this publication. It is quoted from and referred to more by the press of America than
any financial journal in the United States. Subscripiion price $1.00 per year.
Advertising rates on application. Sample copies sent free. Address all
communications to The National Banker, 84 & 86 I^a Salle St., Chicago,111.
M. R. SMITH & COMPANY
LIMITED. Established I85S.
Manufacturers of
High Class Biscuits w6 Confectionery
Gold Medals awarded at Roval Agricultural Exhibition
'95. '96, '97, '98. Medal and Diploma awarded at Colonial
and Indian Exhibitions. Silver Medals at Provincial Exhibitions, 1886.
BRANCH-
VICTORIA,   B.   C.
430 CORDOVA STREET, VANCOUVER.THE MINING RECORD.
XXI
BRITISH   COLUMBIA WHOLESALE SUPPLY HOUSES, ETC.
A
stonier
Becomes a regular customer when once
started buying of us—
WHY?
We have the Best Goods  and   Largest
Assortment in the West.
We Can Fill Orders Promptly From Our Immense Stock.
We manufacture a large quantity of Furniture, and import direct in car lots from the best makers everywhere
EVERYTHING    TO   FURNISH   A   HOME.
Write for illustrated catalogue, free.
WEILER BROS., VICTORIA, B. C.
ESTABLISHED
1862,
Canadian   Pacific Navigation Company, Ltd.
Steamers leave Victoria and Vancouver as follows:
Victoria=Vancouver Route.
Xeave Victoria daily 1 a.m.    Leave Vancouver daily 1.15 p.m.
West Coast, Vancouver Island Route.
Xeave Victoria 11 p.m., ist,   ioth and 20th day of month.
Northern  British Columbia Coast Route.
Leave Victoria 11 p.m., ist and 15th day of month. Leave Vancouver 2 p.m., 2nd and 16th day of month.
Alaska Route.
■Steamships leave Victoria 11 p.m. ist and 15th day of month, leave Vancouver 8 p.m. 2nd  and 16th day of   month
for Ketchikan and Skagway connecting with the White Pass and Yukon Route for Atlin,
Dawson, and Yukon River Points.
J. W. TROUP, Manager.
Victoria.
E. J. COYLE, Asst. Gen. Pass. Agent,
Vancouver.
TURNER,  BEETON & CO'Y
Victoria, Vancouver, and Nelson, B. C.
and at H. C. Beeton & Co., 33 Finsbury Circus, London, England.
""tSX, E,o.   Wholesale Merchants.   ■■■■
Goods indented from all parts of the world.
Cigars, Flour, Etc.
Telegraphic Addresses :
1 'TURNER," Victoria; " BEETON," London; " TURBEET," Vancouver and Nelson
R.  P.   RITHET  &  CO.
Wholesale Merchants, Shipping & Insurance Agents,
Proprietors'of Victoria Wharf, Columbia Flouring Mill ; agents for Victoria Lumber and
Manufacturing Company, Cheminus, V.I.; Pacific Coast Steamship Co., San Francisco.
WHARF STREET.
VICTORIA, B. CINCORPORATED BY ACT
OF PARLIAMENT.
HEAD OFFICE:       -       -       MONTREAL.
CAPITAL all paid up, $12,000,000.00      RESERVE FUND, $7,000,000.00.     UNDIVIDED PROFIT, $427,180.80.
Board of Directors-Rt. Hon. Lord Strathcona and Mount Royal, G. C. M. G., President.   Hon. G. A. Drummond, Vice-President.
A. T. Paterson, Esq.; Edward B. GreenshMds, Esq.; Sir William C. Macdonald; R. B. Angus,Esq.;
A. F. Gault, Esq ; James Ross, Esq.; R. G. Reid, Esq.
F, W. TAYLOR Assistant Inspector
JAMES  AIRD Secretary
Montreal-H, V- MEREDITH Manager
E. S. CLOUSTON General Manager
A. MACNIDER Chief Inspector and Superintendent of Branches
*. S. CLOUSTON Inspector of Branch Returns
BRANCHES
Province of Ontario—Almonte, Belleville, Brantford, Brockville, Chatham, Cornwall, Deseronto, Fort William, Goderich, Guelph, Hamilton, King-
•ton, Lindsay, London, Ot>awa, Perth Pe'erboro, Pieton, Surma, Stratford,
St. Mary's Toronto, Toronto Yonge St. Branch, Wallaceburg.
Province of Quebec—Montreal: West End Br., Seigneurs St. Br., Point
St. Charles; Quebec.
Lower Provinces—Chatham, N.B.; Frederickton, N.B.; Moncton, N.B.
Bt. John N.B.; Amherst, N.S.; Halifax, N.S.; Sydney, N.S.
Province of Manitoba and North-West Territories—Winnipeg, Man.;
Calgary, Alberta; Lethbridge, Alberta; Regina, Assiniboia.
Province of British Columbia—Greenwood, Nelson, New Denver, New
Weitminster, Rossland, Vancouver, Vernon, Victoria.
In Newfoundland—St. John's, Nfld., Bank of Montreal.
THE MINING RECORD.
BANKING ESTABLISHMENTS, ETC.
BANK OF MONTREAL.
IN   CANADA:
In Great Britain—London, Bank of Montreal, 22 Abchurch Lane, E.C.,
Alexander Lang, Manager.
IntheUnitkd States New York—R. Y. Hebden and J. M. Greata,
Agents, 59 Wall Street; Chicago—Bank of Montreal.
Bankers IN Great Britain-London—The Bank of England, the Union
Bank of London, the London & Westminster Rank the National Prov. Bank
of England. Liverpool—The Bank of Liverpool, Ltd. Scotland—Tha British
Linen Company Bank and Branches.
Bankers in the United States—New York—The National City Bank,
The Bank of New York, N.B.A. Bosten—The Merchants' National Bank, J.
B. Moors & Co. Buffalo—Thr Marine Bank, Buffalo. San Francisco—The
First National Bank, The Bank of British Columbia, The Anglo-Califomian
Bank.   Portland, Oregon—The Bank of British Columbia.
:     THE CANADIAN BANK
OF COMMERCE.
With Which is Amalgamated
The Bank of   British Columbia.
HEAD OFFICE:     TORONTO.
Paid Up Capital $   8,000,000
Rest and Undivided Profits      2,652,ooo
Aggregate Resources Over     70,000,000
HON. GEO. A. COX, President. R. E. WALKER, General Manager. ALEX. LAIRD, Asst. General Manager.
LONDON OFFICE:   60 LOMBARD ST., E. C.
The Bank has 80 branches well distributed throughout the Dominion
and elsewhere, including the following in British Columbia and the Yukon
District:
Greenwood,
Kamloops,
Ladysmith
Nanaimo,
Nelson,
New Westminster,
Sandon,
Vancouver,
Victoria,
White Horse.
BRANCHES  IN THE  UNITED STATES.
New York, San Francisco, Portland, Seattle
Skagway.
Every description of banking business transacted.   Letters of credit on
all parts of the world.   Exceptional facilities for handling gold dust.
SAVINGS BANK DEPARTMENT.
Deposits of $1.00 and upwards received and interest paid at current rates.
Victoria B. C, GEO. GILLESPIE, Manager
BANK OF BRITISH NORTH AMERICA
ESTABLISHED 183S.   INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER 1840.
Paid Up Capital, £1,000,000 Sterling. Reserve Fund, $1,776,333
LONDON, ENG., OFFICES, 5 GRACECHURCH STREET, E. C.
BRANCHES IN BRITISH COLUMBIA :
Victoria,   Vancouver,   Rossland,   Kaslo,   Ashcroft, Greenwood*
Also at the Gold Fields—DAWSON CITY.
A Savings Bank Department Has Been Established   n Connection With the Victoria Branch.
Highest Price Paid for Gold Dust and Amalgam. W. T.  OLIVER^  Mgr., Victoria, B. C.
MICHIGAN COLLEGE OF MINES.
An Engineering School with unique location, giving it unusual facilities
New Mining Engineering and Hydraulic Building, also Chemical and Metal
lnrgical Building ready for fall term, 1902. For catalogue giving list of graduates and their occupations, address F. W. McN air, President, Houghton Mich
PATENTS,
Caveats, Designs, Copyrights and Trade Marks obtained in Canada and all
foreign countries.
ROWLAND  BRITTAIIN,
Registered Patent Attorney, Mechanical Engineer and Draughtsman
Write for full information and references.     Satisfaction guaranteed.
Room 20
Bank of Hritish North America
VANCOUVER -B. C.
The Hall Mining & Smelting Co., Ltd.
NELSON,
B. C.
SMELTING  DEPARTMENT
Purchases
COPPER  ORE,
LEAD  ORE,
DRY ORE.
WANTED
Position by Provincial  Licensed  Assayer.     Several  years
experience in B. O.   Apply "A" Box 246 Victoria. B 0THE MINING RECORD.
XXIII
ANCHOR WIRE  FENCE
lis:
i
ai
ft:
IS
Patented 7 Sept., 1894—No- 46991
Strongest, Cheapset,
BEST   IN   THE   MARKET
To be had only from
THE B. C. ANCHOR FENCE-CO., Limited, 743 Pender St., VANCOUVER, B. C.
Where water power is used much depends upon the water
wheel—Pelton wheels have a reputation backed by fifteen years
of continuous use by the best known hydraulic engineers in the
world. Every water wheel requirement has been incorporated
into themanufacture of these wheels—brains and practical experience have combined to make the Pelton a water wheel of the
most efficient type.    Send for Catalogue.
PELTON   WATER  WHEEL CO.,
156 Liberty St.. New York.
wmumsmmamMimimm 'mmbsss;
Lobnitz' Gold Dredgers are at work in British North and
South America, Africa, Asia, &c.
Telegraphic Address: "Lobnitz, Renfrew."   AI Code usedXXIV
THE MINING RECORD.
TRANSPORTATION  COMPANIES AND HOTELS.
The Pleasure
of Travel
j
Is fully realized in travelling on the Canadian Pacific Railway. By its lines
can be reached all Canadian Points, and its arrangement with American Railroads
enable its agents to issue tickets   to all points in the United States.
It operates its own Sleeping and Dining Cars, and has its own Hotels and
Steamships. Its magnificent scenery and .the excellence of its service has made
it the favorite route across the American Continent.
Illustrated publications, as to its route, Banff, Yoho Valley, Glacier, cfec.   sent on
application to any agent.
H. H, ABBOTT,
Agent,
VICTORIA, B. C.
Or to E. J. COYLE,
Ass't General Passenger Agent,
VANCOUVER, B. C.
aZar^ti Ullf to.
Nanaimo Railway.
TIME TABLE NO. 44.
• Southbound.
Northbound.                                Daily. Arrive.
Leave.                                  a.m. p.m.
Victoria     9 :oo 12 :o6
Shawnigan Lake    10120 10:^6-
Duncans    11 :co 10 :o2
P.M.
Nanaimo    12145 8 :i5
Ar. Wellington      1 :oo Lv. 8 :oo
Northbound.
Sat., Sun.
and Wed.    Southbound.
Arrive.
Leave. a.m.
Victoria  4125
Shawnigan Lake  5:42
Duncans    6:20
Nanaimo  8:02
Ar. Wellington   8 :\y
p.m.
8:10
7:01
6:05
4:25
Lv. 4:10
Through Tickets to Crofton via Westholme,   Stage leaves Daily, connecting with North and Sonth bound trains,   Double stage service Saturdays
Sundays and Wednesdays, connecting with morning and afternoon trains.   Fare from Victoria, Single $2, Return $-. B   OCT 1LC oaiuraaya,
Through   Tickets Victoria to Hlberhi—Stage leaves Wellington Tuesdays and Fridays on arrival of train from victnHo    »,.»„,•„,•„„ *v »iv ™i
Mondays and Thursdays.   Fare from Victoria, single, $5.20, return $8.65 arrival 01 train irom Victoria.   Returning from Alberni
Through Tickets Victoria to Bowichan Lake via Duncans—Stage leaves Duncans Mondays, Wednesday and Fridays.   Fare from Victoria $5.00
Excursion rates in effect to all points good Saturday and Snnday.
GEO.   L.   COURTNEY,   Traffic   Manager.THE HUDSON'S BAY COY
-HAVE-
GENERAL STORES
-AT-
fiaie de Peres
Battleford
Calgary
Chapleau
Dauphin
Deloraine
Edmonton
0^6rt WiUiam
Kamloops
Langley
Lethbridge
Lower Fort Garry
Macleod
Mattawa
Morden
Nelson
Pincher Creek
Portage la Prairie
Port Simpson
^.Pfcince Albert
Qu'Appelle
Quesnelle
Rat Portage
Riding Mountain
Sboal Lake
Sudbury
Touchwood Hills
Vanco.uver
Victoria
Vernon
Whitewood
Winnipeg
And at other principal points in British Columbia, Manitoba and Northwest Territories.    Purchasers will find a
these stores the besiygoods at moderate prices, imported direct from all the principal markets of the world.
By \ EVERY   BELT   Mm
^^:C^Ar|^N§EED fr  ;
G|lUINE OAK TANNED
■LEATHER BELTING
ForfExposed Situations Use
Iflancashirefil Hair   Belting.
CATALOGUES AND DISCOUNTS
ON APPLICATION.
Q, K. MtCARljl, Montreal, Toronto.
FELTEN|GU|LEAUME,Carlswerk,
fltien Geseltschaft, Mulheii^on Rhine
MANUFACTURERS OF
ELECTRICAL LEADS AND CABLES
Electric Lighting Cables  for  Coal   Pits  with   arrangement   for
avoiding fire damp explosions in case of the cable breaking.
WIRE R^feES FOR MINIIsfe
Round and Flat Wire Ropes, "Albert," or so-called "Lang's" Lay
'jSrlopes, Patent Locked Coil Wire Ropes, Patented Flattened Strand.
Wire Ropes.
IRON, STEEL, COPPER MlD BRONZE WIRE
Superior qualities.
SOLS AGENTS FOR  CANADA :
WATSON JAlK & CO.,
7 ST. HELEN STREET
MONTREAL
A
N
D
STRAIGHT LINE, DUPLEX
SIM PLE or CO M POU N D.
M or AIR.
AfR COMPRE|pORS|
fiBl Ifx RO§K |RILLS.-sTEA
SHE IaNADiHrAND DR|_L COMPANY
Y2l^©ETOfer B. e.
R0SSLHND, B. 0.
GREENWOOD, B. &.
mmm®;CABLE :  RISOON• S
COOES: A.B.C.  MOREING <* NEAL.
LIEBERS,  WESTERN   UNION.
QOLD
DREDQII#
ifn/rcniNERY.
r/slW&nm /R&n wzrkm
SAN FRANCISCO,. CA^M
U. S. A.
conp§ETf§|||
KQiviiFhprr.
'■■■: llOF niNEll
-WRITE   FOR    OUR   SPECIAL   CATALOGUES.-
tyeb coppEi am
SMELTING  WORKS
-AT-
LADYSMITH
CLERMONTf UViSIGSTON, Manager.
NORTHWESTERN
SMELTING AND REFINING GO.
Buyers of Gold, Silver and Copper Ores, Mattes,
Bullion, Furnaje and Cyanide products^
LOCATION OF WORKS
Crofton, Vancouver Island, fe. <§
Published by the B. C. Record, Ld.
Printed by T. R. Cusack, Victoria, Canada.