THE LIBRARY
THE UNIVERSITY OF
BRITISH COLUMBIALEGISLATURE  OF MINNESOTA. 






NORTHWEST   BRITISH   AMERICA, 
AND  ITS  RELATIONS  TO 
THE STATE OF MINNESOTA. 
BY   JAMES   W.  TAYLOR. 
A Report Communicated to the Legislature of Minnesota by Governor Ramsey, March 2d, and Ordered 
to be Printed. 
ST. PAUL: 
NEWSON, MOORE, POSTER & COMPANY,  PRINTERS. 
1860.GOVERNOR'S    MESSAGE.
To the House of Representatives :
I have the honor to transmit herewith, for the use of the Legislature, a
Report tliis day presented to me, upon the relations of the State of Minnesota to Northwest British America, made upon the suggestion and at the
request of my predecessor in office, by Mr. James W. Taylor.
The accompanying report relates to matters which are not merely a subject of interesting inquiry to all, but which concern, in a great degree, the.
future growth and development of our State, and to which the attention of
Statesmen, both of this  country and of England, is already considerably
directed.
I therefore recommend this report, containing valuable information upon
so important a subject, to the attention of the Legislature.
ALEX. RAMSEY.
Executive Office,       )
St. Paul, March 2, 1860. jREPORT.
B&
St. Paul, March 2, 1668.
I/itn. A If zander Ramsey, Cfovernor of Minnesota.
On the 18th of June 1859, I received from
Hon. Hknky H. Sibley, Governor of Miune-
sota, a communication, requesting me to obtain, in the course of a visit to the Selkirk Settlement, "reliable information relative to the,,
physical aspects and other facts connected
with the British possessions on the; line of the
Overland Route from Pembina via the Red
River Settlement and the Saskatchewan valley to Frazer's River," and to communicate
the same to the Executive Department in a
form suitable for submission to tbe Legislature.
At the Selkirk Settlement upon the Red
River of the North, the introduction of Gov.
Sibley was duly honored by Hon. William
McTavish, Governor of Assiniboia. The settlement upon the Red river, from the international boundary at Pembina to the mouth
of the river in Lake Winnipeg, and upon the
Assiniboin river, for a distance of sixty miles,
west of its junction with the Red river at Port
Garry, have acquired a civil organization,
under appointments of the Hudson Bay Company, which is officially designated as " The
Colony of Assiniboia." I desire to acknowledge the uniform courtesy, and. solicitude to
communicate the information sought by mc,
not only of Governor McTavish, but of Dr.
J. lienx, John £. Harriott, Esq. Thomas
Sinclair Esq. and Robert Macbeth Esq.
gentlemen holding tbe appointments of Legislative Councillors and Magistrates of the colony of Assiniboia.
The first Territorial Librarian of Minnesota,
Chas. Cavillbar, Esq., and Hon. N. W. Kittson, late Mayor of St. Paul, are now residents
at St. Boniface, the seat of the Catholic Epis
copate, opposite Fort Garry; and I am greatly
indebted for their suggestions. The Historical collections of D. Gunn, Esq., Correspondent of the Smithsonian Institute, were accessible by me.
I shall have occasion, also, in the progress
of this report, to produce the testimony of
Bishop Tache of the Catholic Church, and
Bishop Anderson and Archdeacon Hunter of
the Church of England. To them and others
of the Clergy of Selkirk, I would express obligations for valuable information.
It is unnecessary to repeat the narrative of
Lord Selkirk's remarkable colonization of
Red River. Of the present community of ten.
thousand souls, about five thousand are competent, at this moment, to assume any civil or
social responsibility, which may be imposed
upon them. The accumulations from the fur
trade during fifty years, with few excitements
or opportunities of expenditure, have secured general prosperity, with frequent instances of affluence; while the numerous
churches and schools sustain a high standard
of morality and intelligence.
The people of Selkirk fully appreciate the
advantages of communication with the Mississippi River and Lake Superior through the
State of Minnesota. They are anxious for the
utmost facilities of trade and intercourse.
The navigation of the Red River by a steamboat during the summer of 1859, was universally recognized as marking a new era in
their annals. This, public sentiment was
pithily expressed by the remark : "In 1851,
the Governor of Minnesota visited us; in 1859
cDmes a Steamboat, and ten years more'will
bring the Railroad!"
I was gratified to find that the Hudson Bay
Company  was no exception to the general6
feeling of cordiality. Governor Sibley was apprehensive, with the prospect of greatly increased intercourse by the channel of Red
River, that American traders and emigrants
might be received inhospitably, but no such
disposition was shown; and, as to the enterprise of steam navigation,it is now understood
that the Hudson Bay Company has become
an active party in its future prosecution;
The population of Selkirk, unconnected
with the company, is so numerous and influential that all restrictions of trade have been
relinquished. Most amicable relations exist
between the trading post at Fort Garry, and
Kittson's.station at Saint Boniface. Goods
are charged with an impost of four per cent,
whether brought from Europe or the United
States, which constitutes the revenue of the
colony of Assiniboia. Land can be purchased
by any one at seven shillings sterling per
acre, with liberal credits and low interest.
For the present, the jurisdiction of the
country is exclusively that of the Hudson Bay Company. There is a probability, however, that representative institutions will be established by an act of the; current English Parliament. Letters from London were shown to meirmugust—particularly
a communication from Professor Isbister of
London, to Donald Gunn, E'q., of Lower
Fort Garry—which stated that one of the
latest official acts of Sir Edward Bulwer
Lytton, before his retirement from the office
of Colonial Secretary, was to draft and circulate for the consideration of members of Parliament, a bill providing for the organization
of a colony, which should embrace the district
extending from Lakes Superior and Winnipeg
to the Rocky Mountains, and bounded north
by latitude 55°. Its passage was only prevented by the resignation of the Derby ministry, and I notice that Bishop Anderson, in
a recent charge to the clergy of his diocese,
expresses great confidence that Sir Edward's
successor in the Colonial Office, the Duke of
Newcastle, " whose attention has for many
years been directed to this subject, will be
prepared ere long with a comprehensive measure of the same character."    (1.)
(1.) The oue*tinn of a distinct organization, oy act of
Parliament, is the sole topic of political discussion in the
Selkirk Settlements See (ile of the Jfor'-Wester, for January, 1860, a paper published at Fort Garry. In the Appendix (A.) the subject of a Colonial organization u
presented in detail;.
The physical geography of tbe vast interior
districts, which constitute the basin of Lake
Winnipeg, will soon be as familiar as that of
the territory of the United States within the
same lines of longitude. The Canadian Government has lately published the result of an
exploration of the channels and valleys of the
Red and Assiniboin rivers. The London
Geographical Society has given to the world
the narratives of Captain Pallisseb and his
associates, who have thoroughly explored the
vicinity and passes of the Rocky Mountains,
between latitudes 49° and 54°. Intelligent
parties, organized for hunting adventure or
overland transit, are making constant addi^
tions to the publid knowledge of'Northwest
America. A citizen of Minnesota*Col. Wb.
H. Nobles, whose name is rhe designation of
the most practicable pass of the Sierra Nevada, discovered by him in 1851, has turned his
attention since the Gold Discovery of British
Columbia, to the details of an Overland Emigration Route, by the valleys of the Red River of the North, the South Saskatchewan and
the Kootonais Pass. An exploration con-1
ducted by him in the summer of 1859 to Fort
Ellice on the western sources of the Assina-
boin, was very satisfactory, and its results
will be published, as soon as a report by J.
W. Hamilton, Esq., who conducted the same
party of exploration from Fort Ellice''through
the Rocky Mountains, shall be received.   (2.)
Upon the general topic, suggested by Gov.
SiBLEY,of Communications between Minnesota and Central British America', whether considered in regard to transportation from
that extensive district to Lake Superior
and the Mississippi river, or in regard to a
western connexion with the Pacific coast, T
beg leave to submit the following results of
recent observation and enquiry.
1. The navigable capacity of the Red River of the North may be comparatively stated,
as follows: Ascending the stream from
Lake Winnipeg, the navigation to Pembina
is equal to that of the; Mississippi between
Prairie du Chien and Lake Pepin - from Pembina to the month of Red Lake river; the
channel may be compared to the  Mississippi
(2.) See Appendix (B ) Geographical Memoir of tbe
Pe.l River and Saskatchewan District : (0 ) S-ir Roderick
Murchisoo, on tbe result* of the Pallisi er Expedi ton :
(0.) Itineraries of Routes from Saint Paul to Fori Kllk-e
and Edmonton House, ta nbwrrnl by 1.' i.- Sujith, C-vil
Engirieor; and Col W. H. Nobles;7
from Red Wing to Fort Snelling ; from Red
Lake river to Shayenne,, tor the Minnesota
from Ft. Snelling to Shakopee; and from
Shayenne to Breckinridge, to the Minnesota
from Shakopee to Fort Ridgley. The only
material obstruction—sand bars "near the
mouth of Goose river—may be removed (so
Captain E. Bellj/who commanded the steamer, Anson JS7orlhrup, in the summer of 1859,
avers) by an expenditure of ono thousand
dollars. The Red River is navigable above
(south of) Pembina 400 miles, while the distance from the International line by the river
to Lake Winnipeg, is 175 miles; total dis"
tance navigable by steamers 575 miles. To
this add 350 miles for the navigation of the
Shayenne, Red Lake river and Assiniboin,
(its principal tributaries) and tbe river coast
of the Red River Valley, accessible by
steamers, will be found to exceed nine hundred miles.
2. Lake Winnipeg is about two hundred
and fifty miles in length, but of unequal
breadth. Its area cannot be less than that of
Lake Erie, but is far more diversified by islands and headlands. The western bank is
alluvial, resting on limestone, while the numerous bays of its; eastern shore develope the
gneiss, granite.and trap rock of the primary
formation. The lake is not deep, but with no
shallows obstructive to navigation.
3. From a point near the Northwestern
angle of Lake Winnipeg, the great navigable,
channel of the Saskatchewan, divided into
two arms at latitude, o3 ° and longitude 106 °-
may be ascended by steamers to Fort Edmonton on the north branch, and to Chesjterfieldf
House or old Bow Fort on the south branch,
in close proximity to the Rocky Mountains. I
The Rapids of the Saskatchewan, near the
mouth of the river, can hardly be said to interrupt navigation. Open loaded boats have been
tracked (drawi| with a rope by men on shore)
over the most violent portions of the Rapids,
the respective distances being one mile and
a quarter of a mile, while, for descending vessels, there is no difficulty. Loaded boats
run the Rapids with safety at every stage of
water.
4. When Central British America is fully
recognized as a colony of England, its interiori
navigation can be greatly facilitated by canals
between the channels of the Assiniboin and
the South Saskatchewan, and connecting
Lakes Winnipigoos and Manitoba with the
Saskatchewan west of the rapids ; but with
the present natural advantages of the country,
it is easy to perceive that steam navigation
will greatly contribute to the enterprise of an
overland communication from Minnesota to
British Columbia, and, what is of more immediate -importance to the State, will bring art
immense and fertile district, whose colonization can be no longer postponed, into profitable connection with the public thoroughfares
oflMinnesota.
5. The testimony of John E. Harriott,
Esq., Arch-deacon Hunter, Bishop Tache
and others was explicit, that the country upon the north branch of the Saskatchewan is
superior, for the purpose of agriculture, to the
plains of the South Saskatchewan. The latter are destitute of timber, except on a range
of elevations near the international boundary,
and partake of the cretaceous formation apparent on the Upper Missouri. The regions
adjacent to Fort Pelly, Carlton House, Fort
Pitt and Edmonton House—well known points
in a general northwestern direction from Fort
Garry—are remarkably adapted to the cultivation of grain and the sustenance of cattle.
The scenery of the North Saskatchewan's
fully equal.to that of the Mississippi between
Galena and the Falls of St. Anthony.
6. The limit of successful agriculture in
the Northern Temperate Zone should be carried considerably beyond the Saskatchewan
valley, especially near the Rocky Mountains*
Sir Roderick Mcrchison, in a recent address
before the London Geographical Society, represents this chain of mountains to be greatly
depressed in high northern latitudes, and, indeed, several of the tributaries of the Mackenzie have their sources on the Pacific slope,
and wind through the mountains before falling
into the great Arctic river. The mountain
valleys of the Peace and Liard rivers, from
latitudes 56 degrees to 60 degrees, are thus
influenced by the Pacific winds, and wheat,
with other cereals, is successfully cultivated.
7. The present agriculture of Selkirk confirms the evidence from a variety of sources,
that the districts west and northwest of the
Red River valley, are well adapted to settle-'*
ments. For the production of wheat, barley,
rye, oats, peas, potatoes, vegetables, grass—8
whatever is grown in Minnesota except maize,
the region in question will be unsurpassed by
any other area of similar extent on the continent.    (3.)
The foregoing are material considerations.
Closely related to these is a topic of a political character. With the extension of the British Colonial System, now seen to be imminent, there: is reason to believe that the governments of England and the United States
will consummate the recent settlement of tbe
prolonged dispute in Central America, by
an adjustment of the future relations of the
British Provinces and American States, upon a
basis of mutual interest and good will. Such
an International compact might provide for a
Customs and Pbstal Union between the Provinces and the United States. It should, at
all events, stipulate that the Reciprocity Treaty, enlarged in its provisions and renewed for
a long period of years, shall be extended to
the Pacific Ocean, aud, in connection therewith, all laws discriminating between American and foreign built vessels should be abolished, establishing freedom of navigation on all
the intermediate rivers and lakes of the respective Territories. Such a policy of 'free
trade and navigation with British America
would give to the United States, and especially to the Western States, all the commercial
advantages, without the political embarrassments, of annexation, and would in the sure
progress of events, relieve our extended Northern frontier from the horrors and injuries of
war between fraternal communities.
Who can doubt that it would be speedily
followed by overland mails and the telegraph
on the Pembina and Saskatchewan route,
and a Continental railroad, as advocated by
Maury, which England would recognize as
essential to her interests in Northwest America and the Pacific coasts ?    (4.)
The above is intended as an enumeration,
by no means as an exposition, of our relations
to Central British America.    I shall close
(3.) See Appendix (E.) for some extracts, showing the
increased productiveness of plats near the northern limit
of their successful growth. The extraordinary1 returns
from the cereals sown at Selkirk illustrates this climatic
law.
(4.) The whole subject of railroad communication with
Asiatic Commerce is luminously presented in a communication of Commander Maury to Col I). A. Robertson. Appendix (F.) See (8.) an abstract of intelligence respecting British Columbia and (H) In regard to a Pacific Ocean
Telegraph.
this communication with some notes', equally
cursory, upon Northern Minnesota.
1. The steamboat navigation of the Red
River of the North will be regular during the
summer of 1860. The Anson Northrup is in
course of thorough repair and equipment.
Arrangements are also in progress for additional steamers upon Red River and Lake
Winnipeg.
2. It is hoped and presumed that a weekly
mail to Pembina will be conceded by the Government of the United States. The authorities of Assiniboia will cheerfully contribute
to the expenditure requisite for such a mail
service.
3. The Legislature of Minnesota having, at
the present session, adopted memorials to the
Executive and Legislative Departments at
Washington, in favor of an extension of the
Reciprocity Treaty, in favor of a military post
in the valley of the Pembina River,- and for
the extinction of the Indian title in the northwest portion of Minnesota,—I shall not enlarge upon those topics.
4. My return trip from Pembina, was over
the probable extension of the branch line of
the Minnesota and Pacific Railroad, by way
of the Crossing of Red Lake River, Detroit
Lake, and Otter Tail Lake, to Crow Wing.
For the first eighty miles of this route, from
Pembina to the Rapids which limit steamboat
navigation from the mouth of Red Lake River, the trail follows a ridge, as distinctly defined as the formations south of Lakes Erie
and Ontario, over which pass the well known
" Ridge Roads." The vicinity of Otter Tail
Lake for fifty miles in all directions, is unsurpassed in the combination of forests* small
prairies, lakes and rivulets, by the most favored sections of the State. I am satisfied
that the whole course of the Leaf Mountains,
as the divide between the tributaries of the
Mississippi and Red Rivers is designated, will
be found no less attractive, even to Red Lake.
The forests surrounding this lake are destined
to furnish large quantities of pine lumber to
the Red River settlements.
5. On the subject of coal deposits, while no
doubt exists that the sources of the Saskatchewan traverse an extensive coal field, it is yet
uncertain whether the upland district which
separates the basins of the Minnesota and the
Red River of the North from those of the Up-9
per Missouri and the Saskatchewan, are carboniferous. By all geological analogy, a coal
formation should exist between the silurian
system of Minnesota and Selkirk, and the ere
taceous plateau which Nicollet identified on
the Missouri, due west from St. Paul, and
which Professor Hindes, of the Canadian Exploration, traced along the same Ion ntude as
far north as latitude 53 ° .
6. The allusion just made to the exploring
expedition conducted under the authority of
Canada, justifies a tribute to the zeal and intelligence with which the enterprise of an
Emigrant and Transportation Route, from
Fort William on the north shore of Lake Superior, to Fort Garry, is prosecuted. With
the civil organization of Central British America, a wagon road between those points, to be
followed by a railroad, will receive all requisite encouragement, certainly from the Canadian Treasury, perhaps by the efficient cooperation of the Home Government. The
Northwest Transit Company, acting under a j
Canadian charter, but understood to have en- S
2
listed London capitalists, is expected to resume operations during the summer of 1860.
These movements of our Provincial neighbors
cannot fail to influence the policy of Minnesota
in favor of more satisfactory communications
than we now possess between Lake Superior
and tbe channels of the Upper Mississippi
and the Red River of the North,
I desire, in conclusion, to express my obligations to the late Executive of Minnesota, for
the confidence implied by the commission, to
Which the foregoing is a response. Believing
firmly that the prosperity and developement
of this State is intimately associated with the
destiny of Northwest British America, I am
gratified to record the rapid concurrence of
events which indicate that the frontier, hitherto resting upon the sources of the Saint
Lawrence and the Mississippi, is soon to be
pushed far beyond the International frontier
by the march of Anglo-Saxon civilization.
Very respectfully submitted,
James W. Taylor.APPENDIX   "A.
CENTRAL     BRITISH     AMERICA
From the Atlantic Monthly for January/ \<{b" ;
Even before the announcement of the discovery of gold upon the Frazer River and its
tributaries, the people of Canada West had
induced the Parliament of England to institute
the inquiry, whether the region of British
America, extending from Lakes Superior and
Winnipeg to the Rocky Mountains, Ts not
adapted, by fertility of soil, a favorable climate,
and natural advantages of internal communication, for the support of a prosperous colony
of England.
The Parliamentary investigation had a wider
scope. The select committee of the House of
Commons was appointed " to consider the state
of those British possessions in North America
which are under the administration of the
Hudson Bay Company, or over which they
possess a license to trade;" and therefore witnesses were called to the organization and management of the Company itself, as well as the
natural features of the country under its administration.
On the 31st of July, 1857, the committee
reported a large body of testimony, but without any decisive recommendations. They
" apprehend that the districts on the Red River
and the Saskatchewan are among those most
likely to be desired for early occupation," and
" trust that there will be no difficulty in effect
ing arrangements between her Majesty's government and the Hudson Bay Company, by
which those districts may be ceded to Canada
on equitable principles, and within the districts
thus annexed to her the authority of the Hudson
Bay Company would of course entirely cease."
They deemed it " proper to terminate the connection of the Hudson Bay Company with
"Vancouver Island as soon as it could conve
niently be done, as the best means of favoring  the development of the   great  natural
advantages of that important colony; and that
means should also be provided for the ultimate
extension of the colony over any portion of the
adjacent continent, to the west of the Rocky
Mountains, on which permanent settlements
may be found practicable."
These suggestions indicate a conviction that
the zone of the North American continent, between latitudes 49 ° and 55 ° , embracing the
Red River and the Saskatchewan districts east
of the Rocky Mountains, and the area on their
western slope, since organized as British Columbia, was, in the judgment of the committee,
suitable for permanent settlement. As to the
territory north of the parallel of 55 ° , an
opinion was intimated that the organization of
the Hudson Bay Company was best adapted
to the condition of the country and its inhabitants.
Within a year after tbe publication of the
report, a great change passed over the North
Pacific coast. The gold discovery on the Fra-
zer's River occurred ; the Pacific populations
flamed with excitement; British Columbia
was promptly organized as a colony of England ;
and, amid the acclamations of Parliament and
people, Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton proclaimed,
in the name of the government, the policy of
continuous colonies from Lake Superior to the
Pacific, and a highway across British America
as the most direct route from London to Pekin
or Jeddo.
The eastern boundary of British Columbia
was fixed upon the Rocky Mountains. The
question recurred, with great force, what shall
be the destiny of the fertile plains of the Saskatchewan and the Red River of the North ?
Canada pushed forward an exploration of the
route from Fort William, on Lake Superior, to
Fort Garry, on the Red River, and, under the12
direction of S. J. Dawson, Esq., civil engineer,
and Professor J. Y. Hinde, gave to the world
an impartial and impressive summary of the
great natural resources of tbe basin of Lake
Winnipeg. The merchants of New York were
prompt to perceive the advantages of connecting the Erie Canal and the great Lakes with
the navigable channels of Northwest America,
now become prominent and familiar designations of commercial geography. A report to
the New York Chamber of Commerce very
distinctly corrected the erroneous impression,
that the valleys of the Mississippi and St. Law-!
rence rivers exhausted the northern and central
areas which are available for agriculture.
" There is in the heart of North America," said
the report. " a distinct subdivision, of whicE
Lake "Winnipeg may be regarded as the center.
This subdivision, like the valley of the Mississippi, is distinguished for the fertility ofjfe s&ii
and for the extent and gentle slope of its great
plains, watered by rivers of great length, and
admirably adapted for steam navigation. It
has a climate not exceeding in severity that of
many portions of Canada and the Eastern"
States. It will, in all respects, compare favorably with some of the most densely peopled
portions of the continent of Europe. In other
words, it is admirably fitted to become the seat
of a numerous, hardy, and prosperous community. It has an area equal tp, eight or ten first
class American States. Its great river, the
Saskatchewan, carries a navigable water line
to the very base of the Rocky Mountains. It
is not at all improbable that the valley of this
river may yet offer the best route for a railroad
to the Pacific. The navigable waters of this
great subdivision interlock with those of the
Mississippi. The Red River of the North, in
connection with Lake Winnipeg, into which it
falls, forms a navigable, water line, extending
directly north and south nearly eight hundred
miles. The Red River is one of the best
adapted to the use of steam in the world, and
waters one of the finest regions on the continent.
Between the highest point at which it is navigable, and St. Paul, on the Mississippi, a railroad is in process of construction ; and when
this road is completed^ another ejrarid division
of the cpritinent, comprising half a million
square miles, will be open to settlement."
The sanguine temper of these remarks illustrates the rapid progress of public sentiment
since the date of the Parliamentary inquiry,
only eighteen months before. Of the same
tenor, though fuller in details, were publications
on the subject in Canada and even in England.
The year 1859 opened with greatly augmented
interest in the district of Central British
America. The manifestation of this interest
varied with localities and circumstances.
In Canada no opportunity was omitted, either
in Parliament or by the press, to demonstrate
the.importance to the Atlantic and Lake Provinces of extending settlements into the prairies
of   Assinniboin   and   Saskatchewan—thereby
affording advantages to Provincial commerce
and manufactures like those which the communities of the Mississippi valley have conferred
upon the older American States. Nevertheless,
the Canadian government declined to institute
proceedings before the English Court of Chancery or Queen's Bench, to determine the validity
of the charter of the Hudson's Bay Company
—assigning, as reasons for not acceding to such
a suggestion by the law officers of the crown,
that the proposed litigation might be greatly
protracted, while the interests involved were
urgent—and that the duty of a prompt and
definite adjustment of the condition and relations of the Red River and Saskatchewan
districts was manifestly incumbent upon the
Imperial authority.
This decision, added to the indisposition of
Lower Canada to the. policy of westward ex-
.pansion, is understood to have convinced Sir
E. B. Lytton that annexation of the Winnipeg
basin to Canada was impracticable, and that
the exclusive occupation by the Hudson's Bay
Company could be removed only by the organization of a separate colony. The founder of
British Columbia devoted the latter portion of
his administration of the Colonial Office! to
measures for the satisfactory arrangement of
conflicting interests in British America. In
October, iSoS, he proposed to the directors of
the Hudson's Bay Company that they should
be consenting parties to a reference of ques-
tions.r-especting the validity and extent of their
charter, and respecting the geographical extent of their, territory, to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. The Company "reasserted their right to the privileges, granted to
them by their charter of incorporation," and
refused to be a consenting party to any proceeding which might-call in question their char*
tered rights. q ^„s
Under,,date of November 3, 1858, Lord
Caernarvon, Secretary of State for the Colonies, by the direction of Sir E. B. Lytton, returned a dispatch, the tenor of which is a key
not only to.Sir Edward's line of policy, but. in
all probability, to that of his successor, the
Duke of Newcastle. Lord Caernarvon began
by expressing; the disappointment and regret
with which Sir E. B. Lytton had received the
communication, containing, if he understood
its tenor correctly, a distinct refusal on the
part of the Hudson's Bay Company to entertain any proposal with a view of adjusting tbe
conflicting claims of Great: Britain, of Canada
and of the Company, or to, join with her Majesty's government in affording reasonable facilities for tbe settlement of the questions in which
Imperial no less than Colonial interests were
involved. It had been his anxious desire to
come to some equitable and conciliatory agreement, by which , all legitimate claims of the
Company should be fairly considered with reference to the territories or the privileges they
might be required to surrender. He suggested
that such a procedure, while advantageous tothe interests of all-parties, might prove partic- !
ularly for the interest of the Hudson's Bay j
Company. " It would afford a tribunal preeminently fitted for the dispassionate consideration of the questions at issue; it would secure
a decision which would probably be rather of
the nature of an arbitration than of a judgment ; and it would furnish a basis of negotiation5 on which reciprocal concession and the
claims for compensation could be most successfully discussed."
"With such persuasive reiteration, Lord Caernarvon, in the name and at the instance of Sir
E. B. Lytton, insisted that the wisest and most
dignified course would be found in an appeal
to and a decision by the Judicial Committee
of the Privy Council, with the concurrence
alike of Canada aud the Hudson's Bay Company. In conclusion, the Company were once
more assured, that, if they would meet Sir E.
B. Lytton in finding the solution of a recognized difficulty, and would undertake to give
all reasonable facilities for trying the validity I
of their disputed charter, they might be assured
that they would meet, with fair and liberal
treatment, so fatvas her Majesty's government
was concerned ; but if on the other* hand, the
Company persisted in declining these terms,
and could suggest no other practicable mode
of agreement, Sir E. B. Lytton held himself acquitted of fitotber responsibility to the interests
of the Company, and proposed to take the necessary steps for closing a controversy too long
open, and for securing a definite decision, due
alike to the material development of British
North America and to the requirements ofPan
advancing civilization.
The communication of Lord Caernarvon
stated in addition, that, in the case last supposed, the renewal of the exclusive license to
trade in'.any part of the Indian territory—a I
renewal which could be justified to Paitliament
only as a part of a general agreement adjusted
on the principles of mutual concession—would
become impossible.
These representations failed to influence the
Company. The Deputy-Governor, Mr. H. H.
BarensjTesponded, that, as, in 1850, the Com
pany had assented to an inquiry before the
Privy Council into the legality of certain powers claimed and exercisfid by them under their
charter, but not questioning the validity of the
charter itself, so, at this time, if the reference to
the Privy Council were restricted to the question of the geographical extent of the territory
claimed by the Company, in accordance with
a proposition made in July, 1857, by Mr.
Labouchere, then Secretary of State for the
Colonies, the directors would recommend to
their shareholders to concur in the course suggested ; but must decline to do so, if the inquiry involved not merely the question of the geographical boundary of the territories claimed
by them, but a challenge of the validity of the
charter itself, and, as a consequence, of the
rights and privileges which it professed to
grant, and which the Company had exercise'd
for a period of nearly two hundred years. Mr.
Barens professed that the Company had at all
times been willing to entertain any proposal
that might be made to them for the surrender
of any of their rights or of any portion of their
territory; but he regarded it as one thing to
consent for a consideration to be agreed upon
to the surrender of admitted rights, and quite
another to volunteer a consent to an inquiry
which should call those rights in question.
A result of this correspondence has been the
definite refusal of the Crown to renew the exclusive license to trade in Indian territory.—
The license had been twice granted to the
Company, under an act of Parliament authorizing it, for periods of twenty-one years—once
in 1821, and again in 1838. It expired on the
30th of May, 1859. In consequence of this
refusal, the Company must depend exclusively
upon the terms of their charter for their special
privileges in British America. The charter
dates from 1670—a grant by Charles II. to
Prince Rupert and his associates, " adventurers1
of England, trading in Hudson's Bay "—and is
claimed to give the right-of exclusive trade and
of territorial dominion to Hudson's Bay and
tributary rivers. By the expiration of the exclusive license of Indian trade, and the termination in 1859 of the lease of Vancouver's Island
from the British government, the sway and influence of the Company are greatly restricted,
and the feasibility of some permanent adjMA'
ment is proportionately increased.
There is no necessity for repeating here the
voluminous argument for and against the charter of the Hudson's Bay Company. The interest of British colonization in Northwest
America far transcends any technical inquiry
of the kind, and the Canadian statesmen are
wise in declining to relieve the English cabinet
from the obligation to act definitely and speedily upon the subject. The organization of the
East India Company was no obstacle to a
measure demanded by the honor of England
and the welfare of India; and certainly the
parchment of the Second Charles will not deter any deliberate expression by Parliament in
regard to the colonization of Central Britishi
America. Indeed, the managers of the Hudson's Bay Company are always careful to recognize the probability of a compromise with
the government. The lateletter of Mr. Barrens to Lord Caernarvon expressed a willingness, at any time, to entertain proposals for the
surrender of franchises or territory-; and in
1848, Sir J. H. Pelly, Governor of the- Company, thus expressed himself in a letter to Lord
Grey: " As far as I am concerned, (and I
think the Company will concur, if any great
national benefitfwould be expected from it,) I
would be willing to relinquish the whole of the
territory held under the charter on similar
terms to those which it is proposed the East
India Company shall receive on the expiration
Of their charter—namely, securing the proprie-14
tors an interest on  their capital  of ten pel'
cent."
At the adjournment of the Canadian Parliament and the retirement of the Derby Ministry, in the early part of 1859, the position and
prospects of English colonization in Northwest
America, were as follows :
1. Vancouver's Island and British Columbia
had passed from the occupation of the Hudson's Bay Company into an efficient colonial
organization. The gold fields of the interior
had been ascertained to equal in productiveness,
and greatly to ,exceed in extent, those of California. The prospect for agriculture was no
less favorable—while the commercial importance of Vancouver and the harbors of Puget's
Sound is unquestionable.
2. The eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains and the valleys of the Saskatchewan and
Red River were shown by explorations, conducted under the auspices of the London Geographical Society and the Canadian authorities,
to be a district of nearly four hundred thousand
square miles, in which a fertile soil, favorable
climate, useful and precious minerals, fur-bearing and food yielding, animals, in a word, the
most lavish gifts of Nature, constituted highly
satisfactory conditions for the organization and
settlement of a prosperous community.
3. In regard to the Hudson's Bay Company, a disposition prevailed not to disturb its
charter, on conditiou that its directory made
no attemprS to enforce an exclusive trade or interfere with the progress of settlements. All
parties-anticipated Parliamentary action. Letters from Londou spoke with confidence of a
bill, drafted and in circulation among members
of Parliament, for the erection of a colony between Lakes Superior and Winnipeg and the
eastern limits of British Columbia, with a
northern boundary resting on the parallel of
55°; and which, although postponed by a
change of ministry, was understood to represent
the views of the Duke of Newcastle, the successor of Sir E. B. Lytton.
4. In Canada West, a system of communication from Fort William to Fort Garry, and
thence to the Pacific, was intrusted to a company—the "North west Transit"—which was by
no means inactive. A mail to Red River
over the same route, was also sustained from
the Canadian treasury ; and Parliament, among
the acts of its previous session, bad conceded a
charter for a line of telegraph through the valleys of the Saskatchewan, with a view to an extension to.the Pacific coast, and even to Asiatic
Russia.
Simultaneously with these movements in England and Canada, the citizens of the State of
Minnesota, after a winter of active discussion,;
announced a determination to introduce steam-
navigation on the Red River of the North.—
Parties were induced to transport the machinery
and cabins, with timber for the hull of a steamer, from the Upper Mississippi, near Crow
Wing, to the mouth of the Shayenne, on the
Red River, where the boat was reconstructed.
The first voyage of the steamer was from Fort
Abercrombie, an American .post two hundred
miles northwest of St. Paul, down north to
Fort Garry, during the month of June.—
The reception of the stransrer was attended by
extraordinary demonstrations of enthusiasm at
Selkirk. The bells of Saint Boniface rang
greeting, and Fort Garry blasted powder, as if
the Governor of [the Company were approaching its portal. This unique, but interesting
community, fully appreciated the fact that
steam had brought their interests within the
circle of the world's activities.
This incident was the legitimate sequel to
events in Minnesota which had transpired during a^period of ten years. Organized as a territory ia 1849, a^single decade had brought the
population, the resources, and the public recognition of an American State. A railroad system, connecting the lines of the Lake States
andyProvinces at La Crosse' with the international frontier on theiRed River at Pembina,
was not only projected, but had secured in aid
of its constr.ue.tion a grant by the Congress of
the United States of three thousand eight hundred and forty acres a mile.iand a loan of State
credit to the amount of twenty thousand dollars
a mile, not exceeding an aggregate of five million dollars. Different sections of this important extension of the Canadian and American
railways were under contract;and in process of
construction. In addition, the land surveys of
the Federal Government had reached the navigable channel of the Red River; and the line
of frontier settlement, attended by a weekly mail,
had advanced to the same poiut. Thus the
Government of the United States, no less than
the people and authorities of Minnesota, were
represented in the Northwest movement.
Still, its consummation rests with the people
and parliament of England. Sir Edward Bul-
wer Lytton was prepared with a response to
h s own memorable query—" What will he do
with it ?" Shall the Liberal Party be less
prompt and resolute in advancing the policy,
announced from the throne in 1858, of an uninterrupted series of British colonies across the
continent of North America ? This will be determined by the Parl-iaimentary record of
1860.
[It will be seen from the following report of
a debate on the British Parliament, received
since the foregoing papers were in type, that
the expectation of a speedy colonial organization beyond Minnesota, is likely to be realized
at an early day :]
TB5E USE© KIVEja SETTLEMENT.
House op Commons, Feb. 13.
The Earl of Carnarvon inquired what was
the intention of Her Majesty's government with
regard to the administration of the Red River
Settlement and those parts of the Saskatchewan15
district recommended by the committee of the
House of Commons in 1857 to be withdrawn
from the jurisdiction of the Hudson's Bay
Company. The noble earl stated that on the
31st of May last the exclusive licence to trade
which had been granted1 to the Hudson's Bay
Company expired, and the company accepted
the serious responsibility of declining to renew
it upon any other terms than those on which
they had previously held it. Later in the year
the government wisely took powers under an
Act for the appointment of magistrates in the
Red River Settlement and parts of the Saskatchewan districts, and for securing a more
effective system of criminal administration. He
wished to know whether any, and if any, what
steps had been adopted under that Act. Communications which had reached him from various quarters fed him to Tear that the present
state of the Red River Settlement was one calculated, to say the least, to cause some uneasiness.
First of all, there was a strong feeling of dissatisfaction on the part of the colonists themselves,
and he might state that during the short time
he had connexion with the Colonial Office, two
petitions were received from the inhabitants of
the settlement, praying for extensive alterations
in the form of government and general system
of administration. Secondly, the settlement
had been entered by a large number of Canadians, who refused to pay duties on the ground
that they were not leviable from them, and introduced spirits among the Indians, thereby
contributing to their demoralization. Moreover, the same persons, by distributing themselves over ground not belonging to the Red
River Settlement, were raising a question of
great legal nicety, which ought not to be determined in such an irregular manner. Lastly,
during the past year American citizens had
crossed the borders in considerable numbers,
introduced spirits, established an unlicensed and
irregular trade, and were practically under no
sort of control or authority whatever. He was
not afraid of American colonization in that
part of the world, which presented an ample
field for energy, industry, and speculation of all
kinds. Even in the case of British Columbia,
which possessed special attractions, he entertained little apprehension, because he believed that
the same sense of law and order, and the same
obedience to constituted" authority which prevailed in every part where the Anglo-Saxon
race had taken root, would be displayed in that
recently established community. But he viewed
the Red River Settlement in a different fight,
and he should esteem it a grievous misfortune
if, from any omission on the part of the Home
Government or of the local authorities, the
sympathies of the settlement should be alienated from the Crown, and, cat off as it was from
all communication with British North America, it should tarn rather towards the United
States than towards Canada. There were two
roads which connected the Red River Settlement with our possessions in North America,
but they were little used, and, indeed, were im
practicable during the greater part of the year;
whereas the road which :connected the settlement with the territory belonging to the United
States was a good one, and was the route by
Which the largest amount of traffic was carried
on. Last summer trade to the amount of $1,-
500,000 passed between the Red River Settlement and the United States ; a small steamer
had been placed on the Red River in order to
facilitate the traffic, and, upon the whole, he was
afraid the tendency in the Settlement was towards a connexion with the American Republic.
This was a very important' question, and the
present time was a most critical one, so much
so that upon the conduct of the Colonial Secretary during the next few years it might depend
what should be the ultimate destiny of this, colony. He did 'not advocate the payment of any
sums out of the Imperial exchequer to attain
the objects which he had in view ; but he be-
believed that this wasja question'rather of policy than of expenditure, and that much might be
accomplished by a judicious exercise of the influence of the Colonial Office. The noble earl
concluded by asking the questions of which he
had given notice.
TheDuke of Newcastle said that,with reference to what had hitherto been the licensed territory of the Hudson's Bay Company, the government of that company, although theoretically
swept away, yet practically remained in force.
The posts of the company continued in existence, and, as the jurisdiction of the company
was of a very primitive and patriarchal kind,
not founded upon any exact form of law, it had
in fact, survived the expiry of the license. He
was satisfied that the less we disturbed the present relations between the Europeans and half-
breeds and the native Indians the better, and
therefore, although many gentlemen had offered
their services, he bad not yet exercised the
power of appointing magistrates which was
conferred upon him by the Act of last session;
nor should he do so, unless the introduction of
spirits among the Indians, or other irregularities or disorders, should render it necessary.—
With regard to the Red River and Saskatchewan districts, no information of such serious
character as those mentioned by the noble earl
had been received at the Colonial Office. Canadians in.' A.mericans had, no doubt, crossed
the frontiers, nut nothing had occurred to lead
the authorities to apprehend any evil consequence from the presence of either one or the
other class of persons. No definite steps had
yet been taken with regard to these settlements.
His noble friend knew how little information
there existed until lately as to the laud which
was available for colonization. It was not till
within the last three or four weeks that he had
received the concluding portion of Capt. Harris' report, and he had still later been put in
possession of the important document prepared
by Mr. Dawson of Toronto, which did so much
credit to that gentleman, a native of Canada
and a member of its Legislature. Another important reason for not coming to any immedi-16
ate decision on this question was the difficulty
as to communication with the settlements.—
There were only three modes of access—one
from the north ; one from the south through the
territory of the United States; and one from the
east, through Canada. It was of great impon-
tance that these territories should be colonized
md that every facilitv
by
British subject
should be given for the fullest access to them.
The scheme advocated by Mr. Dawson in his
report was, he thought, the most likely to tend
to the colonization and settlement of these districts that could be devised. Before anything
could be done, however, for the future settle
ment of these districts,rit was necessary to make
some arrangement with the Hudson's Bay
Company. It was his desire to arrive at such
a settlement by amicable means, and he hoped
to be able to do so. Papers were published
last session containing a correspondence be-
I tween the Colonial office and the Hudson's Bay
Company, in which the company expressed a
willingness to yield upon equitable terms, either
immediately or by degrees, the jurisdiction over
these two settlements—the Red River and the
Saskatchewan districts, with a view to their
colonization under Imperial auspices. It was,'
of course, necessary to ascertain what these
equitable terms were, and he intended to put
himself iuto communication with the Hudson's
Bay Company, in order to see whether the territory in question could not be surrendered to
the Government without litigation or dispute.
The next step would be to establish some form
of government in these settlements, which, in
the first instance, ought to be as simple and as
inexpensive as possible. It was desirable that
legislation should take place, if possible, daring
the present session on this subject.APPENDIX   "B."
GEOGRAPHICAL MEMOIR OF THE RED RIVER AND SASKATCHEWAN DISTRICT OF BRITISH AMERICA.
Extract from Report of a Committee of the St. Paul Chamber of Commerce, Xm. 22,1859.
The area comprised within the rivers, converging to Lake Winnipeg is estimated to
contain 400,000 square miles. Familiar as the
American public is with the progress of Mississippi States, the Committee are inclined to
review the basin of Lake Winnipeg from our
western stand-point, of its capacity to be
divided and occupied as States or Provinces,
each having an average area of 50,000 square
miles. (Starting, therefore, from that point of
the Western boundary of Minnesota, which is
now or may be improved to become the head
of steamboat navigation on the Red River,
the indulgence of the Chamber is asked, while
we proceed in convenient subdivisions, to group
a considerable number of facts, geographical
and otherwise, demonstrating the future importance of that river navigation which is to be
the avenue" to the vast district inclosed between
latitudes 49 deg. and 55 deg., and extending
from the shores of Lake Winnipeg to the
Rocky Mountains.
THE AMERICAN VALLEY OF "THE RED RIVER.
Of this district, Lac Traverse in one direction, and Otter Tail Lake in a line nearer north
from Saint Paul—either point not more than
two hundred miles distant—may be regarded
as its extreme southern limits; Pembina and
the international frontier, the Northern, while
the longitude of Red Lake on the East, and of
Minnewakan or Spirit Lake on the West, are
convenient designations of the remaining boundaries. This area would extend from about
lat. 46 to 49, and from longitude 95 30 to 99
deg.
Capt. Pope, in his exploration of 1849, remarks that for fifty miles in all directions
around Otter Tail Lake, is the garden of the
Northwest. The outlet of the Lake, constitut-
ing the source of the Red River of the North,
3
has been very favorably described by Dr.
Owen, of the United States Geological Survey. It presents a succession of lakes and
rapids, while at other points rolling prairies extend from its banks, crested with beautifully
dispersed proves of timber. It was in this sec-
tion of Minnesota that the magnesian lime
stone containing Silurian fossils, identical with
those in the bluffs of the Mississippi below St.
Paul, was recognized by Dr. Owen in situ.—
showing that the primary formation, which
divides Minnesota from Northeast to Sonth-
west, is succeeded to the Northwest by the
ascending series of sedimentary rocks.
Many of our citizens have frequently traversed the district just named, and their testimony is, that Westward from Otter Tail Lake
for at least one hundred miles, and Northward
to Red Lake, if not beyond, no more favorable
distribution of beautiful prairies and forests
can be imagined. The lakes are numerous
but small, and almost invariably skirted with
timber, the sugar maple largely preponderating. Seldom is the traveler out of sight of
these groves, while the soil is unsurpassed.
From Dr. Owens' Geological Report, it appears, that below the head of navigation the
Western bank of the Red River is a vast plain'
but on the East, where the country is level,.
timber is more abundant on the river banks j°
the soil is congenial to the ash which attains a
large size; below the mouth of Red Lake River
strong   chalybeate   springs   ooze   from   the
clay banks; saline springs are also found, and
all accounts concur that hardly an acre but is
eminently adapted to the cultivation of wheat*
This great staple, with the aid of machinery,
will hereafter be cultivated more advantageously over the Northwestern areas of the continent, than in the Mississippi basin.18
ASSINIBOIA.
We believe that this is the official designation of the district of British America occupied by the Selkirk Settlements. It embraces
the lower or northern section of the Red River,
and the productive valley of the Assiniboin.
Here is a civilized and interesting community
of 10,000 souls—with schools, churches, a
magistracy, and a successfu.1 agriculture. Its
trade, consisting largely of the exchange of.
furs, is concentrating at St. Paul, and is estimated during the year 1858, to have amounted
to $1,000,000.
The Committee would refer, for fuller details in regard to the community at Selkirk, to
the numerous publications recently made. The
most important of these is a document circulated by the Canadian Government—the Report of an exploring expedition—which among
other interesting statements, shows that the
soil and climate are even more favorable to
agriculture than the vicinity of Toronto. The
Minnesota farmer recognizes in these details a
remarkable coincidence with his own experience.
CUMBERLAND.
But North of the Red River Settlements, is
a region, almost a discovery of recent explorers, which is even more attractive than the
prairie district contiguous to the Red and Assiniboin rivers. Immediately West of Lake
Winnipeg, are Lakes Winnipegoos and Manitoba, with an outlet flowing into Lake Win-
nepeg in latitude 52 deg. Tributary to Lake
Winnipegoos, are the Red Deer and Swan
rivers, which drain a country of rare beauty
and fertility. A traveler, writing to a Canadian newspaper, describes its general features
as rich prairies, interspersed with belts of heavy
oak and elm, while the itinerary of Sir George
Simpson affords a most glowing picture of
the sources of Swan River. Under date of
July 14th, he observes, " In this part of the
country we saw many sorts of birds, geese,
loons, pelicans, ducks, cranes, two kinds of
snipe, hawks, owls and gulls; but they were
all so remarkably shy that we were constrained
to admire them from a distance. In the afternoon we traversed a beautiful country with
lofty hills and long valleys, full of sylvan lakes
while the bright green of the surface, as far
as the eye could reach, assumed a foreign
tinge, under an uninterrupted profusion of
roses and blue bells. On the summit of one
of these hills we commanded one of the few
extensive prospects we had of late enjoyed.—
One range of bights rose behind another, each
becoming fainter as it receded fi'°m the eye,
till the farthest was blended in almost undis-
tinguishable confusion with the clouds, while
the softest vales spread a panorama of hanging copses and glittering lakes at our feet."
As Cumberland House is situated north of
the valley of Swan River, upon the Saskatchewan, its name has been chosen to designate
the district between longitudes 100 deg. and
105 deg. and from latitude 52 deg. to 55 deg.
An equal area immediately south, and between
the parallels of 49 deg. and 52 deg., is no less
attractive and fertile.
SASKATCHEWAN.
There remains, from longitude 105 .to 115,
and from latitude 49 to 55, the respective valleys of the North and South Saskatchewan—
ample in area and resources for four States of
the extent of Ohio. We propose to consider
the whole interval westward from the junction
of the two rivers to the Rocky Mountains,
without subdivision, as, indeed, it is presented
by Colton's Map of North America.
The prairie districts adjacent to the South
Saskatchewan, are described by the Canadian
explorers, as inferior to the rich alluvial
plains of the Red and Assiniboin rivers, but
Sir George Simpson's sketches of his route
from Fort Carlton to Fort Edmonton, are
suggestive of a superior agricultural region.
During his first day's route, he describes the
county " as so picturesque in its character that
almost every commanding position presented
the elements of a picturesque panorama. The
next day he camped near a large lake ; and on
successive dates he refers to " bands of buffalo
in all directions to the number of about five
thousand,"" abundant game," " bold scenery,"
" delicious wild fruits," " luxuriant crops of the
vetch or wild pea, almost as nutritions a food
for cattle and horses as oats," " a seam of coal
ten feet in thickness," &c.
But there is an authority in regard to the
more western portions of the Saskatchewan,
whom the committee are solicitous to bring
prominently before the public. We refer to
Father De Smet, tbe devoted Jesuit missionary to the Indians of Oregon, mentioned by
Gov. Stevens, in a recent address before the
New York Geographical Society, as " a man
whose name is a tower of strength and faith,"
possessing high scientific attainments and great
practical knowledge of the country. His " Oregon Missions " is a publication of much interest, consisting of letters to his superiors ; and a
portion of this volume narrates his explorations
and adventures in the Saskatchewan valleys of
Hie Rocky Mountains. In September, 1854,,
he left the source of the Columbia river in latitude 50, and crossed the Rocky Mountains, descending their eastern slope in latitude 51. He
entered on the 18th of September, " a rich valley, agreeably diversified with; meadows, forests and lakes—the latter abounding in salmon
trout." This was a mountain valley, however, and it was not till three days afterwards
that he reached Bow-river or the South Fork
of the Saskatchewan. Thence he continued
northward, noticing sulphurous fountains and
coal on the Red Deer, a branch of the Bow
river. Descending the valley of the Red Deer,
which is also described in verv glowing terms.19
at length he emerged upon what he describes
as "the vast plain—the Ocean of prairies."
On the evening of the same day, the missionary reached and was hospitably received at the
Rocky Mountain House, latitude 53 deg., and
longitude 115 deg., and on the 31st of October
started for another journey on the plains ; but
after two week3 absence, was compelled to seek
refuge from the approach of winter (now the
middle of November) at Edmonton House on
the Upper Saskatchewan. From this shelter
he thus writes in general terms:
•'•' The entire region in the vicinity of the
Eastern chain of the Rocky Mountains serviug
as their base for thirty or sixty miles, is extremely fertile, abounding in forest^, plains,
prairies, lakes, streams and mineral springs.
The rivers and streams are innumerable, and
on every side offer situations favorable for the
construction of mills. The northern and southern branches of the Saskatchewan water the
district I have traversed for a distance of about
three hundred miles. Forests of pine, cypress,
thorn, poplar and aspen trees, as well as others
of different kinds, occupy a large portion of it,
covering the declivities of the mountains and
banks of the rivers.
These originally, take their
rise in the bigg
est chains, whence they issue in every direction
like so many veins. The beds and sides of
these rivers are pebbly, and their course rapid,
but as they recede from the mountains tbey
widen, and the currents lose something of their
impetuosity. Their waters are usually very
clear. The country would be capable of supporting a large population, and the soil is favorable for the production of barley, corn, potatoes, and beans which grow here as well as in
the more southern countries.
" Are these vast and innumerable fields of hay
forever destined to be consumed by fire or
perish in the autumnal snows? How long
shall these superb forests be the haunts of wild
beasts? And these inexhaustible quarries,
these abundant mines of coal, lead, sulphur,
iron, copper and saltpetre—can it be that they
are doomed to remain forever inactive ? Not
so. The day will come when some laboring
hand will 'give them value; a strong, active
and enterprising people are destined to fill this
spacious void. The wild beasts will, ere long,
give place to our domestic animals, flocks and
herds will graze in the beautiful meadows that
border the numberless mountains, hills, valleys
and plains of this extenive region."
Life at Edmonton during the winter season
is thus sketched:
"The number of servants, including children, is about eighty. Besides a large garden
a field of potatoes and wheat belonging to the
establishment, the lakes, forests and plains of
the neighborhood furnish provisions in abundance. On my arrival at the Fort, the ice
house contained thirty thqusand white-fish,
each weighing four pounds, and five hundred
buffaloes, the ordinary amount of the winter
provisions. Such is the quantity of aquativ
birds in the season, that sportsmen often send tc,
the Fort carts full of fowls. Eggs are picked
up by thousands in the straw and weeds of the
marshes. I visited Lake St. Anne, [a missionary station fifty miles north-west from Edmonton.] The surface of this region is flat for the
most part, undulating in some places—diversified with forests and meadows, and lakes teeming with fish. . In Lake St. Anne alone were
caught, last autumn, more than seventy thousand white-fish, the most delicious of the kind;
they are taken with a line at every season of the
year.
"Notwithstanding the rigor and duration df
the winter in this northern region, the earth in
general appears fertile. Vegetation is so forward iu the spring and summer that potatoes,
wheat and barley; together with other vegetables of Canada, come to maturity."
On the 12th of March, Father DeSmet started on his return trip, proceeding with sledges
drawn by dogs over the snow, to Fort Jasper,
situated Northwest from Edmonton on the
Athabasca river, half a degree north of latitude
54 deg. Here occurred the following hunting
adventure:
" Provisions becoming scarce at the Fort, at
the moment when we had with us a considerable number of Iroquois from the surrounding
country, who were resolved to remain until my
departure in order to assist at the instructions,
we should have found ourselves in an embarrassing situation had not Mr. Frazer come to
our relief, by proposing that we should leave
the Fort and accompany himself and family to
the Lake of Islands, where we could subsist
partly on fish. As the distance was not great
we accepted the invitation, and set out to the
number of fifty-four persons and twenty dogs.
I count the latter because we were as much
obliged to provide for them as for ourselves.
A little note of the game killed by our hunters
during the twenty-six days of our abode at this
place will afford you some interest—at least it
will make you acquainted with the animals of
the country, and prove that the mountaineers
of the Athabasca are blessed with good appetites. Animals killed—twelve moose deer, two
reindeer, thirty large mountain sheep, or big
horn, two porcupines, two hundred and ten
hares, one beaver, ten muskrats, twenty four
bustards, one hundred and fifteen ducks, twenty-one pheasants, one snipe, one eagle, one owl;
add to this from thirty to fifty-five white fish
and twenty trout every day."
Father De Smet soon afterwards returned to
the Western slope of the Rocky Mountains,
whither we will not follow him.
We have thus exhibited the natural features
of the great central district soon to be brought
into close commercial relation with Minnesota
by the navigation of these important rivers of
the Northwest. We have rested our observations hitherto upon latitude 55 deg., but the
suggestions already uttered in" the British Par-ma
Q
liament, of an extension by canal to the navigable tributaries of the McKenzie will warraut
the consideration of a territorial division beyond
that limit.
Athabasca.
The valleys of the Peace and Athabasca
Rivers, eastward of the Rocky Mountains from
latitude 55 deg., share the Pacific climate in a
remarkable degree. The Rocky Mountains are
greatly reduced in breadth and mean elevation,
and through the numerous passes between their
lofty peaks, the winds of the Pacific reach the
district in question. Hence it is that Sir Alexander McKensie, under the date of May 10th,
mentions the exuberant verdure of the whole
county—trees about to blossom, and buffalo
attended by their young. During the late Parliamentary investigation, similar statements
were elicited. Dr. Richard King, who accompanied an expedition in search of Sir John Ross,
as " Surgeon and Naturalist," was asked what
portion of the county visited by him was valuable for the purpose oi settlement. In reply,
he described "as a very fertile valley," a "square
piece of country" bounded on the south by
Cumberland House, and by the Athabasca
Lake on the north.   His words are as follows :
" The sources of the Athabasca and the
sources of the Saskatchewan include an enormous area of country. It is, in fact, a vast piece
of land surrounded by water. When I heard
Dr. Livingston's description of that country,
which: he found in the interior of Africa within
the Equator,,it appeared to me to be precisely
the kind of country which I am now describing.-
* * * It is a rich soil, interspersed with
well wooded country, there being growth of
every kind, and the whole vegetable kingdom
alive."
When asked concerning mineral productions,
his reply . was, " I do not know of any other
mineral except limestone; limestone is apparent
in all directions. * * The birch, the beach
and the maple are in abundance, and there is
every sort of fruit." When questioned further,
as to the growth of trees, Dr. King replied by
a comparison " with the magnificent trees round
Kensington Park in London." He described
a farm near Cumberland House, under very
successful cultivation—luxuriant wheat, potatoes, barley and domestic animals.
The committee will not extend, by any generalization of their own, these geographical,
statements. They prefer, in conclusion, to dis-_-
pose of the subjects of climate and population,
in the impressive language of a writer in the
Knickerbocker Magazine for October 1858.
" Here is the great fact of the North-Western areas of this continent. An area not inferior in size to the whole United States east of
the Mississippi, which is perfectly adapted to
the fullest occupation by cultivated nations, yet
is almost wholly unoccupied, lies west of the
98th meridian, and above the 43d parallel, that
is, north of the latitude of Milwaukee, and west
0
of the longitude of Red River, Fort Kearney,
and Corpus Christi; or, to state the fact in
another way, east of the Rocky Mountains, and
west of the 98th meridian, and between the
43d and 60th parallels, there is a productive,
cultivable area of 500,000 square miles. West
of the Rocky Mountains and between the same
parallels, there is an area of 300,000 square
miles.
" It is a great mistake to suppose that the
temperature of the Atlantic coast is carried
straight across the continent to the Pacific.—
The isothermals deflect greatly to the north, and
the temperatures of the Northern Pacific are
paralleled in the high temperatures in high latitudes of Western and Central Europe. The
latitudes which inclose the plateaus of the Missouri and Saskatchewan, in Europe, inclose the
rich central plains of the continent. The great
grain growing districts of Russia lie between
the 45th and 60th parallel, that is, north
of the latitude of Saint Paul, Minnesota, or
Eastport, Maine. Indeed, the temperature in
some instances, is higher for the same latitudes
here than in Central Europe. The isothermal
of 70 deg. for the summer which on our plateau
ranges from along latitude 50 deg. to 52- deg.,
in Europe skirts through Vienna and Odessa
in about parallel 46 deg. The isothermal of
55 deg. for the year runs along the coast of
British Columbia, and does not go far from
New York, London, and Sebastopol. Furthermore, dry areas are not found above 47 deg.,
and there are no barren tracts of consequence
north of the Bad Lands and the Coteau of the
Missouri; the land grows grain finely, and is
well wooded. All the grains of the temperate
districts are here produced abundantly, and Indian corn may be grown as high as the Saskatchewan.
" The buffalo winter as safely on the upper
Athabasca as in the latitude of St. Paul, and
the spring opens at nearly the same time along
the immense line of plains from St. Paul to
Mackenzie's river. .To these facts, for which
there is the authority of Blodgett's Treatise on
the Climatology of the United States, may be added this, that to the region bordering the Northern Pacific, tbe finest maritime positions belong throughout its entire extent, and no part
of the west of Europe exceeds it in the advantages of equable climate, fertile soil, and commercial accessibility of coa We have the
same excellent authority for the statement that
in every condition forming the basis of national
wealth, the continental mass lying westward
and northward from Lake Superior is far more
valuable than the interior in lower latitudes, of
which Salt Lake and Upper New Mexico are
the prominent known districts. In short, its
commercial and industrial capacity is gigantic.
Its occupation was coeval with the Spanish occupation of New Mexico and California. The
Hudson Bay Company has preserved it an utter
wilderness for many long years. The Frazer
River  discoveries and   emigration are facts21
which the Company cannot crush. Itself must
go to the wall, and now the population of the
great northwestern area begins."
In review of the foregoing, especially when
considered in connection with the probable organization of the Province of Saskatchewan at
the next session of the British Parliament, your
Committee entertain great confidence that the
announcement of a Steamboat upon Red River
in June 1859, will arrest such a degree of
interest that the travel and transportation of
the next season will be very Considerable—
probably ample to remunerate the enterprise;
while, the future increase will be fully equal
to the extraordinary progress of steamboat interests upon the Upper Mississippi.APPENDIX   " C."
EXPLORATION OF THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS IN BRITISH AMERICA BY CAPTAIN PALLISER.
Ecctract from the Address of Sir Roderick I. Murchison, att/ie Anniversary Meeting of tlie^Boyal
Geographical Society, May 23d, 1859.
The important results of the exploring expedition under Captain J. Palliser, as communicated by the Colonial Office, and as dwelt upon
in awarding the Founder's Gold Medal to that
officer, have necessarily given great satisfaction
to us, proceeding as they do from men who
were especially recommended for this public
service to Her Majesty's Government by our
Society as well as by the Royal Society.
When Captain Palliser first proposed to
make this exploration, one of the main points
of interest to geographers was a survey of that
part of the Rocky Mountains to tbe north of
the United States boundary which separates
the great tracts now named British Columbia
. from the eastern mass of British North America. Her Majesty's Government deemed it,
however, of paramount importance that, in the
first instance, the nature of the ground between
Lakes Superior and Winnipeg should be
accurately surveyed, in order to set at rest all
questions of colonization as dependant on the
possibility of making practicable routes of
communication. For example, whether the
Canadas might be brought into profitable
communication with the Red Riv«r Settlement.
The remoter or more western explorations were
destined to develop the true nature of the great
prairie region, as watered by the North and
South Saskatchewan rivers and their affluents.
Collaterally, it was resolved, if possible—and
mainly at the instance of this Society—to determine the elevation of the Rocky Mountains in
those parallels of latitude, and to point out the
passes in them by which communication might
be opened out between the vast country occu
pied by the Hudson Bay Company and the
great British seaboard on the Pacific.
In the award of the Patron's Medal to Captain Palliser, allusions have been made to some
of the principle results obtained by the researches of the expedition under his orders.
But I should not do justice to the leader and
his associates, nor to my own feelings, were I
not to add a few words of explanation and
comment. The first year's labors were necessarily of more importance to the Government
than they could be to geographers and naturalists. The great object was to determine the
capability of establishing an intercourse between the rocky region of Lakes Superior and
Winnipeg on the east and'the rich prairie
countries on the west; and though astronomical, physical, and magnetical observations of
considerable   importance   were   made these
countries being to a great extent known before
and their outlines being monotonous—that portion of the survey created but slight interest
among us.
Not so when the Rocky Mountains, to which
we had specially directed attention, came to be
surveyed* On proceeding from Fore Carlton,
Palliser showed his good sense in approaching
these mountains from the rich Buffalo prairies
midway betweeu the North and South Sas-
katchawan. An experienced buffalo hunter
himself, he knew that if his men were not well
supplied, by no efforts, however well' directed
* Dr. Hector had, by directions of his chief, made a
successful foray in dog-sledges to the eastern edge of
the Rocky Mountains daring the winter, In which he
procured men and horses.n
could they succeed. Accordingly, having established a good base, and having secured
abundant provisions at Slauter Creek, he
divided his force into three parties. Leading
one of these himself across the Kananaski Pass,
and returning by the Kootanie Pass in north
latitude 4:9)4 ° > and directing Captain BlaMs-
ton to explore the still more southerly or
boundary Pass, he sent Dr. Hector to traverse
the chain by the Vermilion Pass, and to explore, as a geologist and naturalist, the much
loftier mountains into which the chain rises-in
its trend to the N.N.W. This division of his
forces well merited, therefore the expressions
used in the award which has been sanctioned
by the Council.
The marked success of the survey accomplished by my young friend Dr. Hector has
been peculiarly gratifying to me, inasmuch as I
had answered fori the capacity he would exhibit
in applying his scientific knowledge. Thus, in
addition to the determination of latitude, longitude, and the altitude of the mountains and two
of their passes, Dr. Hector presents us with a
sketch of the physical and geological structure
of the chain, with its axis of slaty subcrystal-
line rock?, overlaid by limestones of Devonian
and Carboniferous age, and flanked on the
eastern face by Carboniferous sandstone, representing, probably, our own coalfields, the whole
followed by those Cretaceous and Tertiary
deposits which constitute the subsoil of the vast
and rich prairies watered by the North and
South Saskatchewan and their affluents. His
observations on the erratic or drift phenomena
are also curious and valuable.
Prevented by his instructions from descending into the valleys of Columbia, and there to
ascertain practicable routes to the far west,
which he will look out for during the present
summer, Dr. Hector, though so severely injured
by the kick of a horse as to be incapacitated
from moving for some days, contrived so to
travel northwards as to round the base of the
loftiest mountains of the chain before he returned to his winter quarters in October, after an
absence of eighteen weeks from his chief, but
laden with valuable geographical and geological
knowledge.
In this survey he had the merit of showing
that the Vermillion Pass—which is less than
5000 feet, high, and therefore 1,000 feet lower
than any other known pass of the Rocky Mountains—had another decided advantage over
them, inasmuch as its western slope, from the
summit level of the horse path, is so little steep
that its explorer had no doubt that even a road
for carts may be there established. The descents westward, or into the drainage of the
Columbia, in the other passes, are exceedingly
steep; and, according to Captain Blakiston,
the Kootanie Pass can only have a railroad
made along it by the formation of tunnels of
several miles in length, and by encountering the
difficulty of the steep western gradient of 194
feet per mile.
Another singular natural feature of comparison is, that whilst the Vermillion Pass is less
than 5,000 feet! above the sea, the adjacent
mountains on the north rise to near 16,000 feet,
showing the great depth of the gorge. On the
other hand, in the range beyond the British!
boundary, to the south, and where no peak (not
even that of Fremont) exceeds 13,000 feevihe
passes range from 6.000 to 7,000 feet high.*
Whether one of the heights called Mounts
Brownf and Hooker by Mr. Douglas, in
honor of our eminent botanical contemporaries.?
be still higher than the Mount Murchison of
Palliser and Hector, it is certain that the chain
diminishes rapidly in its trend  from this lofty
* In anticipation of what may hereafter be published
in the "Journal of the Royal Geographical Societv."
the:reader is referred to the papers presented to Parliament in April, relative to the " Exploration by Captain.
Palliser of that portion of British North America which
lies between the northern branch of the River Saskatchewan and the, frontier of the United States, and between
the Red River and Rocky Mountains." These printed
documents are accompanied by a map, executed by
Arrowsmith, from the surveys of the Palliser expedition,
together with dispatches of the leader and officers under his command, and tables giving the calculations of
latitude and longitude by whi^h the positions of places
were fixed. An additional paper and map on the southern part of the Rocky Mountains. ne.ar the American
boundary, as prepared by Captain Blak'ston, who had
quitted the expedition, has very recently been sent to
the Society, with the notice from the Secretary of tbe
Colonies that it was not looked upon as an official communication until sanctioned by Captain Palliser. These
last mentioned documents, which seem to me to be
also ably prepared, have not yet been laid before
the Society. The public will soon possess an excellent
map by Arrowsmith, in which all the new discoveries
are inserted. This map is entitled " The Provinces of
British Columbia, Vancouver Island, with portions of
the United States and Hudson Bay Territory."
I was recently informed by my friend, the Right Hon.
Edward Ellice, that the geographical position of these
passes was laid down many years ago upon a MS. map,
at the instance of the Hudson Bay Company, by Mr.
David Thompson. I have further learnt Irom Mr.
Arrowsmith, with whom he cot responded, that Mr.
Thompson explored the vast regions of the Hudson Bay
Company in all directions during twenty-eight years,
I and projected the construction of a general map of the
whole country between Hudson Bay and Lake Superior
on the east and the Pacific on the west! It appears
that the last six years of his labors were spent on the
west side of the Rocky Mountains—it being important
to note that his MS. maps were all made from the actual
survey, corrected by numerous astronomical observations. The largest affluent of the Frazer River in
British Columbia, "the Thompson," justly bears the
I name of this great but little known geogra Ideal explorer; and I therefore trust that there is no foundation
for a report which has been spread, that it is proposed
to substitute some other appellation for the name of this
meritorious man. Beginning his astronomical observations in 1792, Mr. David Thompson was in 181 f appointed the Astronomer of the North American Boundary
Commission, and was upwards of eighty years o? age
when he died in Canada. In the words of Mr. Arrew-
smith, " he has left no one behind him who is possessed
of a tenth part of his acquaintance with the territories
of the Hudson Bay Company, whose directors were duly
sensible of his great merits." Whatever may be the
fate of that remarkable Corporation, we must all admit
that it has not only maintained British rights over wide
tracts of North America, but has also, in addition to
| Thompson, produced seme of the best geological explorers of snow-clad Arctic countries, including our
medallist Rae ;  whilst its dealing with the various fur
| hunting tribes of Indians have been so equitable as to
have maintained the attachment of these poor people,
who under such influence have been preserved, instead
of falling before the white man, as in other parts of
America.
t Mount Brown is said to be 16,000 feet high.u
cluster to the north. We know, indeed, that
Mackenzie, the first great explorer of those
regions, passed through the range in north
latitude 56 ® , at a comparatively lower level;
Again, we further know that in proceeding
northwards these mountains dwindle into insignificance before they reach the Arctic Ocean.
It will be recollected that seven years ago
Captain M. H. Synge of the Royal Engineers,
who had been quartered in the Canadas, and
had made excursions into the adjacent western
territories, being deeply imbued with the importance of the original observations of Mackenzie, and attracted by his glowing description,
made a warm appeal in favor of the establishment of a line of communication between the
Atlantic and Pacific, by passing from Lake
Athabasca and the Peace River, thence traversing the Rocky Mountains on the parallel
followed by Mackenzie.
But that scheme must now, I apprehend,
give way before the shorter passages across
the mountains in a more southern parallel, and
which will, it is hoped, bring a rich prairie
country on the east into intercourse with our
newly discovered gold region on the west, as
well as with Vancouver Island, the natural
resources of which were brought before us by
Colonel W. C. Grant. During the animated
discussion which took place among us in the
year 1851, Mr. Asa Whitney, of the United
States, in proposing his gigantic plan of an
inter-oceanic railway, candidly told us that the
best line of intercourse between the two oceans
would be found within the British territories,
and the Palliser expedition has already gone
far to demonstrate the truth and value of his
suggestion.
. With a knowledge of the data acquired by
the Palliser expedition, men of ardent minds
contemplate the formation of a railroad, or, if
not, of a practicable route, which, traversing
British possessions only, shall connect the At
lantic and Pacific Oceans. But when we
reflect that the length of this line is above
2,000 English miles, and that the greater part
of the route on the east will have to traverse
wild and unpeopled regions, we cannot rush to
hasty conclusions as to the practicability of
such an enterprise. Neither ought we to deride a plan which may be ultimately called for
when British Columbia and Vancouver Island
shall have risen into that importance which
they must attain as British Colonies. For, it
is now ascertained, that the tract lying between
the North aiad South Saskatchewan on theeast.
is one of great fertility, where no intense cold
prevails, and that, once -through the Rocky
Mountains, the traveler enters a country of
cedars and rich vegetation, in which even wheat
may be grown at heights exceeding 2,000 feet
above the sea. In the mean time we need, at
all events, have no hesitation in assuming that
the electric telegraph will, ere long, be at work
across British North America.
Believing it to be of the deepest geographical
importance, that men who have distinguished
themselves as Palliser and his associates, should
not, through a misplaced economy, be held to
their original instructions, and be forced to
return homewards by retracing their steps from
Fort Edmonton, over the previously beaten
tracks of North America and the United States,
I have had great pleasure in supporting the
request of the gallant leader of this expedition
and of his associate, Dr. Hector, that they might
be allowed to wend their way home next summer by again traversing the passes in the Rocky
Mountains, and thence to explore the great
intervening tracts of British Columbia, including the auriferous region of Frazer River. I
am happy to say that Sir Edward B. Lytton
readily complied with this request, and that the
Palliser expedition is thus about to establish
fresh claims upon our approbation.APPENDIX   "D."
JERARIES OF ROUTED FROM ST. PAUL TO PEMBINA, FORT GARRY, FORT ELLICE AND EDMONTON
HOUSE.
St. Paul, Min., March 1st, 1860.
J. W. Taylor, Esq.:
Sir : In compliance with your request, I
herewith submit to you copies of the most reliable itineraries of the various routes between
St. Paul and Pembina on the Red River of
the North ; also of routes beyond the latter
place recently described by parties traveling
overland to Frazer's River.
The following is a list of the " Tables of
Distances" furnished :
(A) 1st. From St. Paul to Pembina, via
Crow Wing and the " Woods road."
(B) 2d. From St. Paul to Pembina, via St.
Cloud. White Bear Lake, Graham's Point, and
the W. side of Red river.
(C) 3d. From St. Paul to Pembina, via portions of various routes.
(D) 4th. From Breckinridge to Pembina,
by the channel of the Red River of the
Jtforth.
(E) 5th. From Pembina to the Rocky
Mountains, routes and portions of routes.
A few remarks are necessary as to the composition of the tables.
From St. Paul to the second crossing of Otter Tafi river, the distances are given from the
actual survey and location of the military roads,
though the latter portion (from Wadena) of the
" Ft. Ripley and Red river road" not being yet
opened out, the road as at present traveled is
necessarily somewhat longer (about 8 miles)
than the line given in the table. The State
road from St. Cloud to Breckinridge, in like
manner, is but partially constructed, the line
as surveyed being at least 18 miles shorter than
that (the traveled .road) given : the shortness of
notice has prevented me from procuring and
inserting said surveyed length with exactness:
From the second crossing of Otter Tail river to Pembina, as also- from St: Cloud (via
White Bear Lake and Graham's Point) to
Pembina, the distances are taken from tbe
odometer measurements of various expeditions,
but as in their details they offer many discrepancies, I have thought it best to include them
all, so that the observations of future travelers
may decide upon their relative value.
The portions of other land routes are but
estimated, and, of course, not strictly reliable.
The routes beyond Pembina are mostly from
odometer measurements.
Along the channel of the Red River of the
North the distances are ascertained with comparative exactness from Breckinridge to tbe
mouth of Buffalo river, the forwardness of the
U. S. Land Surveys in the Red River valley
admitting of it; but from Buffalo river to
Pembina Captain Pope's table of distances has
been used. Capt. Pope estimates this latter
portion of the river as 248 miles in length, but
when it is correctly known, by survey, I do not
think it will be found to exceed 230 miles, making the actual distance by water from Breckinridge to Pembina about 370 miles. Maj. S.
H. Long, in 1823, stated the distance from the
mouth of Red Lake to Pembina to be 130
miles.
The following summary exhibits the relative
lengths of the detailed routes between St. Paul
and Pembina:
STATEMENT OF TOTAL DISTANCES
{Omitting the detours spoken of abovt.)
Miles.
1st.   Via Crow Wing and Detroit Lake        413 to    424
2d.   St.  Cloud,  Alexandria,  Dayton, and  the
" forks of trail," say,   - - -     420
8d. St. Cloud, Richmond, White Bear Lake,
Elbow Lake, Dayton, and the "forks,"
say ....     445
4th. St. Cloud, Richmond, White Bear Lake,
Graham's Point (about), and the road
through Dakota Territory, - -     464
5th.   St. Cloud, Richmond, White  Bear Lake,
Graham's Point (about), and the river, 600
6th. St. Cloud, Alexandria, Dayton, Breckinridge, and the river, say,      - -      -    590
Tth. St. CHoud, Alexandria, Dayton, Breckinridge, Shayenne, and the river, say, 695
I am, sir, very respectfully,
Tour obedient servant,
ALFRED J. HELL.26
Table of distances from St. Paul to Pembina—
Crow Wing or Woods Road.
I.   ST. PAUL TO LAKE FLOYD.
United States Military Road Surveys, 1857.
FROM  ST. PAUL (fTJLLBB KOUSS) TO
St. Anthony (epposite the Falls)
Manomin - - . -
Anoka (east of Rum river)       ...
Itasca - - - . -
Orono (Elk river) - - - .
Humboldt (Big Lake) ...
Marseilles (Bear Island)
Boyington's Tavern ...
Clear Lake        .....
East St. Cloud (Brantford post office)
Sank Rapids ....
Watab       -  '      -
Langola        • -
Swan River . - - -
Little Falls - -
Belle Prairie    - - - -
Oltnstead's    - - -
Mouth of Nokay river (opposite Port Ripley)
Crow Wing ....
Chippewa Agency at Gull River
Opposite mouth of Long Prairie river
Commencement of Grand  Marais—end of
built road - - -
Crossing of Crow Wing river—Wadena
Grossing of Wing river
Crossing of Bluff creek - -
Commeucement of Leaf Mountain
Outlet of Leaf Lake - - -
Leaf City - - -     -
Otter Tail City (to left of road)
First crossing of Otter Tail river (Rush Lake
Second   " " "
>\emd of surveyed line.
Third crossing of Otter Tail river ) Odometer
Detroit Lake—north shore } measure-
Lake Floyd (Eagle's Nest Lake) )  mentt.
Mis.
Total
9
9
7Jtf
16J<
10
26^
6J<
83
7
40
8%
48%
9
.57%;
4
61%
4
65%
9
im
3
77.%
5K
83
12*
95%
10
105 X
3
10S34
5%
114
m
122 a
%
128
7
130
4%
134 a
UX
14T
5
152
8*
160 X
9%
169%
12%
182
6
188
5
193
2
195
5X
	
7
202
16
818
4H
222 a
10K
238
S
239
II.   LAKE FLOYD TO PEMBINA.
Col. Nobles.   1859.
TROM LAKB FLOYD TO
North end of small lake to left of road
Timbered lake, to left       ...
Buffalo river,10 feet wide, 1 foot deep
Dividing ridge, lake and timber
Junction of St Cloud and Pembina trail
Crossing of Wild Rice river, 85 feet wide,
2 feet deep.
Crossing of Wild Rice creek, 15 feet wide,
1 foot deep.
Crossing of SaDd Hill river, 80 feet wide,
1% feet deep.
Crossing of Sand Hill creek, (12 feet)
Bad marshes      -
Stony butte and lake
Small creek, water in holes
Oiossing of Red Lake river, 175 feet wide,
8% feet deep.
Small lake and marsh ...
Small lake ...
Coulee - -
Grossing of Snake -river
Crossing of Middle river, 20 ft. wide, 6 in. d'p
Grossing of Pine river, 15 ft. wide, 1 ft. deep
Bend of Pine river ...
Small creek ...
Big Point ....
South fork of Two Rivers
Month of Two Rivers      ...
Pemblaa ...
Mis. Total
8%841%
6% 246%
5%252
8% 260%
11X278
5   277
282
19& 801%
6 807%
1%|809X
11%!381H
3 h 324%
4%829K
11     340X
4% 845
12% 857%
4 861%
7 868%
6    374%
4 878%
6.V3S5
15% 400 H
6%406%
5 411%
12XJ424
HI.   BED LAKE R1VEK TO PEMBINA.
Col. F. L. Smith.   1856.
FROM ST. PAUL TO
Red river
Small lake
Middle river
Tamarac river (R. aux Eplnees)
Small stream
South branch of Twe rivers
North branch of Two rivers
Lac du Nord Ouest
Pembina, west side of Red river
Mis.
18
17%
4
16%
11
Total
829 X
847 H
864%
868%
885%
396s
400%
11%|412
I   Xi412%
B.
Table of distances from St. Paul to Pembina-
plain trail.
ROUTE OF MAJ. WOODS AND CAPT. POPE.
June and July, 1845.
5B0M  ST.  PAUL TO
Grossing at Sauk Rapids
Cold Water creek - -
Crossing of Sauk river (Richmond)
David Lake (now Henry Lake)
Lake Henrie (now Lake George)
Grossing of Grow river
Lightning Lake (now Grove Lake)
White Bear Lake
Pike Lake -
Main branch of Chippewa river
Elk Lake
Tipsina, or Pomme de Terre river
Elbow Lake
Rabbit River (W. branch of Pomme de Terre)
Grossing of Otter Tail river
Crossing of Red river (near Graham's Point)
Crossing of Wild Rice river, west
Crossing of Shayenne river
Grossing of Maple river
Rush river, turned it -
" bend
Point of ridge -
Main branch of Elm river
South branch of Goose river
Salt Lakes ...
Main branch of Goose river
Crossing of "
Turtle river -
Big Salt river ...
Little Salt river
Little Hill river ...
Cart river (R. de la Chavrette)
Steep Hill river
Heartshorn river
Mud river and commencement Poplar Isl'ds
Branch of Tongue river
Mouth of Pembina river
Mis.
Total
78%
IS
9*X
5
99%
14
118%
7
120H
8
128K
11
189%
14
153%
13
166%
11
177%
2
179%
5
184%
'0
194%
4
198%
i0
218 H
ii
IS!.'
240%
254
11
265
17
288
18%
300%
«!-
310
16
326
1%
888%
«K
342
s%
350%
10J«
361
2JS
368%
18
881%
1»«
401
9
410
12*-
488%
2%
485 :
8
487
3
480
7
437
16
453
10%
468%
II.
ROUTE OF ELLIS SMITH AND PARTY.
August, 1858.
TROM ST.  PAUL TO
Crossing at St. Cloud, say
Sauk river bridge
St. Joseph
Gold Spring
Sauk river ferry, Richmond
L« ke Henry ...
Lake George
Crossing of Grow river
Grove Lake
Chippewa river       ...
White Bear Lake
Little Chippewa river
Lake
Rapid river, (main branch of Chippewa)
|
Mils. Total.
6.83
4.94
9.88
5.57
15.80
5.66
10.27
10.40
5.88
6.11
17,52
.84
7.11
74.52
81.83
86.87
9615
101.78
11T.6S
128:18
138.46
148.85
149.0S
155.19
178.71
178.55
180.66zf
Lake (Pomme de Terre Lake)
Pomme de Terre river
Lake (Elbow Lake)
Lightning Lake -
Crossing of Otter Tall river   •
Grossing Red river (near Graham's Point)
Grossing of Wild Sice river, west—bridged
Grossing of Shayenne river, bridged
Grossing e f Maple river
Crossing of Sash river (creek only)
Bed of stream, water In pools (Rush river)
H tt {(
Hemlock river (main branch Elm river)
Goose river (south branch of ?)
Stream, 20 feet wide
Stream, 20 ft. wide (Gocse B. main branch)
Lake .     -
Turtle river ...
Stream . . . -
Salt river (Little Hill river) bridged
Water in marshes ...
Crossing of Pembina river (ferry) Pembina
Mils.
Total.
188.78
190.14
199.86
804.88
220.30
248.20
254.59
269.41
287.90
611895.51
78 805.88
.64818.87
,68842.49
07 847.56
791859.85
365.82
869.98
887.88
392.29
425.27
450.89
465.59
Table of distances of portions of various routes
between St. Paul and Pembina.
I.   SAUK RAPIDS TO SIOUX WOOD EIVEE.
Gov. Stevens' Expedition.   June, 1853:
FROM  SAUK  RAPIDS  TO
Gold Spring brook
Sank river ford (Richmond)
Lake Henry
Branch of Crow river, 80 feet wide
Lightning Lakes (Grove Lakes)
Branoh of Chippewa river, 80 feet wide
White Bear Lake
Tributary of South branch, 15 feet wide
Swift brook, 6 feet wide
Pike Lake ...
Chippewa river, 184 feet wide
Elk Lake
West branch of Chippewa river (Pomme d
Terre) 140 feet wid
Elbow Lake
Sabblt river (west branch of Tlpsina)
Small brook, 18 feet wide
Small brook (tributary of Sabbit river)
Bois des Sioux river, 3 miles above mouth
Mis.
-18
6
-19%
19
9%
6%
-6
10%
- 8%
1%
-10%
%
e
e 8%
- 9%
6
5%
11&
10
Total
18
24
43%
62%
62%
68%
78%
84
87%
89%
99%
100
108%
117%
128%
128%
140%
160%
IL   ST OLOUD 10 GEORGETOWN.
Stage and Mail Route—Table prepared by Mr.
B. C. Borden.   1859.
FROM  ST  CLOUD  TO
St. Joseph
Oold Spring
Richmond
Oak Grove
Sauk Oentre
Kandotta
Osakis
Alexandria
Evansvllle
Dayton (Wascata P. O.)
Breckinridge
Graham's Point
Burlington
Shayenne
Georgetown
-by land
Mis.
h
10
- *H
-IT
2
-10
12
-22
27
-24
12
26
80
I 4
Total
7
17
21%
41
58
60
70
88
104
1S1
155
167
193
818
817
HL, ST. CLOUD, VIA SIOUX WOODS, TO GOOBER.
Col. C. F. Smith,   August, 1856.
FROM ST. CLOT/D TO
Mis.
First crossing of Sauk River
Oold Water oreek - -        14
Second crossing of Sauk river (Richmond)      5
Lake Henry -' - -18
Lake Mcleod (Grove Lake)     - -        16
Branch of Chippewa riVer, beyond White
Bear Lake, which passed to left 18%
Pike Lake - - - -  4%
Tipsina, or Pomme de Terre river 18
Elbow Lake        - - - -18
Babbit river ...        10%
Bois des Sioux river, about 4 m. from mouth 17%
Graham's Point
Wild Rice river, west
Shayenne river
Maple river
Grossing of Maple river
Oreek emptying into Maple river
Bush river
Small branch of Elm river
17
6%
-15
18
-  8%
7
-15%
15
South branch of Goose river, here left road'11%
Total
8
17
22
40
55
96
109
119%
137
154
160%
175%
188%
lftUf.
198%
2li%
289%
340%
IV.   DETBOIT LAKE TO GEOBGETOWN.
By Mr. Borden.
Estimated
55
V.
Elbow Lake to Wascata, about - -      18
Wascata (Dayton) N. to forks of trail, about       80   98
VI.
From the Upper Sioux Agency (Yellow Medicine)
on the Minnesota river, to Breckenrige, the distance, by the land route, is at least
185
VII.   BAILROAD LINES.
1st. The length of the " branch" line of the Minnesota and Pacific Railroad from St. Paul to St. Vincent,
as far as surveyed and located, to Crow Wing, is about
125 miles.
2d. The length of the mainline of the same railroad,
as surveyed and located to a point on the Sioux Wood
river within 8 miles of Breckinridge, is about 207 miles.
D.
Breckinridge to Pembina by the channel of the
Red River of the North.
FROM BBEOKINBIDGB (mOUtft, Of SlOlUg   Wood
ffiwer) to
Grossing of trail - - -
Graham's Point - - -
Fort Abercrombie -
Mouth of Wild Rice River West (Psihu B.)
"   Shayenne river
Village of Lafayette
"       Shayenne        - - .
Mouth of Buffalo river (Georgetown)
''   Elm river ...
"   Wild Bice river East
"   Goose river      -
"   R. au Marais No.5 (from Pembina)
[SandHIUB?]
"   Sand Bill river [B. au Marais ?]
"   Coulee des Vaches
•'   Coulee de la Butte de Sable
"   Gouleedu Nez Bouge
"   Riviere au Marais, No. 4
"   Conlee du Jeune Bauf
"   La Grand Coulee
"   Goon creek
«   Bed Lake river (La Grand Fonche)
"   Coulee de L'Anglais
Mis. Total
11%  11%
5%  17
6%   28%
52%   78
•1% 117%
&"8%
2%181
7% 188%
25% 168%
6% 160
28% 182%
1     188%
88%30«%
5%212%
1    818%
4%818
8% 226%
8    289%
8    333%
7% 340
4    844
4% 848%28-
Mis.'Total
Riviere an Marais, No. 8
Turtle river
Riviere au Marais, No. 2
Salt river
Biylere au Marais, No. 1
Park river
Biylere aux Epines
Coulee du Bois Percee
Black river
Two Rivers
Pembina river
7%
256
11%
267%
27%
295
s%
298%
18
311%
7%
818%
8%
821%
26%
848%
8
851%
HX
868
18%:
876%
E.
Routes and portions of routes to the North and
Northwest of Pembina.
I. PEMBINA TO THE FOOT OF THE MOUNTAINS.
W. E. Smith and G. C. Burnham.  1858.
FROM PKMBIHA TO '
Fort Garry . . .
Fort Ellice, ascending the Assiniboine
Touchwood HiUs Fort, W.N.W. course
South branch of the Saskatchewan, do
North branch of do do
Crossing the north branch about a day
and a half's journey west of Carlton
to Jack Fish Lake {per Odometer)
Fort Pitt, - estimated
Edmonton       - - "
The foot of the Mountains "
Miles.   Total.
0
281
169.
189.
54.
105
70,
180.
180,
10
00
0011
ooli
10.23
801.52
470.99
600.88
655.21
760.81
880.31
,010.81
,190:81
ii. Pembina to fobt ellice, via st. Joseph.
Col. W. H. Nobles.   1859.
FROM   PBMBINA TO
St. Joseph by the South trail
" North trail   .
St. Joseph to Oak Village, about
Oak Village to Fort Ellice, about *
Whole distance to Port E11 i c e, ah ou t
Miles
S4J
148
61
Total.
23S
Iir.   PEMBINA TO THE KOOTONAIS FORT.
Dr. A. J. Thibodo.   1859.
FROM  PEMBINA  TO
Miles.
Total.
Fort EUice (via Port Garry)
300
300
Fort Qu Appclle         ...
126
420
The elbow of the Saskatchewan
146
666
The entrance of the Kootonais Pass
546
3,112
Kootonais Fort                 -
105
1,217
IV.   PEMBINA TO MOUTH OF BED RIVER, by water.
FP.OM  PEMBINA; TO
Miles.
Fort  Garry (confluence of Assinbeine)|
estimated I 100
Lake Winnipeg,'beyond the delta,   "     j   48
Total.
148APPENDIX   "E.
" T?  «
INCREASED PRODUCTION OF CULTIVATED PLANTS
NEAR THE NORTHERNMOST LIMIT OF THEIR
GROWTH.
Extracts from an article upon the "Acclimating Principle of Plants,'" in the American Journal of
Geology, by Dr. Forry.
The cultivated plants yield the greatest products near the northernmost limit in which they
will grow.
I have been forcibly impressed with this fact,
from observing the productions of the various
plants, which are cultivated for food or clothing
in the United States. The following instances
will- go far to establish the principle, viz:—
The cotton, which is a tropical plant, yields
the best staple and surest product in the temperate latitudes. The southern parts of the
United States have taken the cotton market-
from the East and West Indias, both as regards
quantity and quality. This is partly owing to
the prevalence of insects within the tropics,
but principally to the forcing nature of-a vertical sun. Such a degree of heat developes the
plant too rapidly—runs it into wood and foliage, which become injuriously luxuriant; the
consequence is, there are but few seed pods,
and these covered with a thin harsh coat of
wool. The cotton wool, like the fur of animals,
is, perhaps, designed for protection ; and will
be thick and fine in proportion as the climate
is warm or cool. Another reason is to be
found in the providence of the Deity, who aims
to preserve races rather .than individuals, and
multiplies the seeds and eyes of plants, exactly
as there is danger of there being destroyed by
the severity of the climate, or other causes.
When, therefore, the cares and labors of man
counteract the destructive tendency of the cli
mate and guaranty their preservation, they are,
of course, more available and abundant.
The lint plants, flax, hemp, &c, are cultivated through a great extent of latitude, but
their bark, in the southern climates, is harsh
and brittle.     A warm climate forces these
plants so rapidly into maturity; that the lint
does not acquire either consistency or tenacity.
We must go far north in Europe, even to the
Baltic, to find these plants in perfection, and
their products very merchantable. Ireland ia*
rather an exception as to latitude ; but the influence of the sun is so effectually counteracted
there by moisture and exposure to the sea air,
that it is always cool: hence, the flax and potato arrive at such perfection in that region.
It holds equally true in the farinaceous plants.
Rice is a tropical plant; yet Carolina and
Georgia grow the finest in the world ; heavier
grained, better filled, and more merchantable,
than any imported into Europe from the Indies.
The inhabitants of the East Indies derive their.,
subsistence almost exclusively from rice; they;;
must be supposed, therefore, to cultivate it with
all skill and care, and the best contrivances for
irrigation. Such is, however, the forcing nature of their climate, that the plant grows too
rapidly, and dries away before the grain be
properly filled. Indian corn, or maize, if not a.
tropical plant, was originally found near the
tropics ; and although it now occupies a wide
range, it produces tbe heaviest crops near the
northern limit of its range. In the West/Indies
it rises thirty feet iu height; but with all that
gigantic size, it produces only a few grains on
the bottom of a spongy cob, and is counted on
only as rough provender. In the Southern
part of the United States; it reaches a height of
fifteen feet, and will produce thirty bushels to
the acre; in the rich lands of Kentucky and i
the Middle States, it produces fifty or sixty
bushels to the acre; but in New York and
New England, agricultural societies have actually awarded premiums for one hundred andad
fifty bushels to the acre, collected from stalks
only seven feet high. The heats of a Southern
sun develope the juices of this plant too quickly.
They run into culm and blade, to the neglect
of the seed, and dry away before fructification
becomes complete.
Wheat is a more certain crop in New Tork,
the northern part of Pennsylvania, and Ohio,
and in the Baltic regions of Europe, than in
the south either of Europe or America. In the
north, snows accumulate, and not only protect
it from the winter colds, but from the weevil,
Hessian fly, and other insects that invade it;
and in the spring it is not forced too rapidly
into head, without time to mature fully, and
concoct its farina.
A cold climate also aids the manufacturing
of flour, preserving it from acidity, and enables
U3 to keep it long, either for a good market, or
to meet scarcities and emergencies. Oats grow
in almost every country; but it is in northerti
regions only, or very moist or elevated tracts,
that they fill with farina suitable for humah
sustenance. Rye, barley, buckwheat, millet,
and other culmiferous plants, might be adduced
to illustrate the above principle ; for all their
habits require a more northern latitude than is~
necessary to their mere growth.
The grasses are proverbially in perfection
only in northern and cool regions, although
they will grow everywhere. It is in the north
alone that we raise animals from meadows, attd
are enabled to keep them fat, and in good condition, from hay and grass alone, without grain.
It is there the grasses acquire a succulence and
consistency enough, not only to mature animals,
but to make the richest butter-and cheese, that
contribute so much to the tables of the luxurious. The. grasses which do, often, in theteoutb,
grow large enough, are without richness and
nutriment; in hay, they have no substance;
and when green arc too washy to fatten animals ; the consequence is, most animals in those
latitudes browse from necessity, and are poor
and without size or beauty. It is the same hot
sun which forces them to a rapid fructification,
before they have had time to concoct their
juices. The sugar cane produces, perhaps, better where it never seeds, than in the tropics ;
for the juices will never ripen so as to granulate, until checked by frost or fructification.
In the tropics, the cane grows twenty months
before the juices-ripen; and then the culm has
contracted a woody, fibrous quality, to such a
degree as to resist the pressure of the mills, and
yields but little juice, and that to an increased
effort. In Louisiana we succeed well with the
sugar culture ; because, while the culm is succulent and tender, a white frost checks the
growth, ripens the juices and in five months
gives us a culm, tender, full of juice,'easy to
press, and yielding much grain of sugar. When
Louisiana, therefore, acquires all the necessary
skill; she wall most probably grow this article
cheaper than the West Indies.
Tobacco is a southern plant, but there it is*;
always light and chaffy ; and although often
well-flavored, it never gains that strong narcotic
quality which is its only peculiar property, unless you grow it as far north as Virginia. In
the south, the heat unfolds its bud or germ too
soon, forces into full expansion the leaf, and
drives it to seed before the narcotic quality can
be properly elaborated. We may assert a general rule applicable to all annual plants, that
neither tbe root nor the leaf acquires any further
size or substance after fructification.
The tuberose, bulbous, and other roots, cultivated for human and animal subsistence, are
similarly affected by climate, and manifest habits
in corroboration of the above principle. The
Irish potato, although from or near the tropics,
will not come to perfection but in northern or
cool countries, or in moist, insular situations, as
Ireland. It is in such climates alone, that its
roots acquire a farinaceous consistence, and
have size, flavor, and nutriment enough to support, in the eminent way in which they are susceptible, animal life. In the south, a foroing.',
sun brings the potato to fructification before
the roots have had time to attain their proper
size, or ripen into the proper qualities for nourishment. In Ireland the plant grows slow,
through a long and cool season, giving time for
its juices to be elaborated and properly digested ;
hence that fine farina and flavour which characterizes them. The sweet potato produces
larger, better flavored, and more numerous
roots in Carolina, where it never flowers, than
in the West Indies. In the latter place this
plant runs wild, covers the whole 'face of the
earth with its vines, and is so taken up with
making foliage, that the root becomes neglected,
and is small and woody. In order to have the
onion in perfection, it must grow through two
years, swelling all the time its bulbs. In the
south, however, it seeds in one year, and before
it has made much bulb. Beets, carrots, parsnips, turnips, radishes, and other roots', are
equally affected by a hot sun, and scarcely
worth cultivating far to the south. They all
fructify before they have formed perfect roots;
and make foliage at the expense of their bulbs;
hence they will always be articles of commerce ;
the south will have to depend upon the north
for them.
The salad plants are in like manner affected
by climate, and give further proofs of our assumption. Cabbages, lettuces, endive, cellery,
spinage, plants whose leaves only are eat, to
protect their leaves from cold (through a kind
of instinct,) wrap them up in leaves, which form
heads, and render many of their other parts
tender and crisp for use. These leaves, thus
protected, are not only tender, but more nutritious, because their growth has been slow and
their juices well digested. In :the south, a relaxing sun lays open the very buds of such
plants, gives a toughness and thinness to the
leaves, and they are too unsubstantial for animal support, because of such quiek and rapid
developement.81
The delicious and pulpy fruits are, in a still
more striking way, illustrative of our principle.
The peach, nectarine, plum, apple, cherry, currant, gooseberry, apricot, and many other such
families, are not in perfection in the south. It
is in Pennsylvania, Virginia, Maryland, Jersey
and in the north of Europe that we enjoy them,
although, originally, they came from near the
tropics. The peach of the Carolinas is full of
larvae, gum and knots, and too stringy and forced
to be juicy and flavored. The apple of the
south is too acerb to be either eaten or preserved. The plums, apricots, cherries, currants,
gooseberries, &c, will not even mature until we
go far north. All the trees which bear these
delicious fruits will grow luxuriantly in the
south, make much foliage and wood, with but
little pulp, and that unsavoury. The kernel in
the one-seeded fruit seems to be first object of
nature in southern climes ; that becomes strong,
oily, and enlarged ; and one of the peach family
has so entirely neglected the pulp, that it has
only a husky matter around the kernel, as the
almond. The changeableness of the weather in
the south, in the spring season, throws plants
off their guard ; the frosts attendant on those
changes destroy the young fruit; and it is only
one year in three that the crop hits at all. The
desiccated or dried state' of these fruits enables
us to enjoy them through the year ; but in the
south their acidity carries them into fermentation or decomposition before they can be divested of their aqueous parts. The climate of
the south is equally against converting them
into cider, or any other fermented liquor, because the heat forces their compressed juice so
rapidly into an active fermentation, that it cannot easily be checked until it passes into vinegar. For the same reason distillation goes on
badly in hot climates, and cannot be checked
long at the proper point to give much alcohol:
and whether we aim to enjoy the delidious freshness of these fruits themselves, sip the nectarin
of their juices, refresh ourselves with their fermented beverage, stimulate our hearts with
their brandies and cordials, or feast through the
winter upon the dried or preserved stores of their
fruits, we are continually balked by the severity
of a southern climate, and for such enjoyment
must look to the north.
The melons are always affected by too great
a degree of heat, even though their vines flourish
so much in southern latitudes. The forcing sun
hurries them on to maturity before they have
attained much size, or acquired that rich saccharine and aromatic flavor for which they are
so much esteemed. The cantelope-melon will
rot, or have its sides baked by a hot sun, before
it is fully formed ; and the water-melon is always woody, dry, and devoid of its peculiar
sweetness and richness in the south. Vines
have been known to run one hundred feet, and
bear no melon. It is in Philadelphia and its
neighborhood, and in similar latitudes that the
markets are loaded with delicious melons of all
sorts, whose flavor so much refresh and delight
us.   It is there, near their northern limit, that
we cultivate them with such uniform success.
The orange, strictly a tropical plant, is more
juicy, large and delicious at St. Augustine
(Florida,) than at Havana ; and fruiterers, in
order to recommend an orange, will say that it
is from some place out of the tropics. In the
West Indies, the pulp of the orange is spungy,
badly filled with juice, and has too much of a
forced flavor to be pleasant. The hot-house
forcers of Europe, or at Rome, anciently at first
produced bad fruit; too dry, too small, and
without flavor; because they overacted. They
have lately found out that fact, and now the
productions of the hot-houses of London, Parisj
&c, astonish and delight us with the quanjaty
and excellence of the fruit. They have found
out that gradual and uniform heat is the desideratum ; countervailing the cold rather than
imparting much heat. Fruit thus produced is
pronounced better than any grown in the natural way, however perfect the climate.
The juices of the grape are best matured for
wine near the northern limit of their growth.
On the Rhine, in Hungary, the sides of the
Alps, and in other elevated or northern situations, the wine is strongest, richest, and most
esteemed. The French wines rank before the
Spanish and Italian ; and in no southern country of Europe or Africa, except Madeira, where
elevation makes the difference, is the wine in
much repute. The grapes of France are
more delicious for the table than those of
Spain or Madeira. In the northern part of
the United States, the excess of heat and moisture blights' the grape to such an extent that all
attempts have failed in its cultivation. The
grape-vine, however, whether wild or cultivated
grows there very luxuriantly. The vinous fermentation can also be best conducted in a climate comparatively cool; and all the pressing,
fermenting and distillation of the juice of this
delicate fruit can be safer and more profitably
managed in a mild region.
The olive, and other oleaginous plants, yield
more fruit, of a richer flavor, and can be better
pressed, and the oil preserved, in a mild climate.
In France the tree is healthier, and the fruit and
oil better than in Spain or Italy ; and the Bar-
bary States are known to import their oil from
France and Italy.
Many other plants might be named, whose
habits would equally support our position. It
is presumed, however, that enough have been
cited to call the attention of philosophy to this
curious subject, and enable us to give proper
attention to it, in all the practical operations of
agricultural pursuit. Much time and expense
might be saved, and profits realized, if this were
more generally understood.
We have already observed, that the heat of
the sun in southern climes forces plants to a
false maturity, runs tbem on too rapidly to
fructification, and renders dry and woody the
culms, stalks and leaves of the plants, where
these parts are used.   Hence the chaffiness ofw
32
the leaf, the dryness of the culm, the lightness
of the grain, and the unsavory, spongy quality
of the pulp of the plants in those latitudes.
Hence the difficulty of fermenting their juices,
distilling their essences, and preserving for use
the fruit, juice, or blades of such plants. The
prevalence of insects is another bar "to the productiveness of southern plants ; swarms of them
invade and strip the leaves, bore the fruit, and
lead to blight and decomposition ; and just in
proportion as the labors of man have rendered
plants succulent, and their fruits and seeds sweet
and pleasant, do these insects multiply on them,
devour their crops, and defeat the objects of
husbandry.
The labor of man too is more conservative
in northern climates, because his arm is better
nerved for exercise, his health and spirits more
buoyant; and instead of saying " Go and
work," he says, " Come and work ;" treads with
a cheerful heart upon his own soil, and assists
in the cultivation, collection and preservation of
his own productions. It is in temperate climates that man can be most familiar with nature ; it is there he has the best opportunities
of observing the guarantees which nature has
for the preservation of her animals and plants
against the devastation of the elements ; he sees
an occasional apparent neglect of individuals,
but a constant parental care of races. In every
thing he sees the wisdom and benevolence of
God.APPENDIX   "F
,7
PROF. M. F. MAURY AND PACIFIC RAILROADS—THE
PHYSICAL, COMMERCIAL AND MILITARY NECESSITY OF TWO RAILROADS, ONE NORTH AND ONE
SOUTH.
[At a special meeting of the Chamber of
Commerce of the city of St. Paul, Minnesota,
held on Saturday, January 22, 1859, at the
Room of the Chamber, Col. D. A. Robertson
submitted a letter of Commander M. F. Maury,
U. S. N., (Superintendent of the Observatory
at Washington,) upon the subject of Pacific
Railroads.
On motion of Gov. Alexander Ramsey, Col.
Robertson was requested to furnish a copy of
the same for publication, it being in the estimation of the Chamber the most able exposition of the subject treated upon ever written.
The request of the Chamber was complied
with as follows :1
the whole question so long debated about routes
and roads to the Pacific ?
Tours, truly,
D. A. Robertson.
To Wm. R.  Marshall, Esq., President St.
Paul Chamber of Commerce.
St. Paul, Jan. 24,1859.
Dear Sir-—I venture to comply with your
request in behalf of the St. Paul Chamber of
Commerce, to furnish a copy of Commander
Maury's letter of the 4th inst. for publication,
(striking out the portion of a private nature.)
In doing so, it is proper to remark that the
letter was written in the course of private correspondence, yet, in furnishing it for publication,
I confidently rely upon the acquiesence of its
distinguished and patriotic author. Its contents, especially at this time, are of too much
national value to be allowed to remain in the
obscurity of any private hand. May I not say,
with safety, that the scientific, geographical and
commercial facts therein presented, with such
transcendent ability and high authority, settle
Observatory, Washington, i
January 4, 1859.     3
My Dear Sir:
I have often wished that the question, pure
and simple, Railroad or no Railroad to the
Pacific, could be put to the popular vote of the
nation. Never, since the Memphis convention
of 1849, should I have had any doubt as to the
result. The vote would be largely for the
road.
While all admit the importance of one or
more such railways, there has been such a
diversity of opinion as to routes and plans, that
no one route has as yet met with friends enough
to carry it through in spite of its rivals, and I
do not think that it ever will.
Two roads at least are necessary. At least
two roads—one at the North, the other at the
South, are required for the common defence.
At least two roads—one at the South, the other
at the North—are necessary, socially and commercially ; for by two roads so placed, the
markets of China, Japan, and the Amoor, will
be brought nearer to us by many days' sail than
it is possible for one road to bring them. This
may sound paradoxical; yet I hope, before I
am done, to explain the paradox to your satis ■
faction.
Let us first consider the importance of two
roads in their military aspect. Vancouver
Island commands the shores of Washington and
Oregon;   and whether the terminus of  the3'
Northern road be on Puget Sound or at the
mouth of the Columbia river, the munitions
sent there could be used for no other part of
the coast, for Vancouver overlooks them.
They could not, on account of Vancouver in
its military aspects, be sent from the northern
terminus to San Francisco and the South;
nor could the Southern road—supposing only
one, and that at the South—send supplies in
war from its terminus, whether at San Diego
or San Francisco, by sea either to Oregon cr
Washington. Vancouver would •prevent, for
Vancouver commands their coasts as completely as England commands those of France on
the Atlantic. So complete is this military curtain that you never heard of France on the
Atlantic sending succor by sea to France on
the Mediterranean, or the,- reverse, in a war
with England. The Straits of Fuca are as
close as the Straits of Gibraltar.
In preparing for the national defenses of the
Pacific, this fact, and the fact that Vancouver
Island is in the hands of a foreign power, are
well calculated to impress peculiar features
upon any system that may be adopted.
But I promised to explain why two roads,
one at:the South, the other attbe North, will
bring the maikets of Asia m'uch nearer to us
than either road, singly;.would-make them.
Before, however, I go into that explanation,
let us clear away some of the obstacles which
error has placed in the way of a Northern
route to the Pacific.
Most men of our age were educated under
the belief that parallels of latitude and terrestrial climates are correlatives ; that we might
tell the temperature of any unknown country
or region of country, if we knew its latitude.
Humboldt and Dove exploded this idea with
their isothermal lines. For example, they show
that the mean annual temperature of North
Cape, lat. 70 ° in Europe, is the same as that
along the north shore of Lake Superior, in lat.
50 °. Here is a difference of 20 ° of lat.
without any difference in the average annual
temperature of the two places.
There is a difference in the length of day and
night at the two places, and so far as climate
is affected by difference in the length of day
and night, climate is to that extent, and no
farther, an affair of latitude. But with differences in length of day and night, the relations
between climate and latitude cease. The thermometer and hygrometer then become the true
exponents of climate. Every region, indeed,
tells the whole story of its climates by its flora.
Let us get rid then of our old notions concerning the relatious of latitude to climate, and
with unbiassed minds lay out this north temperate zone, which we iuhabit,into thermal bands,
and then study the flora of these bands. After
we shall have done this, then I think we will
be able to agree, at least among ourselves, as to
the necessity of two routes to the Pacific.
Moreover, we can select those routes that will
be the best agriculturally and commercially ;
and when We shall finish with this investigation,
you will find that these tw5'routes lie exactly
where tbe best plan of national defense requires
them—the Northern route commencing at the
western boundary of Minnesota, and going to
Puget's Sound, with a branch, in the course of
time, to the mouth of the Columbia—the
Southern route commencing at El Paso in
Texas, and going thence to San Diego and San
Francisco.
1 speak of these routes as the routes which
'commerce and' agriculture as well as war require. The elements indicate them. I place
the climatology of these, the agricultural and
commercial resources of the regions through
which they pass in the same category, because
commerce is based on difference of agricultural
I productions, and difference of productions; is an
'affair of climate altogether. Therefore, in
^studying climates and routes we study variety
of production, and cannot help looking at them
in their commercial aspects.
The Army Meteorological Observations,
Blodget's Climatology of the United States,
and Dove's Isothermal Maps, enable us to divide that portion of the northern temperate
zone occupied by the United States, into two
grand-and characteristic thermal bands.
The fauna and the flora of these two bands
differ. The people differ—their'climates differ
—the industrial pursuits in them differ—and,
therefore, I call' them grand and striking subdivisions.
Speaking in a general way, the United States,
lie between the mean annual isotherms of 35 °
and 70 c.
Take a school map of the world and let us
draw with a pencil these isotherms across Europe, Asia, and Africa also. '
Beginning! on the West coast, with the pencil1
at Sitka,-draw it with a free .hand thence
through the mouth of the,Red River of the
North, touching the north' shore of Lake Superior, crossing the St. Lawrence below Quebec,
and thence to St. Johns, Newfoundland. Now
beginning in Europe, near Christiana, draw'
your pencil up towards the Gulf of Onega;
then draw through Orenberg to Kiachta, Marg-
hen and the mouth of the Amoor. You can
now see sufficiently near for our present purpose how the isotherm of 35 ° runs. The
mean temperature of all places south of this
line is not more than 35 c .
In like manner we sketch off roughly the
annual isotherm of 70 c through the new world
and the old. It starts from San Diego, crossing the Colorado at its mouth, and then pass*:
ing down through Chihuahua to Austin, in
Texas, it goes by New Orleans and Pensacola.
to the sea. Striking -the African coast near
Mogador, it goes, through Cairo, Ispahan,
.Delhi, to Canton. The mean temperature of
all places to the north of this line is less than
70°.
Now let us divide the belt included between
these two. isotherms into two nearly equal ther-35
mal bands, by tracing likewise with a free
hand the isotherm of 52 °, the mean (nearly)
between 35 ° and 70 ° .
Beginning near Cape Orford on the West
Coast, this isotherm passes up towards the
Dalles, then down a little to the west of Salt
Luke to Santa Fe; then up to Scott's Bluff,
and then through St. Louis and Louisville to
Baltimore. Taking it up in England it passes
through Belgium towards Zurich, then up towards. Olmutz, and so on through Varna, Der-
,beht, Kokan and Pekin.
This line divides this belt thermally and geographically into two bands of nearly the same
size. They include the garden spots of the
earth. In them man laid his first hearthstone,
and from them the lights of civilization and
Christianity have shed their first and their
brightest rays.
Let us, for the convenience of reference, call
'the Northern band the upper band, and the
Southern one the lower.
We are now prepared to cast the eye over
them; and to generalize concerning the commercial and agricultural aspects of the two
routes.
The plants which give physiognomy to the
fields and forests of these bands are, for the
upper band, conifers, the willow, the beech,
larch, fir, alder, elm, hickory, birch, cranberries,
and pasture grasses. For the lower band, the
characteristic plants are thick-leaved evergreens,
and arborescent grasses, the cypress, cedar, ash,
and magnolia, with roses.
The chief commercial plants, besides the
cereals—which are common to both—are for
the lower band, the orange, tbe vine, the fig,
peach, date, pomegranate, citron, the melon,
St. John's Bread, the sweet potato, rice, indigo,
tobacco, hemp, cotton, tea, sugar, and naval
stores. For the upper band, buckwheat, hay,
Irish potatoes, turnips, apples, pears, plums,
herds and flocks.
Most of the railways, both in Europe and
America, are in the upper band ; so are the
great centers of c fee, and the places for
fairs in Europe and Asia—a sure sign that the
occupations of the people in the upper band
are not so exclusively agricultural as those of
the lower. In other words, we are reminded
by this division that the people, in spile of
legislative enac nts, tariffs and protection,
have obeyed the laws enacted by nature as
'expressed for the geographical distribution of
labor, and that man, though the same in both
bands, has in each heeded those physical conditions by which he finds himself surrounded, and
directed his labors to those pursuits which
promise the best returns.
'This circumstance reminds us that railways
in the upper bands should be much more apt
to have lull freights' both ways than are railways in the lower baud. The latter carry
away tobacco, hemp, cotton, rice, sugar, &c,
and may bring back in a single car, the manu-
i'act ured articles for which a whole train-load'
of cotton has been exchanged. Hence, as a
rule, railroads in this band carry more than
they fetch. The same raw and bulky articles
go into the upper band to be manufactured,
and when manufactured, they are put on the
rails for distribution, and for market—thus
increasing freights for this band both ways.
Each one of these thermal bands in the
United States wants its roads from sea to sea,
and each must have it.   Each wanted its system of roads between the Atlantic Ocean and
the Mississippi River, and each, has ifc*whether
Congress would or not—and so it will be between the " Grand Ocean" and the Mississippi.
Look at the steel engraved map in Putnam's
Railroad Guide and you will see how thisa
systems of roads have been formed.   Until last
summer Virginia would stretch no railway line
from any of her fine harbors into the valley of
the West.   North Carolina had no harbors;
hence, the blank space'on that map between
Ohio and Georgia.
On the other hand, there was the great chain
| of Lakes.   Then there was the Baltimore and
i Ohio, and the Pennsylvania Central Railroads,
! which were commenced at a very early day,
j and pushed forward with vigor.   Now see what
j a net-work of roads these have called out,
i reaching to and beyond the Mississippi, and
stretching due East to connect with these.
While Virginia would not, and North Car-
i oliua could not, South Carolina and Georgia
j went to work with their system of roads, which
has already stretct.     itself towards the setting
sun far beyond the Mississippi.
Texas has given a most magnificent grant of
lands and loan of money to her Southern Pacific
Railway, which will extend the Southern system a3 far as El Paso, within 600 miles of the
Pacific.
Roads from New Orleans, Vicksburg, Memphis, and other, points, are to join the Texas
road. Memphis and El Paso are in the middle
of the lower band. Hence, you perceive, this
band has its roads well under way, and it is
high time Uncle Sara should take hold and
extend it Westward.
Unfortunately, this road has had troubles to
an extraordinary degree—but it's a long night '
that has no day, and it now begins for the first
time ! the light of real day.   The dawn is
promising.
So, too, in Minnesota: St. Paul is in the
center of the upper band, and there is a railroad
already under way from St. Paul to Pembina.
A branch from this road leading to the Pacific
will most fairly represent the system in the
upper band. St. Paul is in the middle of it,
and the distance by an air-line from the Western limits of Minnesota to Puget's Sound is 870
miles; making only (say) 1500 miles of road
to be provided for by the' general government,
in order to secure both of these roads. Indeed,
if the Southern road be taken to the California
line, California will take care of it- thence to
San Francisco.   So that by providing for the36
construction of some 500 miles, government
can now secure one at the South. Ten years
ago, when this question of a road to the Pacific
began first to be agitated, government would
have had to provide for it all the way from the
Mississippi to the Pacific—so it was held—and
that would have required a single road about
2,000 miles long. Now, government aid along
1,500 miles will give us two.
These bands give a complete quietus to all
objections to the Northern roads, on the score
of climate. In other parts of the world roads
abound "Hi just such climates. The road from
St. Petersburg to Moscow, and the Prussian
roads, with others in the same bands in Europe, are even in a higher latitude than the
St. Paul road will be; yet climate is no objection to them. Neither is it to the Canada
railways, nor to any others as far North as the
rails have been laid. We all expect to see the I
day when Russia will be extending her system
of rails into Siberia, and none of us—for in that
matter all of us have unbiassed minds—antici- I
pate any difficulty on the score of climate.
Rain maps for these bands show that the
average annual amount of rain along this northern route and until you pass the Rocky Mountain range—after which the climate is mild,
like that of England—is less than it is along
any railway in the Atlantic States, or in the
Mississippi valley, or, indeed, in any part of the
world. They show that the average amount of
precipitation, both snow and rain, in winter,
for that part of the route which lies between
the Pacific range of mountains and St. Paul, is
less than three inches!
Thus, I think, the question of climate, of
terrific snowstorms and impassable drifts along
this route, may be considered as disposed of.
We return now to the paradox, that by these
two roads to the Pacific, the markets of Asia
will be much nearer to those of the Mississippi
valley than either road alone could bring them.
To explain this, it is only necessary to remind
you how the winds blow and the currents set
that control the routes of sailing vessels—the
burden cars of the sea—between the eastern
shores of Asia and our west coast.
The route to Asia lies through the N. E.
trade winds.   These winds blow between the
parallel of 30 deg. N. and the Equator ; and
vessels that take this route usually run across
the broad Pacific between the parallel of 18
deg. and 25 deg. N. where the trades are
strongest.   Returning, they take the great circle route—the shortest distance—and keep well
up to the North; for now the " brave west
winds" of those extra-tropical regions which
would have been adverse for the outward voyage, are fresh and fair for the homeward run.
So you perceive that a vessel trading under
canvass between our Pacific States and China
describes on every round voyage, an ellipse;
coming out of the straits of Fuca or the Columbia river for instance, her course is first to
the southward, as though she were bound round
Cape Horn, and until she gets into the N. E.
trade winds. Her course is then west until she
enters the waters of the China Seas. She then
hauls up to the northward and westward for her
port. On the return voyage, her course on
coming out of her Asiatic port, is to the northward and eastward, until she gets fairly within
the " brave west winds." With these she steers
to the eastward, following the great circle route
gradually shaping her course to the S. of E.
until she reaches our own shores again.
If she be bound to San Francisco, her route,
until she gains the offings of the Straits of
Fuca, would be the same as though she were
bound into Puget's Sound or the Columbia
river.
Thus you perceive that, on the outward voyage, San Francisco is on the way side from
Puget's Sound and Columbia river to China;
whereas, Puget's Sound and Astoria are on the
way-side of the route from China and Japan
to California.
To see how one road only would work, let us
suppose it at the north—running from St. Paul
to Puget's Sound. Let us now follow a package of merchandize—say of ginseng—that is
sent over this road from Memphis to be bartered
-in China for tea. The ginseng would first go
North up the Mississippi to get to the road.
Thence it would cross to the Pacific; arriving
at Puget's Sound, it would then be shipped for
China. Now it must come back to the South
again to get into the trade-wind region. Thus
you observe it would have to go more than a
thousand miles up the Mississippi out of the
way ; and when it reaches the Pacifie, it would
have to return again as far to the South. Being
exchanged for tea in China, it would be nearest for the tea to stop at Puget's Sound, take
the Railroad and come South on the Mississippi,
instead of coming South by sea along the Pacific coast.
Now let us, in imagination, place the road at
the South instead of at the North, and take a
bale of furs to illustrate the route of trade and
travel. The fur, we will suppose, is sent from
St. Paul. It comes down the Mississippi to
get to the road. That would not be out of the
way for the fur, for it is bound South for the
Northeast trade winds at any rate; and it
would be, in a national point of view, perhaps
more desirable to have it go South by the Mississippi, than by sea in the Pacific. But when
thesilk for which it has been exchanged in
China, on St. Paul account, arrives, on its return off the entrance of the Straights of Fuca,
it has to turn out of its way. Instead of finding railway transportation to take it through
from Puget's Sound across to Minnesota, it
has to run away to the South. Perhaps a week
after it might have been in St. Paul by a
Northern road, it arrives by sea in California,
and is carried by rails to Memphis. Now it
has to double upon itself to go North, and re-
cross every parallel of latitude that it crossed after turning out of its way from Juan de Fuca.37
This doubling will require two or three weeks
of time, besides risk and expense.
Withftco roads there will be no doubling,
hence two roads will bring China and Japan
and Russia very much nearer to the Mississippi
valley than one can do. The distance saved
will be, in furlongs, nearly twice the length of
the Mississippi river, and in time some two or
three weeks.
Whether the government therefore aids in
the building of these roads, or not, these circanv
stances will of themselves call for the construction of at least two roads to the Pacific—one at
the North, the other at the South. Northern
capital and Southern capital will assist in both.
I have thus endeavored to make clear the
paradox with which I set out, and I hope I
have succeeded in showing to your satisfaction
that at least two railways—one at the North
the other at the South—are required to the
Pacific.
There are no toll-houses on the lakes, and
none on the Gulf of Mexico. The commercial
voices of these two waters, could it be heard,
would be raised, eachtrumpet-tongued, in favor
of these two routes.
The nearest way from Brazil and the Amazon, as well as from the West Indies to China,
would then be by the South Pacific Railway.
*******
Yours truly,
M. F. MAURY.
D. A. Robertson. St, Paul, Minnesota.APPEN1
,•>
BRITISH   COLUMBIA
From tlie Correspondence of the London Times.
Victoria, Vancouver's Island, \
December 9,1859.     j
All recent accounts from British Columbia
have been of a most satisfactory and eucour-
aging character.
Its wealth, and the vast extent of its auriferous area, are now established by undeniable
evidence; the satisfaction of the miners with
.their success, and the arrival here of large quantities of gold dust, the discoveries of new
" placers," and the extension of old diggings in
which gold is found deeper and further inland
from the rivers than was at first expected, all
go to establish these two important facts.
NEW   GOLD   DIGGINGS.
Rich diggings have been discovered in the
Similkaraeen valley, a short distance north of
the 49th parallel, within the territory of British
Columbia. The valley of the Similkaraeen (pronounced " Sheemilkeemeen,") which is watered
by a river bearing the same name, is exten- f
sive, fertile, abounds in rich pasture, and is well
adapted for settlement. The climate is genial
and there are many exteusive tracts in the
Similkameen country especially favorable for
stock raising, as in winter the snow never lies,
however deep it may be iu the mountainous
country around.   The river is a tributary of
the Okinagan, whi
alls into the Columbia
near 48 ° north latitude. This new mining
country is accessible from Fort Hope on Frazer
river, and from the neighboring American
country, (Washington Territory.) the inhabitants of which have availed themselves of the
facility to mine there duriug last autumn with
success, which produced the usual" excitement."
Gold has also been discovered and worked to a
considerable extent on Quesnell's river and Lake
some 250 miles to the north of the last mentioned locality. In short, the whole of the interior portions of the country, from a point
about 45 miles from (above) the mouth of Fra
zer river up to the vicinity of the Rocky Mountains, including New Caledonia, are now ascertained to be auriferous; and, what is equally
important, extensive tracts of good land adapted
for agriculture have been at the same time discovered.
QUEEN  CHARLOTTE'S  ISLAND.
The problem whether the gold area extended
as far north as the northern boundary of British Columbia to the Russian line has also been
solved. Captain Torrens, late of Her Majesty's
55th Regiment—a gentleman who combines a
life of adventure with a high spirit of enterprise—organized an expedition, including scientific men, some months back, to explore Queen
Charlotte's Island and the northwest coast of
British Columbia. They first made for Fort
Simpson, the Hudson's Bay Company's northernmost establishment on the Pacific, situate
in latitude 54 deg. 20 sec, near the Russian
boundary.
From Fort Simpson they, crossed to' Queen
Charlotte's Island (a dependency of the colony
of British Columbia.)]and landed on Point Rose,
au isthmus which forms the north-eastern extremity of the island. Captain Torrens has
kindly furnished me with notes from his
and from them I will extract a
count of his wanderings. From
the party coasted southward, " prospecting" as
they went along. The " color," as the miner
calls a successful -trial for gold, was found almost.everywhere on the coast in the concrete,
and in the different strata of gravel in the cliffs ;
but the best " prospects" were derived from the
black sand on the beach from Point Rose to
Skidegate, a distance of some sixty odd miles on
the south coast. Captain Torrens thinks the
discovery of gold in black sand (iron pyrites,)
on the sea coast a remarkable fact. Gold in
considerable quantities is found similarly situate
on the north coast of California, at a place
hio journal
succinct ac-
Point Rose39
called Gold Bluff, where miners have been at
work extracting it from the " black sand," by
machinery and the use of quicksilver, for the
last nine years. At Skidegate village the Indians behaved in so hostile a manner that the
party went back in their canoes to Fort Simpson. Smitten by qualms of conscience at their
inhospitality, or, more probably, having a dread
of Governor i Douglass' vengeance, as he had
sent a message beseeching kind treatment for
the" party, the Indians, to make amends, sent a
deputation to Fort Simpson to invite Captain
Torrins to repeat his visit under a promise of
safe conduct from the chiefs of the " Haidabs,"
the. most powerful tribe on the island. Thus
encouraged,, the Captain- and his men started
again. En route they visited Pitt Island which
lies on the east side of Queen Charlotte's Island,
between it and the mainland- Here they found
specimens of gold-bearing quartz. They then
made for Gold Harbor, on the east side of
Queen Charlotte's Island, where a considerable
quantity of gold quartz was blasted in 1852,
under the auspices of the Hudson's Bay Company, and sent to London—a fact which added
to the exhibition of golden nuggets by the Indians frequenting Victoria.had raised high hopes
among the more speculative of our townsmen
that great wealth lay here.
Captain Torrensjwas disappointed if he entertained any such hopes. He found the gold
" leads" worked out. At least, he and his party
thought, and they left again tor the mainland.
On their way back they visited an island 25
miles to the  north  of the  Queen   Charlotte
le very rich in
i
which  they found  to  I
groupe;
cdpper ore. They visited also Kagahni an;
Tonga's islands, a little beyond the parallel of
the British possessions, and Chatsina, on the
main Russian Territory. These localities they
found to contain lead, bismuth, plumbago, and
quartz rich, in sulphurets, which analyze from
§135 to §200 per ton, in great abundance.
Captain Torrens describes the character of
the north-west coast of British Columbia as
" high ly in o un tai n o us, one long'continued formation of slate interspersed with frequent veins
of crystalized quartz."
THE  MAINLAND.
The Captain having'determined to examine
tbe interior of the mainland of British Columbia in this northern portion of it, he ascended
the Naas river, which empties.into the Pacific
about 40 iiiiles north of Fort Simpson. Nothing remarkable struck his notice■ .until he and
his men bad got up the river for forty miles..
Here they observed evidences of volcanic action at some remote period in the discolored
and blistered appearance of the rocks; and
here they commenced " prospecting," which
they continued for a distance of 100 miles, being the extreme distance they proceeded to, and
throughout which they found the bars in the
river to be auriferous. The trip being essentially a " prospecting trip," they did not settle
down to the general operations of a mining
camp, remaining only a day here and a day
there, as circumstances permitted. The river
being full, the 'bars' were but little exposed.
Good diggings were, however, discovered, and
the whole party were sanguine that a new gold-
field will be opened up in this remote part of
the world next spring, when Captain Torrens
returns to his exploration of the Naas river
arid surrounding country.
The navigation.of the river was accomplished
in canoes. It is not adapted for steamers, being too rapid. The scenery is very bold and
picturesque. The weather in autumn was beautiful. Of the soil the Captain says :—"Magnificent plateaus of land are now to be found
where once flowed torrents. of water; open
lands occur also at intervals, the vegitation upon
which is luxuriant." In addition to the discovery of gold and of good• land on the Naas
river, Captain Torrins was informed that the
Indian trails were so good as to be " available
for pack trains with but little trouble"—a fact
which is of the first importance to facilitate the
transit of goods by a short route from the coast
into New Caledonia, where gold is cow being
worked,, which is known to be highly auriferous ; and where, from the amenity of the
climate in winter, and the abundance of pasture
a large mining population would settle were it
not for the; difficulty aad great expense of transit
by way of Fraser river.
Captain Torrens is loud in his praises of the
humanity, kindness, and liberality of the Hudson's Bay Company, from whom he and his
party received important assistance.
ANOTHER   EXPLORER.
Another explorer.has?just returned from the
same part of the world, whose report has added
to our meagre information of the topography
of the northern and western portions of the new
colony, and to which the Governor attaches
considerable importance.
.Mr. i)ownie,.an old California pioneer,where,
although a Scotchman and,of course a foreigner,
he was.liberally promoted to the brevet rank of
" Major," started also from Fort Simpson, in
August, on a tour of exploration into the interior by the Skeena river,, which falls into a bay
or^hle<|atPortiEs§jng|on1jibout 50 miles north
of- Simpson. What with hardships, starvation,
annoyances of Indians, and ignorance of the
route, and of the languages of the savages, the
Major's trip was an eventful arid romantic one,
and he has,made a tremendous story of it himself in the shape of- a report to the Governor ;
but I must limit myself to a short abstract,
which will embrace the main points.
The bay at Port Essington runs jpland, and
is deep and navigable for thirty miles. The
rocks aire gigantic, no quartz appearing. " The
bante of the Skeena are low, with small hardwood and cotton trees (poplar.) and some good
sized white-oaks, the finest I have seen west of
Fraser river, on its margin.   Vessels drawingfour feet can ascend the river for twenty miles,
but no further;" the rest of the navigation must
be accomplished by canoes. Near the embouchure of the Skeena the poor Major first
came to grief. Some " honest" Indians stole
his coat, but he was soon consoled for the loss
by finding " some chrystalized quartz with gold
in it, with an Indian on the Scenetoys river," a
tributary of the Skena.which led him to conclude
" that good paying ^quartz will be found here."
Paddling along for about 100 miles, the work
of many days, no doubt,but of which the Major
gives no account, he " got fairly over the coast
range of mountains," through which the Skeena
flows. Once over the range he found " gold, a
few specks to the pan ; and the whole country
looks like a gold country, with fine bars and
flats, and clay on the bars." Bars and flats and
clay on them are considered gold locations.
" Tbe mountains look red, and slate and quartz
can be seen." A slate formation indicates the
neighborhood of gold. The Major is skillful in
judging by " symptoms,,' for he discovered no
end of gold diggings and quartz leads in California. After some days journey beyond the
coast range, keeping a north-easterly direction
the Major got intelligence of what he calls the
" Plumbago Mountain ;" of this mineral he got
a specimen. " From here to the village of
Kitcoonsa the land improves, the mountains recede from the river, and fine flats run away
four or five miles back to the " mountain sides."
The milder natural scenery would seem to have
improved the manners and tempered the dispositions of the Indians inhabiting the valley of
Kitkoonsa. They were very kind to the Major
and wished him to live with them.
the cascade country.
In a district which 1 take to lie between two
ranges of the Cascade Mountains, about 200
miles northward and eastward of Fort Simpson,
he found " the prospects " of gold to vary much
but on the whole concludes that it is the best
looking mineral country he had seen in British
Columbia. On crossing the second range of the
Cascade Mountains, the Major " enters a^ extensive coal country, the seams varying in thickness from 3 to 35 feet"—a fact which he was
able to ascertain from the river having cut
through them. He traced the veins for a mile
in length. It took him tweDty days from Fot t
Simpson to this coal district, but by good travelling arrangements, it could be done in a week.
I must now take a tremendous jump with tbe
Major to Babine Lake, near the northern boundary of British Columbia. This lake is deep and
broad, and 100 miles long—facts which are
corroborated by some of the gentlemen of the
Hudson's Bay Company, and who add that the I
Great Eastern could float upon it The Major
reports that this lake is the source of Skeena
river, and he corrects the mistaken and long-
received opinion that it is the source of Simpson's River, as laid down in the maps. To
compress the Major's most original, but con- j
40
I fused descriptions, t would say that for about
100 miles to the southward and westward of
and up to Babine Lake, the country is well
j adapted to settlement.   " The land is first-rate
and wild hay and long grass abound.   No
heavy pine timber, but plenty of cotton-wood,
of which the canoes are made;" abundance of
salmon and wild berries, and the weather in
September pleasant.   The winters, however,
mnst be very severe.   From Nass-Glee to Fort
Kilmaurs—a Hudson's Bay Company's station
! on Babine Lake—the distance is about  50
miles, and " the land is good the whole way."
I The Major was enchanted with this part of the
country.   He calls Kilmaurs  a lovely place,
and moralizes a bit in the following strain :—
" It seems a great pity to see this  beautiful
land, so well adapted to the wants of man, lying
waste, when so many Englishmen and Scotsmen, would be glad to come here and till the
soil."   If gold is found to abound, one would
think the country could be more readily peopled by Canadians than by Scots or English.
From Babine Lake the Major made a portage
of ten miles to Stuart's Lake, " over a good
trail," made by the Hudson's Bay Company.
Arrived at Stuart's Lake the Major and his
party were put to great shifts, being without
food, without ammunition to shoot ducks with,
and without a canoe to cross the lake in. " We
camped here three nights without food, sleeping the greater part of our time to stifle our
hunger;" their only consolation being " the
grand idea of their enterprise in exploring a
I new route from the Pacific, which will one day
connect the ocean with the Atlantic."   With
the aid of Indians who treated them with the
greatest kindness, they made the passage of
Stuart's Lake on a raft of logs, and at length
made Fort St. James, another Company's establishment at the south-east end of Stuart's
Lake, in the district of New Caledonia.   True
to his instinct and to his mission, the indefatigable Major,.having been driven on a lee shore on
Stuart's Lake, at a point some fifteen miles
from the  north end of the lake,  tried  his
hand at " washing," and " obtained  a small
prospect of gold."   " On the north side of the
lake the ground is rocky, but south of the lake
the land is as good as can be, and will
anything."
For one who has only seen the country bordering on the coast of British Columbia, and
that through which Frazer river runs, which is
mountainous, broken and rugged to a degree,
it is difficult to imagine so level and so productive a country as the interior is throughout the
greater portion of its extent. The Cascade
Mountains are passed, and the soil and climate
change for the better, while tbe scenery becomes softer and more subdued.
I must wind up the Major's story, which I
have already made longer than I intended.
After paying a tribute of praise to the agent in
charge of Fort St. James, who received them
" with that kindness and hospitality I have al-
produce41
ways found at the Company's posts," he winds
up his narrative with a short table of distances :
—" Stuart's Lake is 50 miles long; Babine
Lake 100 miles long to Nass-Glee, course about
S. E. and N. W.; from Nass-Glee to Port
Simpson, 250' miles." From Fort St. James
the Major ran down a feeder of Frazer's river,
called Stuart's river, some 50 miles to Fort
George. Here he took the main stream of
Frazer's river, down to Fort Alexander, on the
southern confines of New Caledonia, where he
found a community of miners in constant and
regular communication with the lower country,
and whence he had no - difficulty in getting to
Victoria by the ordinary route of travel.
NEW ROUTE   TO THE MINES.
Imperfect as the poor Major's exploration
has been, it establishes the fact that gold exists-
from the coast to near the northern and eastern
boundary of the colony, well nigh to tbe Rocky
Mountains, in portions of the country never before " prospected ;" but far more important is
the fact which he asserts, that easy means of
transport of merchandize exist by the route he
travelled, which will be much shorter from Port
Essington to New Caledonia than the present
route by Frazer's river ; while the difficulties
are far les3, and the carriage will be much
cheaper, even adding the freight- coastwise from
Victoria to Port Essington.
I confess I feel rather astonished, if the Major
is correct, that these indefatigable " pathfinders," the Hudson's Bay Company's officers, did
not discover this northern and easier route, for
they took great pains to find a better one than
the oldtroute by Frazer's river, &c, which is
so bad that frequently 50 and 60 horses perish
from fatigue and hunger on the journey. It is
true that till lately the Fort Simpson Indians
were very fierce and intractable, and it might
have been imprudent to transport much property through their neighborhood.
PRODUCTIVENESS OF THE MINES.
It is impossible to give an estimate of the
production of gold in British Columbia.   All
6
accounts agree that the individual earnings of
the miners are much larger than in California
or Australia. It is very common to light upon
a man going to San Francisco with several
thousand dollars, upon others with one thousand each, and upon many with some hundreds ;
but besides these exceptional cases which come
to light it is all guess work.
The amount " manifested" as exported in the
last three months was $451,866, which is a
good amount for so small a number of miners
as have been at work within that period ; but I
should think an amount equal to the sum just
stated must have been taken by private hands.
Assuming for example, that 1,000 miners have
left the mines with $500 a piece, a low estimate,
this would make $500,000 taken away in the
last quarter, besides tne $151,866 manifested.
I doubt, besides, that the amounts shipped on
freight are all given.
The export of gold is not the only test of the
productiveness of the mines.   To the success of
the minins: interest I attribute the growing pros-
perity of Victoria—the building of houses,
stores, and shops by the merchants, traders and
shopkeepers, and by other inhabitants.     To
the same cause I attribute the demand for improvements in real property which has lately
taken place.   Much of the gold produced remains here and goes to pay for local improvements.   When I see men who came to Victo^
ria eighteen months ago poor, growing rich,
ceasing to borrow money, and building houses
and shops, I can have no doubt as to the source
of their improved means.   Another most important ". sigh of the times," and a most gratifying one, is the growth of confidence in the
permanent progress of the place and in the future productiveness of the. mines.   When cautious and prudent men, after long observation
and due reflection, begin to make permanent
investments in real property, there need be no
fears entertained of the future.   My own conviction is that the day of the retrogression of
both colonies is past.   Their progress may be
slow, or it may be rapid, but progress they
must.APPENDIX   H.

PACIFIC  OCEAN TELEGRAPH  BETWEEN NORTHERN
ASIA AND AMERICA.
The following paragraphs are from an article
in the Atlantic Monthly, for March 1860, upon
the " Progress of the Electric Telegraph."
" A late European steamer brings a report
that two Russian engineers have proceeded to
Pekin, China, to make preparations for a telegraphic connection between that place and the
Russian territory.
" There is reason to believe that arrangements will soon be made at St. Petersburg,
through private companies and government
subsidies, for completing the line of telegraph
from Novogorod to the mouth of the Amoor,
and thence across the straits to Russian America. In the meantime a company" has already
been formed and incorporated in Canada, under
the name of the Transmuridane Telegraphic
Company, which will afford important aid in
continuing the proposed line through British
America. The plan is, to carry the wire from
the mouth of the Amoor across Behring's Strait,
to and through Russian and British America.
From Victoria a branch will be extended to San
Francisco, and another to Canada.   The line
from San Francisco to Missouri is under way,
and Mr. Collins, who is engaged in the Russian
and Canadian enterprise, thinks that by the
time it is in operation he shall have extended
his line to San Francisco.
" This is unquestionably the most feasible
route for telegraph communication between
America and Europe ; and, though the longest
by several thousand miles, it would afford the
most rapid means of communication, owing to
the great superiority of aerial over subaqueous
lines."
To a similar effect is an item of European
intelligence, in the New York Herald, of February 20,1860:
" An overland route for telegraphic communication with America has been proposed in
France, making use of the existing lines from
London to Dresden, and from thence entering
the Russian empire, and passing through Moscow and Kasan. Then crossing the Ural mountains to Yakoutsk and on to the Behring Strait,
crossing this, and passing through Russian
America to Canada and the United States."